Title: Kencorpus: A Kenyan Language Corpus of Swahili, Dholuo and Luhya for Natural Language Processing Tasks
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.12081v2
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
1 
Kencorpus: A Kenyan Language 
Corpus of Swahili, Dholuo and Luhya 
for Natural Language Processing 
Tasks 
Wanjawa, Barack* 
University of  Nairobi, Kenya 
wanjawawb@gmail.com 
Wanzare, Lilian 
Maseno University, Kenya 
Indede, Florence 
Maseno University, Kenya 
McOnyango, Owen 
Maseno University, Kenya 
Ombui, Edward 
Africa Nazarene University, Kenya 
Muchemi, Lawrence 
University of  Nairobi, Kenya 
 
Abstract 
Indigenous African languages are categorized as 
under-served in Natural Language Processing. 
They therefore experience poor digital inclusivity 
and information access. The processing challenge 
with such languages has been how to use machine 
learning and deep learning models without the 
requisite data. The Kencorpus project intends to 
bridge this gap by collecting and storing text and 
speech data that is good enough for data-driven 
solutions in applications such as machine 
translation, question answering and transcription 
in multilingual communities. The Kencorpus 
dataset is a text and speech corpus for three 
languages predominantly spoken in Kenya: 
Swahili, Dholuo and Luhya (three dialects of 
Lumarachi, Lulogooli and Lubukusu). Data 
collection was done by researchers who were 
deployed to the various data collection sources 
such as communities, schools, media, and 
publishers. The Kencorpus' dataset has a 
collection of 5,594 items, being 4,442 texts of 5.6 
million words and 1,152 speech files worth 177 
hours. Based on this data, other datasets were also 
developed such as Part of Speech tagging sets for 
Dholuo and the Luhya dialects of 50,000 and 
93,000 words tagged respectively. We developed 
7,537 Question-Answer pairs from 1,445 Swahili 
texts and also created a text translation set of 
13,400 sentences from Dholuo and Luhya into 
Swahili. The datasets are useful for downstream 
machine learning tasks such as model training and 
translation. Additionally, we developed two proof 
of concept systems: for Kiswahili speech-to-text 
and a machine learning system for Question 
Answering task. These proofs provided results of 
a performance of 18.87% word error rate for the 
former, and 80% Exact Match (EM) for the latter 
system. These initial results give great promise to 
the usability of Kencorpus to the machine 
learning community. Kencorpus is one of few 
public domain corpora for these three low 
resource languages and forms a basis of learning 
and sharing experiences for similar works 
especially for low resource languages. Challenges 
in developing the corpus included deficiencies in 
the data sources, data cleaning challenges, 
relatively short project timelines and the 
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that 
restricted movement and hence the ability to get 
the data in a timely manner. 
Keywords: Swahili, Dholuo, Luhya, POS 
tagging, Question Answer, Translation, Low 
resource languages, Corpus creation 
1 
Introduction 
The intention to specifically focus research 
initiatives on low resource languages in Africa and 
other regions of the world is a necessity if we 
desire to preserve these languages. Language 
serves as a tool for both cultural preservation and 
communication. Language can also be used to 
gauge a community's success in terms of its 
economic, emotional, and social development 
(Smith, 2019). The advancement of natural 
language processing (NLP) in information 
technology, as used in machine learning and deep 
learning, has led to the creation of numerous 
useful applications such as text-to-speech, speech-
to-text, machine translation, virtual assistants, text 
summarization, autocorrection and sentiment 
analysis, among others. However, these machine 
learning algorithms need training data, which is 
typically not available for low resource languages. 
Developing language datasets for languages with 
limited resources is therefore an appropriate initial 
*corresponding author 
 
 
2 
step to guarantee that machine learning tasks are 
feasible. 
It is for this reason that the Kencorpus project was 
undertaken with the aim of collecting text and 
speech 
data for 
low resource 
languages. 
Nonetheless, we face the challenge of dealing with 
the many low resource languages of the world. For 
example, Africa has many different languages 
spoken within and across its borders. There are 
over 2,000 different languages spoken in Africa, 
representing a significant part of the world’s 
languages (Heine & Nurse, 2000). A country such 
as Kenya alone has over 42 distinct language 
communities (National Museums of Kenya, n.d.). 
Therefore, the project started with a case study 
involving the three Kenyan languages of Swahili, 
Dholuo and Luhya. 
The choice of these three Kenyan languages is 
based on purposive selection on relative 
representativeness. Swahili, also known as 
Kiswahili, is the national and official language of 
Kenya and Tanzania. The language is a cross 
border language in the Eastern part of Africa and 
is spoken by over 150 million speakers globally. 
Dholuo is a Nilotic language with an ethnic 
community of over 5 million speakers mainly 
around Lake Victoria in three East African 
countries of Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania 
(National Museums of Kenya, n.d.; Omondi, 
2020). Luhya, on the other hand, is a Bantu 
language of about 7 million speakers also 
predominantly used in the Western part of Kenya. 
It is a language with 17 sub-linguistic dialects i.e., 
Lulogooli, 
Luisukha, 
Luitakho, 
Lutiriki, 
Lubukusu, 
Lutachoni, 
Lunyore, 
Lumarachi, 
Lukhayo, Lusamia, Lunyala, Lumarama, Lushisa, 
Luwanga, 
Lutura, 
Lutsotso 
and 
Lukabras 
(Lubangah, 2018).  
This research expects to develop and discover 
methodologies for collection, storage, and 
processing of corpora for under-resourced 
languages. The research also aims at developing 
datasets that are based on the corpus, such as Part 
of Speech (POS) annotation, translation across 
languages, Question Answering (QA) dataset and 
speech-to-text modeling for these low-resource 
languages.  
The data presented in this paper is available for 
diverse machine learning data driven solutions 
such as question answering, machine translation 
and transcription. Through the project, we got 
insights into what it takes to prepare data (text and 
speech) and the accompanying datasets of part of 
speech (POS) annotations and translations 
between the low-resource languages. We have also 
developed 
a 
question 
answering 
dataset. 
Appreciating that such a corpora and datasets 
open many potential opportunities in the machine 
learning communities, the paper reports on 
benchmark work done on two use cases i.e. QA 
and speech-to-text (STT) Transcription. 
The machine learning community involved in 
aspects of research that use corpora and datasets 
such as ours shall be the immediate beneficiaries. 
Enterprises 
interested 
in 
human 
language 
technology (HLT) systems can also access datasets 
for developing and testing their language models 
as they develop practical information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems e.g., 
chatbots, searching tools, translation systems, 
teaching aids, etc. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows – 
Section 2 provides the related work for this 
research while Section 3 describes the details of 
our methodology. Our results are presented in 
Section 4, while Section 5 discusses these results. 
Finally, Section 6 provides the conclusion and 
points out the areas of further research. 
 
2 
Related work 
There are different issues to consider when 
conducting data collection and the curating of 
language datasets. These include the data 
collection process and the source materials for the 
language data that should be included in the 
corpus. There is also the need to consider the 
annotations that can result out of the corpus e.g., 
POS tagging, question-answer, among others. In 
addition, to show the viability of the collected 
datasets, researchers can develop benchmark 
models as proof-of-concept systems. In this 
section, we discuss related work based on the 3 
areas that can be considered when developing 
 
 
3 
language datasets. We focus on data collection 
with reference to building datasets for low-
resource languages.  
2.1 
Data collection and African low-
resource language corpora 
Data 
collection 
modalities 
need 
careful 
consideration and planning. Participatory methods 
of data collection is a workable method that 
achieve a sustainable data collection model 
(Nekoto et al., 2020). As an example, some work 
has been done on using community initiatives to 
build corpora for low resource African languages. 
Such initiatives include the Masakhane project 
(Orife et al., 2020) and AI4D African language 
program (Siminyu et al., 2021), that focus on 
curation of language datasets. Another example 
of a participatory approach in data collection is 
the Digital Umuganda corpora in the country of 
Rwanda (Digital Umuganda, n.d.) where com-
munities gathered at centralized locations for data 
collection activities. Other corpora developed for 
African languages have exploited the task of 
machine translation. This includes work done on 
building machine translation (MT) models with 
204 languages, including some low resource 
languages of Africa (Costa-jussà et al., 2022). The 
Autshumato dataset is also a corpus for machine 
translation of the official languages of South 
Africa, though it can be useful for any other 
translations 
between 
pairs 
of 
languages 
(Groenewald & Fourie, 2009). 
Open-source data can also be used for corpora 
compilation. Tracey et al., (2019) built a dataset for 
low resource languages including some African 
languages like Kiswahili, Wolof, Zulu, among 
others. They built the corpora through web-
scraping and employed native speakers to search 
the web for texts in their native languages. Babirye 
et al. (2022) curated texts and speech datasets for 
5 East African languages, including Kiswahili and 
4 languages spoken in the country of Uganda. 
They employed both participatory approaches 
with local communities and web scraping of social 
media, Wikipedia and local news sites. Marivate et 
al. (2020) created low resource datasets for South 
African languages (Setswana and Sepedi) through 
scraping of online news channels. Apart from 
news sites, other resources contain collections of 
stories on African languages. These include the 
African story books (African Story Book, n.d.) and 
Tuvute Pamoja initiative (Tuvute Pamoja, n.d.) 
both of which have story collections in different 
African languages, while Edutab (Edutab, n.d.) 
provides a collection of Swahili story texts. Other 
datasets such as named entity recognition (NER) 
systems for ten African languages have been 
developed as part of uplifting low resource 
languages of Africa (Adelani et al., 2021).  
Datasets of news articles in Kinyarwanda and 
Kirundi languages of Eastern Africa have been 
compiled for purposes of text classification and 
cross-lingual learning (Niyongabo et al., 2020). 
Web datamining is a method that has been used to 
develop some corpora such as the WebCrawl 
African where 694K parallel sentences for English 
and 15 African languages, such as Swahili, Zulu, 
Hausa among others, is done. Such data is 
applicable in machine translation tasks (Vegi et al., 
2022). 
For the Swahili language, the Helsinki corpus of 
Swahili (Hurskainen, 2004a) and the Swahili 
language online part of speech tagging tool 
Swatag (aflat, 2020) are tools for Swahili language 
processing, specifically Part of Speech (POS) 
tagging.  
Kenya languages with some resources include the 
Kikuyu language which has a spell checker utility 
(Chege et al., 2010). There are few corpora for the 
Kenyan low resource languages of Dholuo and 
Luhya. Nonetheless, there exist some in the public 
domain. Some Dholuo texts have previously been 
collected for the task of machine translation from 
religious texts, though it can be used for other 
machine learning tasks (de Pauw et al., 2010).  
For the Luhya dialects, Siminyu et al. (2021) 
developed a phone dataset for Lubukusu and 
Lusaamia dialects. Ngoni (2022) developed an 
English-Luhya machine translation dataset for 
Lubukusu dialect of Luhya, while Chimoto & 
Bassett (2022) developed an English-Luhya 
machine translation dataset from Bible translation 
for the Lumarama dialect.  
Speech data can be collected using methods such 
as GroupTalk where data collection is done 
through interviews in small groups of focused 
 
 
4 
group discussions in formal settings (Cieri et al., 
2002). Conversion of written text to create speech 
data, such as the use of GroupMeet has been used 
previously to extend data corpora (Gelas et al., 
2012). Mukiibi et al. (2022) leveraged on local 
radio stations to collect speech data for Luganda, 
spoken in Uganda.  
These tried and tested methods of using a 
combination of participatory approaches, web-
scraping and local radio stations have been found 
useful and have been adopted in developing the 
Kencorpus datasets. These research efforts have 
led to a collection of language corpora and 
datasets, but there is still more that needs to be 
done to resource the many low resource languages 
of Africa and the world. 
2.2 
Creation of  annotation datasets 
For this research, we focused on three possible 
annotations that can be developed on top of the 
collected language datasets namely Part of Speech 
(POS) tagging, Question-Answer pairs for QA 
task and Parallel corpora for Machine Translation.  
Part of speech (POS) tagging is usually one of the 
annotation datasets that are needed in an NLP 
pipeline. POS tagging is therefore an important 
aspect of data curation that researchers of low-
resource languages should consider. Some open-
source toolkits exist for POS tagging e.g., GATE 
(Cunningham, 2002), and BRAT (Stenetorp et al., 
2012). These are applicable for high resource 
languages but can also be tweaked for low 
resource languages (Skeppstedt et al., 2016). 
However, these toolkits may not be practical in all 
cases, especially where there is no internet access 
during annotation. Annotators also need some 
training in the use of these tools. In such scenarios 
and as an alternative, POS annotation can be done 
using spreadsheets as was done for some low 
resource languages of Kenya such as Kikamba 
(Kituku et al., 2015; Pauw et al., 2006). In this 
research, we adopted the use of spreadsheets as 
the project duration was short and it would have 
taken longer to train the linguistic annotators on 
the use of a toolkit such as GATE (Cunningham, 
2002).  
POS annotations require tagsets. Different 
languages tend to have different tags e.g., the 
Kiswahili tagset (Hurskainen, 2016), Kamba tagset 
(Kituku et al., 2015). This realization therefore 
leads to the need for some middle ground tagset, 
such as the universal target set proposed by Petrov 
et al. (2011). For this work, we adopted the POS 
tagset proposed by Petrov et al. (2011), as shown 
in Appendix 1, to enable uniform deployment to 
the three different languages considered in this 
research. 
Another necessary annotation dataset that has 
gained popularity among low resource language 
researchers is a parallel corpus for machine 
translation. 
Toolkits 
for 
neural 
machine 
translation already exist, such as the openNMT 
toolkit which uses neural networks to perform the 
translation (OpenNMT, n.d.). Some work has 
been done on machine translation such as neural 
machine translation models used across 5 different 
languages in South Africa with 50,000 sentences 
(Martinus & Abbott, 2019). Practical applications 
of translations for low resource languages include 
work done in translating a glossary of Coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) terms across 33 languages 
(Translators Without Borders, n.d.).  
Initiatives to develop machine translation corpora 
for low resource languages include work done on 
Bambara language of West Africa to and from 
English and French (Tapo et al., 2020). Statistical 
and neural translation methodologies have also 
been tried for Somali and Swahili languages 
spoken in Eastern Africa (Duh et al., 2020). 
Chimoto et al. (2022) creates a parallel corpus of 
8,000 Luhya-English sentences for purposes of 
machine translation. These works bring out the 
challenges and opportunities of working with 
languages that have little data sources. 
Finally, a QA dataset is one of the datasets that can 
be developed from a language corpus. Several QA 
datasets exist for high resource languages e.g., 
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), MCTest 
(Richardson et al., 2013), Common sense 
knowledge systems (Ostermann et al., 2018), 
WikiQA (Yang et al., 2015), TREC-QA (Voorhees 
& Tice, 2000) and TyDiQA (Clark et al., 2020). 
However, only a few QA datasets are available for 
low-resource languages, in particular Kiswahili. 
TyDiQA is such a dataset since it has a QA 
collection of 11 languages from the Wikipedia 
 
 
5 
corpus including the low-resource language of 
Swahili (Clark et al., 2020). It is therefore desirable 
to deliberately develop more QA datasets, 
especially for low-resource languages. 
2.3 
Proof  of concept 
Proof of concept systems are important in testing 
and confirming the useability of a corpus and its 
resultant annotation datasets. It is possible to test 
different NLP aspects of a corpus and dataset e.g., 
effectiveness of the POS tags in NLP tasks, 
practical use of the translation sets in NLP 
systems, and even benchmarking the QA set 
against QA-related tasks.  
For example, assessing the effectiveness of a QA 
dataset can be done using machine learning. This 
is however only possible when there exist vast 
amounts of data to train, validate and test the 
models. Use of machine learning QA models on 
datasets such as the English language SQuAD QA 
dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) has achieved F1 
scores of up to 93.214 (Paperswithcode, n.d.). 
That was achieved using bidirectional encoder 
representations 
from 
trans-former 
(BERT) 
ensembles, which is a deep learning method that 
relies on lots of training data. However, in cases 
where there is little or no training data, as is usually 
the case with low re-source languages, there is the 
need for other methods that may not require as 
much training data. One such alternative data 
model uses semantic networks (SN) (Wanjawa & 
Muchemi, 2020, 2021). SNs are already used in 
domains such as Google Knowledge Graph 
(Singhal, 2012), LinkedIn (Wang et al., 2013) and 
Facebook (Sankar et al., 2013) amongst others. 
SNs can be formulated to model natural language 
data. Even in such cases, there is still need for 
some additional part of speech (POS) tagged 
corpus, to tag the source text, for this SN method 
to work. Once tagged, it is then possible to employ 
SNs to first model the language in such a way that 
the language is structured and ready for tasks such 
as QA.  
SNs model the language by creating a network of 
triples having subject-predicate-object (SPO). If a 
relationship of these triples can exist, then a 
meaningful knowledge base can be created. 
Fortunately, languages also have a generic 
structure that gives them meaning. For example, 
Swahili has a generic subject-verb-object (SVO) 
structure (Hurskainen, 2004a; Ndung’u, 2015). It 
is therefore possible to map the SVO structure of 
a language, to the SPO structure of a SN. The only 
processing of the language text that is needed is 
therefore just the tagging of the source text with 
the corresponding POS. No other training data is 
needed, hence overcoming the need for training 
and testing data. The POS tags can be used to 
identify these subjects and objects (usually nouns) 
and predicates (usually verbs).  
STT transcription systems are of practical use in 
applications that assist people with hearing 
challenges. These systems develop automatic 
speech recognition (ASR) systems that exploit 
speech data, such as that available in a typical 
corpus like this project’s Kencorpus speech 
corpus. It is therefore possible to test ASR systems 
on the speech data of a corpus as proof of 
concept, especially for low resource languages 
where few such systems exist. Transcriptions 
usually follow a five-stage workflow in processing 
the speech files into text (Moore & Llompart, 
2017). This is a pipeline that can be tried in a 
proof-of-concept system for a low resource 
language, together with associated toolkits such as 
CMU Sphinx to create and test an ASR system 
(Pantazoglou et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 2015). 
 
3 
Methodology 
The Kencorpus project collected primary data, 
both speech and text, in the three Kenyan 
languages of Swahili, Dholuo and Luhya. The 
project then curated text and speech corpora for 
each individual language. Additionally, three 
datasets were developed from annotations done 
on the language corpus. The first additional 
dataset was a QA dataset for Swahili, the 
Kencorpus 
Swahili 
Question 
Answering 
(KenSwQuAD) dataset. The second was a set of 
translations of Dholuo and Luhya language texts 
into Swahili, while the third was a part of speech 
(POS) tagged Dholuo and Luhya texts. The 
project also developed proof of concept systems 
for STT modeling and QA system. The details of 
 
 
6 
each aspect of the project are provided in this 
section. 
3.1 
Choice of  languages 
Kenya has more than forty-two indigenous 
languages and are grouped in three major language 
families of Bantu, Nilotic and Cushitic (Iraki, 
2009). 
Kenyan 
languages 
tend 
to 
have 
predominance in certain geographical locations 
within the country. The choice of Swahili, also 
known as Kiswahili, as a language in the project 
was due to Swahili being the national language of 
Kenya. Despite it being spoken by many speakers 
in East Africa and with interests globally, Swahili 
is still a low resource language. More deliberate 
research efforts are therefore still need-ed to 
provide corpora and machine processing tools for 
Swahili. There are many dialects of Swahili (Wald 
& Gibson, 2018; Walsh, 2017). The Swahili data 
collected (text and speech) was mainly the 
Standard Swahili that is of general use in official 
and learning settings, though subtle differences 
were possible depending on the region of Kenya 
where the data came from. The Swahili data in this 
research is therefore considered as Standard 
Swahili.  
Dholuo is a Nilotic language mainly spoken in the 
Western part of Kenya near Lake Victoria. It also 
has speakers in the countries of Tanzania and 
Uganda. It is the second most populous language 
in Kenya (Mazrui, 2012). Dholuo also has 
different dialects or sociolects, and the project 
collected language dialects that were available in 
the data collection field. Nonetheless, these 
dialects tend to have mutual intelligibility and 
hence can be generally called Dholuo.  
The Luhya language is a Bantu language also 
spoken predominantly in the Western part of 
Kenya. 
This 
language 
however 
comprises 
seventeen different dialects within it (Lubangah, 
2018), hence is a language of interest due to its 
diversity amongst its speakers. Due to the 
constraints in resources, only three dialects within 
the Luhya language were selected, being 
Lumarachi, Lulogooli and Lubukusu. The 
purposive sampling was guided by Lubukusu and 
Lulogooli being the most populous languages 
compared to the other dialects (Lubangah, 2018). 
The Lumarachi dialect was of interest due to the 
geographical location of most of the speakers 
who are at the border of the Dholuo speakers in 
Western Kenya. The proximity was of interest to 
gauge if there was any cross-border effect in these 
languages of study. The researchers also had ease 
of access to the geographical location and 
internally available resources to interact with the 
Dholuo and Luhya languages chosen. 
3.2 
Scope of  project 
The Kencorpus project aimed at collecting speech 
and text data for the three languages of Swahili, 
Dholuo and Luhya. The intention was to collect 
an equal number of speech and text data in these 
three languages.  
Additionally, the collected data was to be 
annotated with parts of speech (POS) for Dholuo 
and Luhya texts. Swahili texts were not tagged 
since existing projects have already developed 
POS tagging for Swahili which are generally 
dependable (Hurskainen, 2004a, 2004b). The third 
aspect of the project was to undertake translation 
of texts from the Dholuo and Luhya languages 
into Swahili. This was to increase the size of the 
Swahili corpus, while also understanding the 
intricacies of such translations. The datasets from 
translation would also be useful for the task of 
machine translation. A fourth component of 
Kencorpus was to create a QA dataset based on 
the Swahili text corpus. Finally, the project aimed 
to develop proof of concept systems to confirm 
that the collected data and annotations were of 
practical use to the machine learning community. 
To this end, two proof of concept systems were 
developed. These were a QA model for Swahili 
texts, and a STT model for Swahili speech files. 
3.3 
Data sources 
The project identified data sources which were 
both primary and secondary data sources. The 
primary data was collected using participatory 
approaches from institutions of learning (schools, 
colleges), local community engagements and 
during social events. Secondary data was obtained 
from partnering media houses and publishers. 
Research assistants, who are natives of the 
respective languages, visited the geographical 
locations of the research areas and assisted in the 
 
 
7 
collection of the data. The project employed three 
research assistants per language to lead data 
collection 
efforts. 
We 
had 
partnerships 
agreements with several institutions to enable us 
to access their existing datasets or to allow us to 
link to their data sources. This enabled us to 
collect texts from various genres such as articles, 
book sections, news texts, African short stories, 
and other publications. Additionally, the project 
held story writing competitions in educational 
institutions with the aim of getting texts from 
different geographical regions and language 
dialects. Our respondents were purposively drawn 
from 
different 
genders, 
age 
groups 
and 
geographical locations. We also collected web-
scraped data from tweets particularly for Kiswahili 
and Dholuo. 
3.4 
Data collection 
The project designed guidelines and methods for 
collecting both text and speech data from various 
sources. Text data was collected through story 
competitions mainly in schools. This meant 
providing the respondents with writing materials 
(pens, papers) and collecting the resultant creative 
writing, which were later digitized (see Section 3.6 
for details). However, volunteers and college-level 
students provided their own compositions already 
in soft copy. Local media houses broadcasting in 
local languages (Dholuo, Luhya) provided their 
news transcripts in soft copy. Publishers provided 
their data either as hard copies for photocopying 
or in some cases as soft copies ready for direct 
processing by computers. Tweets (for Kiswahili 
and Dholuo) were collected using Twitter API 
(Lomborg & Bechmann, 2014) with search 
phrases that included names of known local radio 
stations and journalists who post regular content 
in the local languages. Any source material that 
was obtained as hardcopies were later digitized as 
detailed in Section 3.6.  
Speech data was recorded using voice recorders 
(or voice recording apps on smartphones like Easy 
Voice recorder1), while collaborating media houses 
provided speech data through computer files 
mostly in MP3 format. All collected raw data was 
compiled into an initial database and classified as 
level 0 data. 
In terms of Research Ethics, we developed 
research consent forms for use in the project. The 
consent form spelt out the project objectives and 
how the data would be processed, accessed, and 
used. Only the respondents who were willing to 
provide data were allowed to participate in the 
project, subject to their informed consents. All 
respondents who agreed to participate in the 
project signed the forms and also kept a copy of 
the consent forms. Consent forms for groups 
such as schools were executed by the school 
managers on behalf of the respondents. Even in 
such cases, only the students that were willing to 
participate in the project were allowed to do so. All 
members participating, whether individuals or 
groups, were listed by full names and their 
contacts on the consent forms. Metadata 
collection forms, which were hard copy data 
forms ready for population by pen, were also 
developed to capture the details of each data item 
collected. All these items were part of the research 
assistants’ toolkit. The metadata details captured 
during the project are shown in Table 3.1 below. 
 
Table 3.1: Kencorpus project statistics 
Aspect 
Data to be provided 
1. Date
Date of data collection
2. Story ID 
Unique identification of the data item collected 
3. Researcher details 
Needed: (1) Researcher Name (2) Resource Person Name 
4. Story details
4.1 Language 
Options: Swahili(Swa) / Dholuo(Dho) / Luhya- Lumarachi(Lhych) / Lubukusu(Lhybk) / 
Lulogooli(Lhylg) 
4.2 Category of story
Options: Letters / News / Folks / Essays / Story / Dialogue / Song / Advertisement / Others 
4.3 Topics 
Options: Agriculture / Education / Culture / Commercial / Political / Religious / Social affairs 
/ Others
4.4 Title 
Title of the data item being collected 
1 - https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.coffeebeanventures.easyvoicerecorder&hl=en&gl=US&pli=1
 
 
8 
4.5 Short description 
A description of the data item being collected 
4.6 Type 
Options: Text / Speech 
5. Origin
5.1 Location 
Geographical location where data collection was done 
5.2 Source 
Options: Schools / Publisher / Media / Community 
5.3 Name 
Name of author / speaker / provider 
5.4 Gender
Options: Male / Female
5.5 Age group 
Options: School going / Community / under-18 / Adult / Elderly 
5.6 Contacts 
Tel./email 
6 Consent form
6.1 Was signed 
Date / Confirm copyright owner given right for reproduction? 
6.2 Was not signed 
Confirm considerations to ensure no copyright infringement 
6.3 Include in corpus
Options: Yes / No
7. Text processing 
 
7.1 Pages/words 
Number of pages on the text (or words) 
7.2 Text source  
Options: handwritten / typed / already softcopy / image-scan 
7.3 Source text quality 
Options: excellent / good / acceptable / bad-unclear
7.4 Source text format 
(if softcopy) 
Options: TXT / DOC/X / PDF / ODT / picture/scan 
7.5 Initial computer 
copy 
Options: re-typing / scanning / already softcopy 
7.6 Conversion to text 
Options: re-typing / scan to text OCR / already softcopy
8. Speech processing
 
8.1 Setting 
Options: Studio / Clean (anechoic chamber) / Natural recording (quiet room) / Recording with 
background noise / Telephone recording
8.1 Recorder 
Options: Speech file as provided / Phone app details / Microphone details 
 
3.5 
Staff  Training and Piloting 
The Kencorpus project undertook training of the 
identified 
research 
assistants, 
who 
were 
knowledgeable in the three research languages. 
This training was done at the beginning of the 
project. Both face to face and virtual training were 
done. 
Internal 
capacity 
building 
between 
researchers within the language categories was also 
done. Data collection efforts were expected to be 
evenly distributed amongst the three researchers 
per language or language dialect. 
The researchers then started their field work while 
reporting back to the project office on their field 
experiences. Such experiences enabled the project 
to fine tune their research tools to be better suited 
to the research environment and continually 
improve them over time. 
Subsequent training was done for data cleaning 
and annotation tasks. Data cleaning was aimed at 
converting the raw collected data at Level 0, into 
edited computer formats e.g., text images or scans 
were to be converted to the standard text (TXT) 
format. Any other text for-matted documents 
were also to be reformatted back to TXT. Speech 
files were all to be con-verted to the standard 
Waveform Audio File (WAV) format. 
3.6 
Data Cleaning 
In this project we did data cleaning of texts only. 
The speech clips were retained as originally 
recorded due to constraints in equipment to edit 
speech files. However, original recorded speech 
files passed through quality control checks to 
assure the best quality possible. Most of the 
speech files were also studio quality, having been 
obtained from media houses. 
Data cleaning of texts is an essential process of 
eliminating noisy signals that would other-wise 
degrade the quality of datasets intended for 
natural language processing. The noise in data can 
be due to the presence of corrupted characters, 
misspellings, inconsistent data, redundant data, 
missing characters, extra spaces, inconsistent 
punctuations, 
spelling 
variations, 
and 
codeswitching, among others. The data collected 
in this study was not devoid of these noisy 
elements. Therefore, a systematic approach was 
developed to ensure that the raw corpus 
comprising handwritten manuscripts, scanned 
 
 
9 
pages, images, web-scraped data (tweets), and text 
files were adequately processed to deliver quality 
and clean texts in the language datasets.  
The data cleaning approach adapted a four-stage 
data cleaning process (den Broeck et al., 2005). 
However, we tweaked it by introducing a 
preceding stage that we named ‘Digitize’, and also 
introduced a different processing route for tweets. 
The final data cleaning pipeline that we adopted 
was therefore a 5-stage process that included the 
digitization, screening, diagnosis, treatment, and 
documentation stages. The data cleaning process 
flow is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Fig. 1 - The 5-stage data cleaning process adopted by Kencorpus project (source: author). 
 
In the full data cleaning cycle, we employed 
eighteen data cleaners composed of native 
speakers from the three languages. They were 
interviewed, hired, and trained on data cleaning 
and research ethics. To ensure data reliability, each 
file had a primary and secondary data clean-er. As 
an initial process, the primary data cleaner 
meticulously went through each sentence in the 
documents to clean it according to the data 
cleaning scheme. The cleaning done included 
identification and removal of noisy elements, 
correction of spelling and grammatical errors 
using human language experts, and handling of 
missing data that could have been omitted in the 
process of conversion of source text to computer 
format, among others. As a second process, at the 
end of the week, the data cleaners were swapped 
within their respective language teams to look 
through already cleaned text files to recheck them 
for any previously unseen errors. They would then 
further correct such errors to improve the data 
quality. Finally, a linguist, for the respective 
languages, randomly selected and perused sample 
files for quality assurance of the data cleaning. The 
linguists were in charge of cleaning and also the 
other annotation tasks described in section 3.7. 
The tweets were cleaned automatically using 
Python tweet-processor and regular expressions to 
remove constructs such as webpage uniform 
resource locators (URL), hashtags and emojis. 
Moreover, all the tweets were lowercased, and the 
images, and other sections of the tweet dropped 
to only retain the message section. The final 
processing entailed the use of a regular expression 
library to remove non-ASCII characters that could 
have been left behind. Fig. 2 below shows a sample 
of a processed tweet (in Kiswahili), with the raw 
scrapped tweet on the left, and the processed 
tweet on the right. 
 
 
 
10 
Raw Tweet 
Processed Tweet 
Mwanamke Bomba Esther Muiu hujishughulisha na shughuli 
za kuwasaidia wanafunzi Mama huyu wa watoto wanne na 
wajukuu husaidia wale wasiojiweza Esther hushirikiana kwa 
karibu kuwasaidia wanafunzi wa kike #SemaNaCitizen 
https://t.co/oocALvHjwf
Mwanamke Bomba Esther Muiu hujishughulisha na 
shughuli za kuwasaidia wanafunzi. Mama huyu wa watoto 
wanne na wajukuu husaidia wale wasiojiweza Esther 
hushirikiana kwa karibu kuwasaidia wanafunzi wa kike 
 
Fig. 2 - Processing of tweet from original TXT to final TXT for part of Kencorpus storyID 2597 
The first step in processing texts that were not 
tweets, was to digitize the manuscripts by scanning 
and converting the scanned portable document 
format (PDF) images into an editable text format. 
Approximately three thousand manuscripts, 
largely composed of compositions written by 
primary and secondary school students, were 
scanned into PDF text images. Subsequently, 
several Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 
software were used to convert the PDF files to 
editable text formats, with mixed results: some 
achieving very accurate digitization while some 
were not very accurate. This could largely be 
attributed to the handwriting quality and partly to 
the precision of the OCR software. The OCR 
software used were Pen-to-Print mobile phone 
app (Pentoprint, 2021), Expert PDF OCR 
(Avanquest Software, 2021), and Google doc 
internal file converter. An example of an original 
handwritten text page subjected to OCR 
processing using Pen-to-Print is shown in Fig. 3. 
The original handwritten text scan is shown on the 
left side of the figure, while the processed text is 
shown on the right-hand side. 
 
Fig. 3 - Digitization using Pen to print app (source: author). 
A comparative analysis of the various OCR tools 
confirmed that Google doc internal file converter 
had the best results. Therefore, Google doc 
internal file converter was extensively employed to 
convert the rest of the scanned files into editable 
text documents. The unique identifier of the data 
item was preserved in the naming of the cleaned 
texts to ensure direct linkage to the original source 
text. This internal file converter tool also reduced 
the project costs that would otherwise be used in 
procuring proprietary OCR software.  
The second step in the data cleaning was the 
screening, which entailed analysis of the quantity 
and quality of the text output from the initial first 
step. This meant comparing the output of the 
OCR with the original hardcopy on a document-
by-document basis. A sample of such a processing 
is shown on the right side of Fig. 3, where the 
 
 
11 
original text is compared to the OCR converted 
text on a line-by-line basis.  
Some of the original manuscripts had been 
improperly scanned. Such scans had resulted in 
images 
that 
were 
hazy 
and 
hence 
incomprehensible when digitized. To resolve this, 
the respective raw manuscripts were identified and 
rescanned 
properly. 
In 
some 
cases, 
the 
manuscripts contained crossed or strikethrough 
words that were incorrectly interpreted as 
ideographic characters by the OCR software. 
These were dropped while cleaning the final texts. 
The whole raw text document was retyped in cases 
where the OCR output was non-intelligible. 
The third data cleaning step was the diagnosis 
stage, where incomplete data, inconsistent 
punctuations, 
data 
redundancies, 
spelling 
variations, and other errors were identified, as 
shown in Fig. 4. An illustration of some errors that 
were noted in the typical OCR conversion are 
highlighted in the text on the right of Fig. 4, with 
reference to the original handwritten source text 
on the left. 
MADHARA YA KUCHAFUA MAZINGIRA  
mazingita no sehemu yanayozunguka na kiumbo zota kwa 
kweir mazingira ni Pahali ambapo tunafca kulekeleza vizori 
kwa hata ya mienyezi mungu hopenda mazingira safi. 
iwapo mwenyezi mungu hupenda Pakali safi na je ? sisi 
wanaJamu ningependa kuambia ni nini huaribu mazingira 
yeti iwapo hatolekolozi mazingira ya kwanza tunapasua kila 
kito hinao tomia 19wa kuzibeba lxifaa zetu tunapersua 
kutafola mbinu zingine kwa sababu tunatumia ufaa ambaro 
zina haribu mazingira ze tu
 
 
Fig. 4 - Digitization of scanned PDF of Kencorpus storyID 1570 to an editable text document (source: 
author) 
The fourth step involved treating the dataset by 
eliminating the errors identified in step 3. 
Corrections of any spelling, grammar and 
mistakes in sentence structure were also done in 
this stage of the cleaning. This was the longest, 
most time-consuming, and most expensive step. 
Note that the corrections (spelling, grammar, 
restructuring) were only done on the handwritten 
texts from schools. Based on the number of 
words, this was only 12% of the texts that re-
quired such treatment. Texts from media and 
publishers were retained as they were, with the 
processing only confirming that the final 
converted text was true to the original. 
Fig. 5 below shows the typical processing of step 
4, by first correcting the errors identified in step 3 
(Fig. 4). The errors observed at this stage were the 
insertion of unknown characters or omission of 
characters from the original texts. The text on the 
left of Fig. 5 is exactly the output of step 3 as per 
Fig. 4 above, while the text on the right is the text 
resulting from corrections done on the identified 
errors that are shown in bold and underlined. 
 
MADHARA YA KUCHAFUA MAZINGIRA  
mazingita no sehemu yanayozunguka na kiumbo zota kwa 
kweir mazingira ni Pahali ambapo tunafca kulekeleza vizori 
kwa hata ya mienyezi mungu hopenda mazingira safi. 
iwapo mwenyezi mungu hupenda Pakali safi na je ? sisi 
wanaJamu ningependa kuambia ni nini huaribu mazingira yeti 
iwapo hatolekolozi mazingira ya kwanza tunapasua kila kito 
hinao tomia 19wa kuzibeba lxifaa zetu tunapersua kutafola 
mbinu zingine kwa sababu tunatumia ufaa ambaro zina haribu 
mazingira ze tu
MADHARA YA KUCHAFUA MAZINGIRA  
mazingira ni sehemu yanayozunguka na kiumbe zote kwa 
kweli mazingira ni Pahali ambapo tunafaa kutekeleza vizuri 
kwa hata mienyezi mungu hupenda mazingira safi. 
iwapo mwenyezi mungu hupenda Pahali safi na je ? sisi 
wanadamu ningependa kuambia ni nini huaribu mazingira 
yetu iwapo hatutekelezi mazingira ya kwanza tunapasua kila 
kitu tunao tumia kwa kuzibeba vifaa zetu tunapasua 
kutafuta mbinu zingine kwa sababu tunatumia vifaa 
ambayo zina haribu mazingira zetu
 
Fig. 5 - Processing from Digitized to true to original TXT for part of Kencorpus storyID 1570 (source: 
author). 
 
 
12 
 
The second stage of step 4 involves any further 
corrections such as spelling, grammar, and 
sentence structures to ensure that the text is 
properly constructed to create meaning out of the 
original text. This is shown in Fig. 6 below, where 
introduction of proper nouns and other 
grammatical corrections have been made. The text 
to the left is the output of step 4, while the text on 
the right is the final reformatted text, considered 
as the final cleaned text from the process. 
 
MADHARA YA KUCHAFUA MAZINGIRA  
mazingira ni sehemu yanayozunguka na kiumbe zote kwa 
kweli mazingira ni Pahali ambapo tunafaa kutekeleza vizuri 
kwa hata mienyezi mungu hupenda mazingira safi. 
iwapo mwenyezi mungu hupenda Pahali safi na je ? sisi 
wanadamu ningependa kuambia ni nini huaribu mazingira 
yetu iwapo hatutekelezi mazingira ya kwanza tunapasua kila 
kitu tunao tumia kwa kuzibeba vifaa zetu tunapasua kutafuta 
mbinu zingine kwa sababu tunatumia vifaa ambayo zina 
haribu mazingira zetu 
MADHARA YA KUCHAFUA MAZINGIRA  
Mazingira ni sehemu inanayozunguka viumbe vyote. Kwa 
kweli mazingira ni pahali ambapo tunafaa kutunza vizuri 
kwani hata Mwenyezi Mungu hupenda mazingira safi. Ikiwa 
Mwenyezi Mungu anapenda pahali pasafi na je sisi 
wanadamu? 
Ningependa kuelezea ni nini huharibu mazingira yetu 
tusipoitunza. Kuna vifaa vingi tunavyotumia ambavyo 
tukitupa ovyo ovyo huharibu mazingira yetu. Karatasi ni 
mojawapo ya vitu tunazotumia aambavyo huharibu 
mazingira yetu. 
 
Fig. 6 - Processing from true to original TXT to final TXT for part of Kencorpus storyID 1570 (source: 
author). 
 
The fifth and last step was the documentation 
stage. This involved indexing all of the original 
scanned files and mapping the ‘level 0’ master data 
with the respective cleaned data files stored in the 
‘level 1’ cleaned data files. Subsequently, 
annotations based on the cleaned data could be 
done. 
3.7 
Data annotation 
The project collected data for the Kencorpus 
corpus, and also developed datasets such as part 
of speech (POS) annotation for Dholuo and 
Luhya texts, QA pairs for Kiswahili texts, and 
translations from Dholuo to Kiswahili and Luhya 
to Kiswahili. We developed our own annotation 
guides for the POS tagging, translation, and QA 
tasks. These were made available to all research 
assistants for their reference. The details of all the 
data annotations aspects are pro-vided below. 
POS Annotation  
Part of speech (POS) tagging was done by at least 
two research assistants per text document. The 
lead researcher in charge of the language did 
random checking on the POS tags and con-firmed 
agreement between the research assistants. The 
lead researcher, being the subject matter expert in 
the respective language, had the final decision in 
case of disagreement. POS tagging was based on 
a predefined tag set developed by the subject 
matter experts and shared amongst the annotators. 
This tag set was made uniform for deployment 
across the two languages being annotated (Dholuo 
and Luhya). The starting point of tag set 
development was the twelve universal tag set 
(Petrov et al., 2011). The initial idea was to 
increment the tags as necessary, upon consensus 
and agreement amongst the linguists in the four 
languages i.e., Dholuo and the three dialects of 
Luhya. This would result into a new tag set for 
uniform deployment across the corpus languages. 
However, the additional tags suggested for the 
different languages could not cut across all 
languages. After careful consideration, and to 
maintain uniformity across the languages in the 
project, a final decision was made to restrict our 
tagging to only the twelve universal tags. The 
deployed tagset is shown in Appendix 1. 
The number of annotations done per language 
(Dholuo and Luhya) were one-third of the texts 
that had been digitized and cleaned. We did 
 
 
13 
sampling based on the lengths of texts, targeting 
longer texts for the tagging.  
QA Annotation  
Collection of Question-Answers pairs was done 
using an online form (Google form), where 
annotators filled in the QA pairs for each story 
text that they had read. The methodology for QA 
formulation was similar to what was employed for 
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and TyDiQA 
(Clark et al., 2020). We formulated 5 QA pairs per 
text, with each annotator reading and setting the 
QA pairs as per predefined criteria such as the type 
of question to set and that the questions should 
be answerable by a single answer. The number of 
texts that were annotated with QA pairs was 70% 
of the Kiswahili texts. This volume of texts was 
chosen because it met the criteria set for doing the 
QA annotations. Such criteria spelt out the length 
of text (number of words) that could qualify for 
annotation. This was to avoid overly short or long 
texts to enable us to fit the standard number of 
5QA pairs that we were to annotate on each text. 
Another criteria was on the text domain. This 
restricted our texts to prose and hence excluded 
poems and plays. The full details of the QA 
annotation aspects of the project are provided on 
a separate article (Wanjawa et al., 2023) 
Translation 
The unit of translation adopted in the project was 
at sentence level. The annotators were to translate 
one sentence at a time. The translation method 
used was the literal translation of meaning of 
word(s) in context. We adopted equivalence 
translation, 
hence 
cultural 
words, 
idioms, 
metaphors, and sayings were translated into the 
best matching equivalence in the target language. 
At the beginning, the research had group 
translations where we conducted comparative 
translation to agree on the guidelines. Native 
speakers and linguistic experts participated in the 
translation. 
As 
supplementary 
material, 
dictionaries (Aswani (1995); Marlo et al., 2008; 
Ndanyi (2005); Odaga (1997); Parker (1998); 
Sibuor (2013); TUKI, 2013) were used as 
references. The translations done were for 
Dholuo-Kiswahili and Luhya-Kiswahili language 
pairs. The texts selected for translation were 
sampled through convenient sampling, targeting 
texts that were digitized and cleaned. 
3.8 
Quality control check 
The project set up a system of checking each 
aspect of the project and ensuring that quality was 
assured. Quality control checking of all our 
processes from collection to annotation was a 
continuous process. This review assisted in 
ensuring that we provided datasets that were of 
high quality for use in machine learning tasks. We 
did the monitoring of data items as they were 
being collected and transmitted. This enabled the 
project to check on the data as it came and to apply 
corrective actions in terms of the quality of the 
data itself or the process of get-ting the data to 
the centralized storage. The collected data was 
submitted and managed in a shared centralized 
storage under the accountability of one 
researcher, who served as the data manager. The 
researcher in charge of raw data checked each 
received data item and communicated back to the 
research assistants in cases where the data needed 
to be resubmitted for whatever reason. 
Data collection was supervised by the linguists, 
while the researchers also visited the data 
collection sites to confirm and spot check the data 
collection initiatives. We developed a processing 
and review methodology that called upon the 
research assistants to send data immediately upon 
collection instead of keeping it for long. In terms 
of project management and quality checks, each 
member of the research team was assigned a task 
and worked with a team of research assistants to 
accomplish the task. The research team met 
weekly to review, correct and guide on project 
execution to ensure the achievement of a quality 
product. 
Data cleaning teams were guided on tools and 
methods of data cleaning, with the supervising 
researcher checking on the outputs. Each 
annotation work was done under a supervising 
researcher to ensure that the expected task was 
done, confirmed, and checked.  
POS tagging was rechecked by the subject matter 
experts on a random sampling basis targeting 10% 
of all the annotated words. This was done by 
sampling the various genres of texts, but fully 
 
 
14 
checking all the tags in the sampled text under 
consideration.  
For translation, the researcher in charge, being the 
subject matter expert, also sampled 10% of the 
translated work and checked the translations to 
confirm accuracy. QA pair tagging task had a 
counterchecking system where the annotators 
reviewed a sample of each other’s work to confirm 
agreement. The researcher in charge of QA 
annotation was to have the final decision in case 
of any disagreement on the set of QA pairs.  
Lastly, the two proof-of-concept systems were 
overseen by the project team under the 
supervision of two researchers with expertise in 
the respective modeling (STT or QA). The teams 
and experts checked and confirmed that the 
project expectations of the proof-of-concept 
systems were met. 
 
4 
Results 
The result of this project is the Kenyan languages 
corpus (Kencorpus). This is a corpus of texts and 
speech for the three languages of Kiswahili, 
Dholuo and Luhya. The project also developed 
other datasets of Dholuo-Kiswahili and Luhya-
Kiswahili translations, part of speech (POS) 
tagged data for the Dholuo and Luhya languages 
and a question answering dataset for the Kiswahili 
language. Two proof of concept systems (STT 
and QA tasks) were also developed to test the 
datasets on NLP tasks. 
4.1 
Kecorpus statistics 
The details of the dataset that the Kencorpus 
project collected is shown in Table 4.1 below. The 
final outcome of the initiative is therefore the 
Kenyan Languages corpus (Kencorpus) that has a 
dataset of 4,442 texts and 1,152 speech files. Note 
that the total numbers (Texts, Speech and Total) 
refer to the unique filenames compiled in the 
collection. Words refers to the total number of 
words in the texts available in the collection. The 
total time is the number of hours, minutes and 
seconds in speech files in the collection. 
Table 4.1: Kencorpus project statistics 
Language Texts
Words 
Speech
Time 
Total
Swahili 
2,585
1,829,727 
104 
19:10:57 
2689
Dholuo
546
1,346,481
512
99:03:08
1058
Luhya 
987
2,272,957 
536 
58:15:41 
1523
Tweets 
(Swahili) 
324
152,750 
0 
0:00:00 
324
Total 
4,442
5,601,915 
1,152
176:29:46 5,594
 
The Luhya language data of a total of 1,523 data 
items as per Table 2, was however obtained from 
three different dialects, each dialect with its own 
data distribution as shown bro-ken down in Table 
4.2 below. 
Table 4.2: Kencorpus project breakdown of  Luhya 
language data into dialects 
Dialect
Texts
Words
Speech
Time
Total
Luhya_M
arachi 
483 
67,812 
138 
15:37:46
621 
Luhya_Bu
kusu 
135 
876,257 
354 
30:11:00
489 
Luhya_Lo
gooli
369 
1,328,888
44 
12:26:55
413 
Total 
987 
2,272,957
536 
58:15:41
1,523 
 
4.2 
Kecorpus annotations 
The project created three datasets from the initial 
data collections above. The first dataset was a 
translation dataset of 13,400 sentences, being 
translations of Dholuo-Kiswahili and Luhya-
Kiswahili sentence pairs as shown in Table. 4.3. 
The second dataset was a collection 143,000 words 
annotated for POS in two languages (Dholuo and 
Luhya-Lumarachi, 
Luhya-Lubukusu, 
Luhya-
Lulogooli) as shown in Table 4.4. The final dataset 
was a dataset of 7,537 QA pairs from Kiswahili 
texts as shown in Table 4.5. More details about the 
Kencorpus Kiswahili Question Answering dataset 
(KenSwQuAD) including details of quality checks 
and machine learning systems developed as a 
result of that set are available as a separate project 
(https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/OTL0LM). 
Table 4.3: Kencorpus datasets created from the data 
collected - Translation 
Task
Sentences
Dholuo-Swahili translation 
1,500 
Luhya-Swahili translation
11,900
Total  
13,400 
 
 
15 
Table 4.4: Kencorpus datasets created from the data 
collected – POS tagging 
Task 
Words 
Dholuo POS tagging
50,000
Marachi POS tagging 
27,800 
Bukusu POS tagging
30,900
Logooli POS tagging 
34,300 
Total 
143,000
 
Table 4.5: Kencorpus datasets created from the data 
collected – QA annotation 
Aspect
No.
Swahili text stories annotated 
1,445 
Total QA pairs 
7,537 
 
All the above-mentioned datasets and the corpus 
are available for use by researchers and any other 
user under the creative commons with attribution 
(CC BY 4.0) international license. These 
Kencorpus data collections are available on the 
project 
website 
(https://kencorpus.maseno.ac.ke/) 
 
4.3 
Kencorpus proof  of  concept 
The Kencorpus project developed two proof of 
concept systems to test the datasets for their 
practical use in machine learning tasks. The first 
was to test the QA dataset on a QA system and the 
second was to test the collected speech data on a 
STT system. QA systems are applicable in systems 
such as internet search, dialog systems and 
chatbots, while STT systems are useful for 
processing text in instances such as educational 
materials for those with hearing challenges.  
The first proof of concept that tested a QA 
system on the newly developed QA dataset was 
based on a deep learning system, specifically 
XLM-RoBERTa (Conneau & Lample, 2019). This 
was done using a dataset of 100 stories with 500 
QA pairs from the Kencorpus QA dataset. The 
model used 80% of the data for training, while 
20% of the data was used for testing. The file 
formatting and programming code for creating 
the model was based on what has been done in 
other similar settings for low-resource languages 
(Pytext, n.d.). The model settings were left at 
default apart from the following changes: Max 
sequence length = 384, Learning rate = 3e-5, 
batch size = 12, Epochs = 40 and max split span 
= 128.  
The other machine learning method tried for QA 
was that of using semantic networks as al-ready 
tried on other datasets (Wanjawa & Muchemi, 
2021). This method creates a network of nodes 
and edges based on the part of speech (POS) 
tagging of the text. The network then models the 
language by connecting the subjects-predicates-
objects to create a network that shows the inter-
relatedness of the POS words in the language. 
POS tagged words such as nouns tend to 
represent subjects and objects, while POS tagged 
words such as verbs tend to represent the 
relationships between the subjects and objects for 
SVO languages such as Swahili (Hurskainen, 
2004a; Ndung’u, 2015). Such a network is created 
using programming scripts that mine the POS 
tagged text to identify the various parts of speech 
that represent subjects and objects, and then 
create the interconnections using POS tags such 
as verbs. The final format of the network is in a 
resource description format (RDF) which can 
then be queried using a database query language 
such as SPARQL, to enquire on the subjects or 
objects presented on the query text. 
The second proof of concept model was a 
speech-to-text (STT) model based on the Swahili 
speech files collected in the project. This STT 
system was based on a collection of the speech 
corpus that is 27hrs 31min 50 sec, with 7 male and 
19 female speakers. This created a Kiswahili 
phoneme dictionary of 31,759 word-phoneme 
pairs (Awino et al., 2022). The SST model was 
based on CMU Sphinx STT toolkit (Pantazoglou 
et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 2015). 
The summary of performance of the two proof 
of concept systems developed for the project is 
shown in Table 4.6, with EM being exact match, 
while WER being word error rate. Details of the 
STT research are further explained in Awino et al. 
(2022) while those of the QA system are further 
explained in Wanjawa et al. (2023). 
 
 
16 
Table 4.6: Kencorpus proof  of  concept system performance 
Test system 
Accuracy 
QA system using deep learning (BERT)
59.4% F1 score
QA system using semantic network 
80% EM 
STT using CMU Sphinx STT toolkit
18.87% WER
 
While performance of QA systems for English 
language now uses machine learning to achieve 
upto F1 score of 93.214 (Paperswithcode, n.d.), 
the use of non-machine learning method for 
Kiswahili low resource language achieved 80% on 
exact match basis. The testing of the QA using a 
machine learning system (BERT) achieved an F1 
score of 59.4%. While exact match and F1 metrics 
are used in different learning methods, the higher 
the performance the better the method. We 
observe that learning systems trained on little data 
available for low-resource languages are not able 
to perform as well as the models trained on large 
data such as for English, nor can such perform 
better than other system that are not based on 
training data, such as SN method. 
For the STT system with Kiswahili language, the 
18.87% WER is relatively good performance. 
High resource languages such as English have 
some of the best WERs, that are as low as 5.1% 
(Kurata et al., 2017). However, low resource 
languages have shown WERs of over 10%, such 
as 14.2% for Somali and 27.2% for Wolof 
language (Gauthier et al., 2016; Nimaan et al., 
2006). Training the models on model data for 
similar low resource STT systems such as ours 
should improve the current WER rates. 
5 
Discussions 
This project developed the Kenyan Languages 
corpus (Kencorpus) that has datasets in the three 
languages of Kiswahili, Dholuo and Luhya. For 
this research, we sampled three Luhya dialects, 
hence the final corpus has data in the five distinct 
languages of Swahili, Dholuo, Luhya-Lumarachi, 
Luhya-Lulogooli and Luhya-Lubukusu. These 
datasets were developed through data collection 
from both primary and secondary data sources by 
the project researchers. The Luhya-Lumarachi 
dialect was included to enable possible future 
research in the influence of neighbouring 
languages to a language of study. Lumarachi 
speakers are neighbours to the more populous 
Dholuo language speakers. This aspect was not 
addressed in this research but is a possible future 
linguistic study.  
Analysis of the text data collected in this project 
showed that most texts were about 2,000 words in 
length on average. Our data on speech files 
indicated that most speech files were much less 
than 5 minutes each, especially from storytelling 
scenarios. The longer speech files were those from 
media houses where in some cases the audio clips 
provided could run up to an hour. These relative 
data sizes are useful in planning for project 
resources in similar corpus creation projects.  
Getting data from primary sources such as 
education institutions and the community pro-
vided the corpus with rich data that reflected 
diversity in the age groups from lower primary to 
college levels. Gender and cultural diversity were 
also manifested at data collection points. We 
discuss other pertinent issues encountered and the 
lessons learnt below. 
Raw data - Data collected from lower grade 
schools were a bit illegible due to their writing 
habits and were made worse by their use of pencils 
for writing. Scanning or retyping handwrit-ten 
texts to create the computer formats needed in the 
corpus was difficult, with the discovery of such 
challenges coming up much later in the project 
after the data collection phase had ended. A lesson 
learnt from this was the need to use darker pens 
when collecting handwritten stories. This is not 
the usual conventional medium darkness (HB) 
pencil that are otherwise used in such school 
settings. The pen used should be much darker, and 
preferably an ink or biro pen where possible and 
as appropriate to the type and convenience of the 
respondent. 
While it was fast and relatively easy to get 
secondary data from our collaborators, we still had 
challenges in processing some of the data that was 
still unclear e.g., scans or photographed images of 
newspaper 
clippings. 
Sometimes 
the 
shortcomings in the quality of the scans were 
related to the equipment used in the scanning or 
the expertise of the operator. We had instances 
where the scanned images would cut off the edges 
 
 
17 
of the raw text documents. This made the 
reproduction of the original texts to be difficult. 
Some secondary data was also quite voluminous 
e.g., book scans or Bible sections. These were 
challenging to scan and to eventually reprocess 
into a computer format. We continually gave 
feedback to our researchers on the quality of the 
data being transmitted so that they could improve 
on any shortcomings over time. 
Speech files did not have many challenges apart 
from the quality of recording that depended 
largely on the equipment. However, most of the 
collections (over 60%) were provided by project 
collaborators from media houses which were 
already in high quality studio recording format and 
in a suitable compression format such as MP3. 
Speech files tended to be big in size and 
sometimes the recording gadgets, such as 
smartphones, would run short of storage memory. 
Careful planning of work to anticipate the 
expected data volumes and preparing the 
recording hardware settings in advance assisted us 
in addressing such challenges. We also encouraged 
the research assistants to post their data to our 
central storage as soon as they could and 
immediately after the data collection exercise. This 
ensured that the recorders had more than 
adequate resources at any given time. 
Data cleaning – A data cleaning process was used 
to convert our raw documents into computer 
processable formats, which were TXT for all texts 
and WAV for all speech files. This process would 
lead to the creation of the corpus that is ready for 
machine learning tasks. Our project planned for 
the data cleaning to be done after the conclusion 
of data collection, so that the data to clean would 
be fully available for cleaning when the data 
cleaning exercise started. We however soon 
realized that the volume of data from the raw 
sources that needed cleaning was too much, 
despite the time allocated to data cleaning being a 
bit limited.  
We also had other project tasks such as 
translations, POS tagging and QA annotation 
which needed the cleaned data and could therefore 
not start at their planned time as they needed the 
cleaned data. We overcame this by allowing parallel 
running of both the data cleaning and the 
annotations. In cases such as QA annotation, we 
allowed the annotators to use the raw data (images, 
scans, PDF) and annotate the QA pairs from such 
raw data sources. Future projects dealing with 
corpus creation can benefit by starting the data 
cleaning process as soon as data collection 
commences. These two processes should run in 
parallel to ensure that the workload involved in 
data cleaning is balanced throughout the project 
cycle and any dependent data processing tasks, 
such as annotations, are not delayed.  
The decision on whether cleaning of texts should 
also include correction of spelling and grammar 
remains an issue of concern. Text data from 
lower-level schools tended to have many of such 
mistakes. In our case we only made corrections 
(spelling, grammar, sentence constructions as 
necessary) on all the handwritten texts that were 
collected from schools and left all other texts from 
publishers and media in their original form. Such 
corrections were however done on a small 
proportion of the data which turned out to be 
12% of the total texts, based on the number of 
words. 
The corpus therefore consists of text data that is 
of well-structured language, with correct spelling 
and grammar, either as originally sourced from 
publishers or media (88% of all texts, based on 
number of words) or corrected by our researchers 
when necessary (12%). The original collected text 
data before cleaning is also a good data source for 
research on text changes as influenced by data 
cleaning, optical character recognition (OCR) and 
image processing. Though the corpus publishes 
the cleaned TXT data format, it is possible to 
obtain the original source texts on request for 
purposes of such research. 
Data 
volume 
- 
There 
were 
challenges 
experienced with the proof-of-concept systems 
which could be attributed to the low volume of 
data in the corpus for machine learning methods 
that needed lots of data. The performance of the 
BERT-based proof of concept system on QA was 
low due to inadequate data. This BERT-based QA 
system was observed to improve in performance 
only when the data volume was increased. It is for 
this reason that we tested the SN method as 
another proof-of-concept, and this provided 
 
 
18 
much better performance since it did not rely on 
vast amounts of data that was not available 
anyway, but just needed the original text to the 
POS tagged. The STT system that was tested as 
another proof of concept also did not have much 
data to train on since the Swahili speech files were 
relatively few, compared to the texts. Lack of 
training and testing data therefore remains the 
challenge with low resource language processing 
when subjected to machine learning methods that 
need such datasets.  
 
Our Kencorpus project therefore contributes to 
resources of such languages as Kiswahili, Dholuo 
and Luhya. This should start placing them at the 
realm of machine learning systems so that users 
can access the many technological benefits of 
machine processing e.g., education materials for 
the 
physically 
challenged, 
internet 
search, 
chatbots, frequently asked questions (FAQs) that 
are developed from models such as STT and QA. 
These 
models 
need 
a 
corpus 
and 
the 
accompanying annotations, both of which the 
Kencorpus project provides. 
As this and other data collection and annotation 
efforts continue, we expect that machine learning 
researchers targeting Swahili and other low 
resource languages, many of which are in Africa, 
shall start building resources for the benefit of the 
language users. 
However, we also encountered some challenges 
while developing the Kencorpus datasets. The first 
was how to deal with incentives to respondents. 
This was a challenge while getting primary data 
where respondents expected or asked for 
compensation to provide the needed data. This 
had not been planned and would also not have fit 
into the budget of the project. We decided to 
forgo any such potential data sources. The other 
challenge was the Coronavirus disease of 2019 
(COVID-19), a pandemic that caused curfews and 
restrictions in movement. We overcame such 
through good planning, virtual engagements and 
targeted one-off events that would enable us to 
gather as much information or input as possible, 
with minimal physical contact.  
6 
Conclusion 
This 
research 
described 
the 
creation 
of 
Kencorpus, which is a corpus of 5,594 data items, 
both speech and text, for Swahili, Dholuo and 
Luhya. Kencorpus was created through the 
collection of primary and secondary data from 
education institutions, community, media houses 
and publishers. The research also reports on the 
data cleaning efforts that were needed to ensure 
that the datasets were in the expected computer 
format that would aid in further machine learning 
processes. The resultant collection in Kencorpus 
is the set of 4,442 text documents of 5.6 million 
words and 1,152 speech files of 176.5 hours across 
the three languages. 
We have reported our POS tagging efforts for 
Dholuo, Luhya-Lumarachi, Luhya-Lulogooli and 
Luhya-Lubukusu. These tags are useful for 
language processing systems such as spelling and 
grammar checkers, hence such tools for our low 
resource languages can now be developed in our 
word processing programs. The paper has 
explained the development of parallel corpora for 
Dholuo-Swahili and Luhya-Swahili. This is useful 
in increasing parallel corpora for machine 
translation systems. A QA dataset of 7,537 QA 
pairs was also reported. This is useful in ma-chine 
learning systems for machine comprehension 
tasks and enquiry systems such as chatbots, 
frequently asked questions (FAQs) and even 
internet search using low resource languages. We 
developed an STT transcription proof of concept 
for Swahili which will contribute in research 
related to the development of speech technology 
tools. 
By monitoring the data collection and dataset 
creation process at every stage, we ensured that 
the resulting corpus and datasets were of high 
quality and were also of practical use in typical 
machine learning systems as demonstrated by our 
proof-of-concept systems in STT and QA using 
deep learning and semantic networks.  
For future work, this research corpus can be 
updated with new data and datasets over time. 
This shall further enrich it and make it even more 
useful in machine learning models that re-quire 
lots of training data.   
 
 
19 
Acknowledgements 
This research was made possible by funding from Meridian Institute’s Lacuna Fund under grant no. 0393-
S-001 which is a funder collaboration between The Rockefeller Foundation, Google.org, and Canada’s 
International Development Research Centre. 
We also acknowledge the inputs of the following research assistants for their contributions to the project:  
Dholuo team: Beryl Odawa, Bildad Okebe, Immaculate Ochieng, Jackline Okello, Jonathan Onyango, 
Jotham Ondu, Jude Abade, Mary Muma, Mercy Oduoll, Wilfred Okoth 
Luhya team: Belinda Oduor, Caren Nekesa, Chrispinus Waswa, Dorine Lugendo, Edwin Odhiambo, Evans 
Owino, Frankline Mwaro, Jamleck Lugwiri, Joseph Ambwere, Josephat Bwire, Joyline Ingasiani, Judith 
Awinja, Kints Mugoha, Mactilda Makana, Martin Mulwale, Mary Kibigo, Mary Masinde, Marystella 
Mbaya, Morris Salano, Phelisters Simiyu, Samwel Nyongesa, Stanely Kevogo, Tobias Shikuku, Vivian 
Alivitsa, Yonah Namatsi 
Swahili team: Alice Muchemi, Benard Okal, Eric Magutu, Henry Masinde, Japheth Owiny, Khalid Kitito, 
Naomi Muthoni, Patrick Ndung’u, Phillip Lumwamu, Rose Nyaboke 
Data Cleaning team: Led by Abiud Wekesa, Hesbon Watamba, Joyce Nekesa, Victor Orembe 
Systems team: Ebbie Awino, Edwin Onyango, Geoffrey Ombui, Mark Njoroge 
Logistics team: Job Ajiki, Kay Atieno, Leila Awuor, Odhiambo Oduke, Susan Makhanu. 
 
References 
Adelani, D. I., Abbott, J., Neubig, G., D’souza, D., 
Kreutzer, J., Lignos, C., Palen-Michel, C., Buzaaba, 
H., Rijhwani, S., Ruder, S., & others. (2021). 
MasakhaNER: Named Entity Recognition for 
African Languages. Transactions of  the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 9, 1116-1131. 
aflat. (2020, September). Kiswahili Part-of-Speech 
Tagger - Demo  AfLaT.org. 
https://www.aflat.org/swatag 
African Story Book. (n.d.). Retrieved June 28, 
2021, from https://www.africanstorybook.org/ 
Aswani, F. O. B. (1995). Fonolojia ya silabi ya 
Kiswahili sanifu na ya Kimarama: Uchanganuzi 
Linganishi. Tasnifu ya Uzamili. Chuo Kikuu cha 
Moi. 
Avanquest 
Software. 
(2021). 
ExpertPDF. 
https://www.expert-pdf.com/ 
Awino, D., Muchemi, L., Wanzare, L. D. A., 
Ombui, E., Wanjawa, B., McOnyango, O., & 
Indede, F. (2022). KenSpeech: Swahili Speech 
Transcriptions. Harvard Dataverse. 
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/YHXJSU 
Babirye, C., Nakatumba-Nabende, J., Katumba, 
A., Ogwang, R., Francis, J. T., Mukiibi, J., 
Ssentanda, M., Wanzare, L. D., & David, D. (2022). 
Building Text and Speech Datasets for Low 
Resourced Languages: A Case of Languages in 
East Africa. 3rd Workshop on African Natural 
Language Processing. 
Chege, K., Wagacha, P., de Pauw, G., Muchemi, L., 
Ng’ang’a, W., Ngure, K., & Mutiga, J. (2010). 
Developing an Open source spell checker for 
Gĩkũyũ. In Proceedings of  the Second Workshop on 
African Language Technology - AfLaT 2010 (Issue 
LREC). 
Chimoto, E., & Bassett, B. (2022). Very Low 
Resource Sentence Alignment: Luhya and Swahili. 
Proceedings of  the Fifth Workshop on Technologies for 
Machine Translation of  Low-Resource Languages 
(LoResMT 2022), 1–8, Gyeongju, Republic of 
Korea. Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Cieri, C., Miller, D., & Walker, K. (2002). Research 
methodologies, observations and outcomes in 
 
 
20 
(conversational) speech data collection. Proc. HLT 
2002. 
Clark, J. H., Choi, E., Collins, M., Garrette, D., 
Kwiatkowski, T., Nikolaev, V., & Palomaki, J. 
(2020). TyDi QA: A benchmark for information-
seeking question answering in typologically diverse 
languages. Transactions of  the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 8, 454-470. 
Conneau, A., & Lample, G. (2019). Cross-lingual 
language model pretraining. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 7059–7069. 
Costa-jussà, M. R., Cross, J., Çelebi, O., Elbayad, 
M., Heafield, K., Heffernan, K., Kalbassi, E., Lam, 
J., Licht, D., Maillard, J., & others. (2022). No 
language left behind: Scaling human-centered 
machine 
translation. 
ArXiv 
Preprint 
ArXiv:2207.04672. 
Cunningham, H. (2002). GATE, a general 
architecture for text engineering. Computers and the 
Humanities, 36(2), 223–254. 
de Pauw, G., Maajabu, N., & Wagacha, P. W. 
(2010). A knowledge-light approach to Luo 
machine translation and part-of-speech tagging. 
Proceedings of  the Second Workshop on African Language 
Technology (AfLaT 2010). Valletta, Malta: European 
Language Resources Association (ELRA), 15–20. 
den Broeck, J., Argeseanu Cunningham, S., 
Eeckels, R., & Herbst, K. (2005). Data cleaning: 
detecting, 
diagnosing, 
and 
editing 
data 
abnormalities. PLoS Medicine, 2(10), e267. 
Digital Umuganda. (n.d.). Retrieved March 31, 
2022, from https://digitalumuganda.com 
Duh, K., McNamee, P., Post, M., & Thompson, B. 
(2020, May). Benchmarking neural and statistical 
machine translation on low-resource African 
languages. Proceedings of  the Twelfth Language 
Resources and Evaluation Conference, 2667-2675. 
Edutab. (n.d.). Retrieved July 18, 2021, from 
https://edutab.africa/ 
Gauthier, E., Besacier, L., & Voisin, S. (2016). 
Automatic speech recognition for African 
languages with vowel length contrast. Procedia 
Computer Science, 81, 136-143. 
Gelas, H., Besacier, L., & Pellegrino, F. (2012). 
Developments of Swahili resources for an 
automatic speech recognition system. SLTU-
Workshop on Spoken Language Technologies for Under-
Resourced Languages, 94–101. http://www.isca-
speech.org/archive 
Groenewald, H. J., & Fourie, W. (2009). 
Introducing 
the 
Autshumato 
integrated 
translation environment. Proceedings of  the 13th 
Annual Conference of  the European Association for 
Machine Translation. 
Heine, B., & Nurse, D. (2000). African languages: An 
introduction. Cambridge University Press. 
Hurskainen, A. (2004a). Helsinki corpus of 
Swahili. Compilers: Institute for Asian and African 
Studies (University of  Helsinki) and CSC. 
Hurskainen, A. (2004b). Tagset of  SWATWOL A 
two-level morphological dictionary of  Kiswahili Clause 
boundary tag Tags for marking noun class features. 
http://www.aakkl.helsinki.fi/cameel/corpus/swa
tags.pdf 
Hurskainen, A. (2016). Helsinki Corpus of  Swahili 
2.0 
Annotated 
Version. 
Kielipankki. 
http://urn.fi/urn:nbn:fi:lb-2016011301 
Iraki, F. K. (2009). Language and political 
economy: A historical perspective on Kenya. 
Journal of  Language, Technology & Entrepreneurship in 
Africa, 1(2), 229–243. 
Kituku, B., Musumba, G., & Wagacha, P. (2015). 
Kamba Part of Speech Tagger Using Memory-
Based Approach. International Journal on Natural 
Language Computing, 4(2), 43–53. 
Kurata, G., Ramabhadran, B., Saon, G., & Sethy, 
A. (2017). Language modeling with highway 
LSTM. In 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition 
and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 244-251, 
IEEE. 
Lomborg, S., & Bechmann, A. (2014). Using APIs 
for data collection on social media. The Information 
Society, 30(4), 256–265. 
Lubangah, L. J. (2018). Linguistic Versus 
Geographical Boundaries: A Lexical Semantic 
Assessment Of  Luhyia Dialects [UON]. 
http://erepository.uonbi.ac.ke/bitstream/handle
 
 
21 
/11295/104707/Lubangah%20_Linguistic%20V
ersus%20Geographical%20Boundaries%20A%2
0Lexical%20Semantic%20Assessment%20Of%2
0Luhya%20Dialects..pdf?sequence=1 
Marivate, V., Sefara, T., Chabalala, V., Makhaya, K., 
Mokgonyane, T., Mokoena, R., & Modupe, A. 
(2020). Investigating an Approach for Low 
Resource Language Dataset Creation, Curation 
and Classification: Setswana and Sepedi. Proceedings 
of  the first workshop on Resources for African Indigenous 
Languages, 15–20, Marseille, France. European 
Language Resources Association (ELRA). 
Marlo, M., Sifuna, A., & Wasike, A., (ed.) (2008). 
Bukusu-English dictionary,  
https://www.academia.edu/1901981/Lubukusu-
English-dictionary (retrieved June 15, 2022) 
Martinus, L., & Abbott, J. Z. (2019). A focus on 
neural machine translation for African languages. 
ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:1906.05685. 
Mazrui, A. (2012). Language and education in 
Kenya: Between the colonial legacy and the new 
constitutional order. In Language Policies in 
Education (pp. 151–167). Routledge. 
Moore, E., & Llompart, J. (2017). Collecting, 
Transcribing, 
Analyzing 
and 
Presenting 
Plurilingual Interactional Data. Research-Publishing. 
Net. 
Mukiibi, J., Katumba, A., Nakatumba-Nabende, J., 
Hussein, A., & Meyer, J. (2022). The Makerere 
Radio Speech Corpus: A Luganda Radio Corpus 
for Automatic Speech Recognition. Proceedings of  
the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation 
Conference, 
1945–1954. 
https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.208 
National Museums of Kenya. (n.d.). The 
Languages of  Kenya: The Nilotic, Bantu and Cushitic 
Language Groups. Retrieved March 31, 2022, from 
https://artsandculture.google.com/story/the-
language-of-kenya-the-nilotic-bantu-and-cushitic-
language-groups/2AJCwOhG6x7aIQ 
Ndanyi, J. O. (2005). Lulogooli-English translation 
(dictionary). Nairobi: Ndanyi Enterprises. 
Ndung’u, N. M. (2015). Information Structure in 
Kiswahili. International Journal of  Education and 
Research, 3(3). 
Nekoto, W., Marivate, V., Matsila, T., Fasubaa, T., 
Kolawole, T., Fagbohungbe, T., Akinola, S. O., 
Muhammad, S. H., Kabongo, S., Osei, S., & others. 
(2020). Participatory Research for Low-resourced 
Machine Translation: A Case Study in African 
Languages. 
Findings 
of  
the 
Association 
for 
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, 2144–
2160, Online. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Ngoni, V. N. (2022). English–Bukusu Automatic 
Machine Translation for Digital Services Inclusion in E-
governance. University of Nairobi. 
Nimaan, A., Nocera, P., & Bonastre, J. F. (2006). 
Automatic transcription of Somali language. In 
Ninth International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing. 
Niyongabo, R., Hong, Q., Kreutzer, J., & Huang, 
L. 
(2020). 
KINNEWS 
and 
KIRNEWS: 
Benchmarking Cross-Lingual Text Classification 
for Kinyarwanda and Kirundi. Proceedings of  the 
28th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, 5507–5521, Barcelona, Spain (Online). 
International Committee on Computational 
Linguistics. 
Odaga, A. B. (1997). English-Dholuo Dictionary, Lake 
Publishers and Enterprises Ltd, Kisumu. 
Omondi, D. (2020, February 22). Five tribes 
retain hold at apex of population as numbers 
increase. The Standard. 
https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/kenya/article/
2001361377/2019-census-results-tyranny-of-big-
tribes 
OpenNMT. (n.d.). Retrieved March 31, 2022, 
from https://opennmt.net/ 
Orife, I., Kreutzer, J., Sibanda, B., Whitenack, D., 
Siminyu, K., Martinus, L., Ali, J. T., Abbott, J., 
Marivate, V., Kabongo, S., & others. (2020). 
Masakhane–Machine Translation for Africa. 
ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2003.11529. 
Ostermann, S., Roth, M., Modi, A., Thater, S., & 
Pinkal, M. (2018). Semeval-2018 task 11: Machine 
comprehension using commonsense knowledge. 
Proceedings of  the 12th International Workshop on 
Semantic Evaluation, 747–757. 
 
 
22 
Pantazoglou, F. K., Kladis, G. P., & Papadakis, N. 
K. (2018). A Greek voice recognition interface for 
ROV applications, using machine learning 
technologies and the CMU Sphinx platform. 
WSEAS Transactions on Systems and Control, 13, 
550–560. 
Paperswithcode. (n.d.). Question Answering on 
SQuAD2.0. Retrieved November 14, 2022, from 
https://paperswithcode.com/sota/question-
answering-on-squad20 
Parker, P. M. (1998). Bukusu-English Thesaurus 
Dictionary, ICON Group International Inc. 
Pauw, G. de, Schryver, G.-M. de, & Wagacha, P. W. 
(2006). Data-driven part-of-speech tagging of 
Kiswahili. International Conference on Text, Speech and 
Dialogue, 197–204. 
Pentoprint. (2021). Live Paperless - Convert 
Handwriting to Text. https://www.pen-to-
print.com/ 
Petrov, S., Das, D., & McDonald, R. (2012). A 
Universal Part-of-Speech Tagset. Proceedings of  the 
Eighth International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC'12), 2089–2096, Istanbul, 
Turkey. 
European 
Language 
Resources 
Association (ELRA). 
Pytext. (n.d.). XLM-RoBERTa. Retrieved 
November 15, 2022, from 
https://pytext.readthedocs.io/en/master/xlm_r.
html 
Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K., & Liang, P. 
(2016). SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine 
Comprehension of Text. Proceedings of  the 2016 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, 2383–2392, Austin, Texas. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
Reddy, M. R., Laxminarayana, P., Ramana, A. v, 
Markandeya, J. L., Bhaskar, J. I., Harish, B., 
Jagadheesh, 
S., 
& 
Sumalatha, 
E. 
(2015). 
Transcription of Telugu TV news using ASR. 
2015 International Conference on Advances in 
Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), 
1542–1545. 
Richardson, M., Burges, C. J. C., & Renshaw, E. 
(2013). MCTest: A challenge dataset for the open-
domain machine comprehension of text. EMNLP 
2013 - 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of  the 
Conference, 193–203. 
Sankar, S., Lassen, S., & Curtiss, M. (2013). Under 
the Hoodࣟ: Building out the infrastructure for Graph 
Search. 
http://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook-
engineering/under-the-hood-building-out-the-
infrastructure-for-graph-
search/10151347573598920/ 
Sibuor, S. O. (2013). Excellent Trilingual Dictionary. 
Dholuo-Kiswahili-English with Translated Luo Proverbs. 
ISBN:978-9966-074-91-1, Nairobi 
Siminyu, K., Kalipe, G., Orlic, D., Abbott, J., 
Marivate, V., Freshia, S., Sibal, P., Neupane, B., 
Adelani, D. I., Taylor, A., & others. (2021). AI4D–
African Language Program. ArXiv Preprint 
ArXiv:2104.02516. 
Singhal, A. (2012). Introducing the Knowledge Graph: 
things, not strings - Inside Search (Vol. 2013, Issue 
7/22/2013). 
http://insidesearch.blogspot.com/2012/05/intro
ducing-knowledge-graph-things-not.html 
Skeppstedt, M., Paradis, C., & Kerren, A. (2016). 
PAL, a tool for Pre-annotation and Active 
Learning. Journal for Language Technology and 
Computational Linguistics, 31(1), 81-100. 
Smith, B. (2019, December 12). Preserving cultural 
heritage one language at a time. 
https://blogs.microsoft.com/latinx/2019/12/12
/preserving-cultural-heritage-one-language-at-a-
time/ 
Stenetorp, P., Pyysalo, S., Topić, G., Ohta, T., 
Ananiadou, S., & Tsujii, J. (2012). BRAT: a web-
based tool for NLP-assisted text annotation. 
Proceedings of  the Demonstrations at the 13th Conference 
of  the European Chapter of  the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 102–107. 
Tapo, A., Coulibaly, B., Diarra, S., Homan, C., 
Kreutzer, J., Luger, S., Nagashima, A., Zampieri, 
M., & Leventhal, M. (2020). Neural Machine 
Translation for Extremely Low-Resource African 
Languages: A Case Study on Bambara. Proceedings 
of  the 3rd Workshop on Technologies for MT of  Low 
 
 
23 
Resource 
Languages, 
23–32, 
Suzhou, 
China. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
TUKI (2013). Kamusi ya Kiswahili Sanifu. Toleo la 
tatu. Nairobi: Oxford University Press. 
Tracey, J., Strassel, S., Bies, A., Song, Z., Arrigo, 
M., Griffitt, K., Delgado, D., Graff, D., Kulick, S., 
Mott, J., & others. (2019). Corpus building for low 
resource languages in the DARPA LORELEI 
program. Proceedings of  the 2nd Workshop on 
Technologies for MT of  Low Resource Languages, 48–55. 
Translators Without Borders. (n.d.). Retrieved 
March 31, 2022, from 
https://translatorswithoutborders.org/twb-
creates-covid-19-glossary/ 
Tuvute Pamoja. (n.d.). Retrieved February 5, 
2021, from https://digitalumuganda.com 
Vegi, P., Sivabhavani, J., Paul, B., Mishra, A., 
Banjare, P., Prasanna, K. R., & Viswanathan, C. 
(2022, 
December). 
Webcrawl 
african: 
A 
multilingual parallel corpora for african languages. 
Proceedings of  the Seventh Conference on Machine 
Translation (WMT), 1076-1089. 
Voorhees, E. M., & Tice, D. M. (2000, May). 
Implementing a question answering evaluation. 
Proceedings of  LREC’2000 Workshop on Using 
Evaluation within HLT Programs: Results and Trends. 
Wald, B., & Gibson, H. (2018). Swahili and the 
Bantu languages. In The World’s Major Languages, 
903–924. Routledge. 
Walsh, M. (2017). The Swahili language and its 
early history. In The Swahili World, 121–130. 
Routledge. 
Wang, R., Conrad, C., & Shah, S. (2013). Using 
Set Cover to Optimize a Large-Scale Low 
Latency Distributed Graph. Proceedings of  the 5th 
USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud 
Computing. 
https://www.usenix.org/conference/hotcloud13
/workshop-program/presentations/Wang 
Wanjawa, B., & Muchemi, L. (2020). Using 
Semantic Networks for Question Answering-Case 
of Low-Resource Languages Such as Swahili. 
International Conference on Applied Human Factors and 
Ergonomics, 278–285. 
Wanjawa, B., & Muchemi, L. (2021). Model for 
Semantic 
Network 
Generation 
from 
Low 
Resource Languages as Applied to Question 
Answering–Case of Swahili. 2021 IST-Africa 
Conference (IST-Africa), 1–8. 
Wanjawa, B., Wanzare, L., Indede, F., McOnyango, 
O., Muchemi, L., & Ombui, E. (2023). 
KenSwQuAD – A Question Answering Dataset 
for Swahili Low Resource Language. ACM 
Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language 
Information Processing, 22(4), 1-20. 
Yang, Y., Yih, W. T., & Meek, C. (2015). WikiQA: 
A challenge dataset for open-domain question 
answering. Proceedings of  the 2015 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
2013–2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
Appendix 1 
 
A1 – The 12 universal tags used in Kencorpus Part of Speech (POS) tagging (source: Petrov et al., 
2011) 
1. NOUN (nouns) 
2. VERB (verbs) 
3. ADJ (adjectives) 
4. ADV (adverbs) 
5. PRON (pronouns) 
6. DET (determiners and articles) 
7. ADP (prepositions and postpositions) 
8. NUM (numerals) 
9. CONJ (conjunctions) 
10. PRT (particles) 
11. ‘.’ (punctuation marks)  
12. X (a catch-all for other categories such as abbreviations or foreign words) 
 
 
