Title: Neural Natural Language Processing for Long Texts: A Survey on Classification and Summarization
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16259v6
--------------------------------------------------

Neural Natural Language Processing for Long Texts: A Survey on
Classification and Summarization
Dimitrios Tsirmpas†§, Ioannis Gkionis†§, Georgios Th. Papadopoulos¶, Ioannis Mademlis*§¶
§ Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business
¶ Department of Informatics and Telematics, Harokopio University of Athens
Abstract
The adoption of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has greatly benefited Natural Language Processing (NLP) dur-
ing the past decade. However, the demands of long document analysis are quite different from those of shorter
texts, while the ever increasing size of documents uploaded online renders automated understanding of lengthy
texts a critical issue. Relevant applications include automated Web mining, legal document review, medical
records analysis, financial reports analysis, contract management, environmental impact assessment, news ag-
gregation, etc. Despite the relatively recent development of efficient algorithms for analyzing long documents,
practical tools in this field are currently flourishing. This article serves as an entry point into this dynamic do-
main and aims to achieve two objectives. First of all, it provides an introductory overview of the relevant neural
building blocks, serving as a concise tutorial for the field. Secondly, it offers a brief examination of the current
state-of-the-art in two key long document analysis tasks: document classification and document summarization.
Sentiment analysis for long texts is also covered, since it is typically treated as a particular case of document
classification. Consequently, this article presents an introductory exploration of document-level analysis, ad-
dressing the primary challenges, concerns, and existing solutions. Finally, it offers a concise definition of “long
text/document”, presents an original overarching taxonomy of common deep neural methods for long document
analysis and lists publicly available annotated datasets that can facilitate further research in this area.
Keywords: Natural Language Processing, Long Document, Document Classification, Document
Summarization, Sentiment Analysis, Deep Neural Networks
1. Introduction
Understanding written text has always drawn significant interest within the Artificial Intelligence (AI) com-
munity. Nowadays, it also enjoys increasingly many commercial applications: successfully parsing and ana-
lyzing texts expressed in natural language is crucial for a variety of practical tasks traditionally performed by
humans, which require the extraction of sentiments, meaning or themes. Books [1, 2, 3, 4], academic papers [5],
technical manuals [6], news articles [7], legal documents [8, 9, 10] and many other types of long texts can be
the target of such analysis. Common application domains for existing, real-world practical systems range from
the automated processing of legal, medical, scientific and journalistic documents, to more niche areas such as
intelligence gathering [11].
1† The first two authors contributed equally and are joint first authors.
2* Ioannis Mademlis is the corresponding author.
© 2024. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. DOI: 10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108231.
arXiv:2305.16259v6  [cs.CL]  15 Mar 2024
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Similarly to the more common case of short text analysis, long document Natural Language Processing (NLP)
has been revolutionized during the past decade by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which greatly surpassed
traditional statistical and machine learning approaches in accuracy and abilities. Nevertheless, even DNNs face
severe challenges when analyzing long documents, due to a higher chance of ambiguities, varying context,
potentially lower coherence, etc. [12]. Despite such limitations though, long document NLP has already become
very important in the industry. It can be used to extract medical categories from electronic health records,
enabling better patient care and treatment plans [13], or for automatically classifying lengthy legal documents
[8] [14]. In fact, the legal domain is currently one of the major application areas of long document NLP, with
relevant algorithms exploited for desk research, electronic discovery, contract review, document automation,
and even legal advice [9].
This survey focuses on two key NLP tasks that present peculiarities for the long document case: document
classification and document summarization. The first one involves categorizing entire documents into predefined
classes, based on their content. This enables efficient organization and retrieval of information. The second one
aims to generate concise and coherent summaries of longer documents. It involves distilling the key inform-
ation and main ideas from a document, while preserving its meaning. Additionally, sentiment analysis is also
investigated as a particular variant of document classification. The task consists in determining the sentiment or
emotional tone expressed in a piece of text, such as positive, negative, or neutral. It involves analyzing subjective
opinions, attitudes, and emotions expressed in reviews, social media posts, or customer feedback.
Although other important tasks are also relevant to long documents (e.g., question answering, machine
translation, information retrieval, topic modelling, etc.), the selected three tasks encompass a wide range of
document analysis needs, play fundamental roles in handling large volumes of textual data and have direct
applicability to diverse industries/domains, while they have been extensively studied and complement each
other in terms of practical use. Overall, they jointly provide a balance between technical feasibility, practical
applicability and user-centric impact, thus serving as suitable demonstrators for state-of-the-art (SoA) neural
architectures designed for long document analysis.
Despite the presence of review papers discussing the development, methodology and applications of NLP
tasks in general [15] [16] [17], or in specific thematic fields [18] [19] [20] [21], there are currently no sur-
vey/review articles discussing and aggregating recent DNN solutions for long document analysis across tasks.
To remedy such gaps in existing literature, this article specifically focuses on document-level analysis for the
three selected NLP tasks (classification, summarization, sentiment analysis). Unlike other review papers, particu-
lar emphasis is given to how the relevant neural building blocks and architectures operate, equipping this article
with an additional tutorial value. From the survey point-of-view, existing solutions to the three NLP tasks under
examination are systematically reviewed, while current challenges are subsequently identified and discussed
along with common ways to circumvent them. The methods and algorithms that have been selected tackle the
peculiarities of long documents; not text classification, summarization or sentiment analysis in general. Over-
all, the goal of this article is two-fold: i) to make the barrier of entry for this relatively young section of active
research more accessible, and ii) to aggregate common issues and solutions across multiple document-level long
text NLP tasks, thus encouraging cross-pollination of research and ideas.
The remainder of this article is organized in the following manner. Section 2 is a brief tutorial of basic neural
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
architectures and building blocks that are essential for modern document analysis. Section 3 offers a definition of
long texts/documents, along with a list of relevant challenges, a timeline and a taxonomy of relevant deep neural
methods, irrespectively of any specific task. Sections 4, 5 and 6 detail the challenges and proposed solutions to
the document classification, summarization and sentiment analysis tasks, respectively, emphasizing methods
designed specifically for long documents. To better focus this overview, these sections only examine dedicated
algorithms and pretraining/finetuning approaches. Zero/few-shot prompting alternatives based on generic pre-
trained Large Language Models (LLMs) are not covered, since they fall outside the scope of the article. Section 7
presents publicly available, annotated long document datasets, which can be utilized for relevant research. Sec-
tion 8 summarizes and organizes the presented methods and challenges, discusses current trends and identifies
open issues. Additionally, it draws conclusions from the preceding discussion, regarding the current state and
future of long document analysis. The Appendix details previous recent surveys/reviews that overlap with this
article, highlighting the main differences.
2. Deep Neural Networks Used in Document Analysis
NLP tasks place specific demands on DNNs: for instance, a DNN model needs to uncover on its own the
structure, context and the meaning of a single word. This calls for specialized architectures whose properties
allow the DNN to navigate through the complexities of human-generated natural text. Long documents exacer-
bate these challenges, since: i) the context, the tone and the theme may change repeatedly as the text progresses,
and ii) the DNN may be required to correlate semantic cues which are far apart to each other within the text, in
order to successfully execute the desired task.
Since the SoA in NLP has been revolving around DNNs for the last several years, this section briefly presents
the most widespread and effective neural architectures used for NLP. The complexities and the individual vari-
ations of each architecture are out of the scope of this article, since its focus is on DNN-enabled document
analysis and not on DNNs themselves. All architectures presented in this section are typically trained with vari-
ants of error back-propagation and stochastic gradient descent [22] [23], but only the inference stage is described
here.
The following presentation is split into two subsections. Initially, generic neural architectures common in
the relevant SoA are briefly described for reference purposes. Subsequently, specific NLP-oriented neural archi-
tectures commonly used for analyzing texts are detailed.
2.1. General Neural Architectures
2.1.1. Encoder-Decoder Architectures and the Attention Mechanism
Neural NLP initially utilized traditional DNN architectures, such as MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs) [22],
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [24][25] or Recurrent Neural Networks [26], such as Long Short-Term
Memory networks (LSTMs) [27] or Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) [28], with RNNs having the ability to analyze
sequences by unfolding through time across discrete time steps. In NLP, typically each time step corresponds to
an input token. However, these architectures face limitations: e.g., CNNs have computational overhead issues
and RNNs/LSTMs struggle with long-term dependencies in long texts. The vast majority of contemporary DNNs
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
for document analysis rely on the more recent Transformer architecture, which itself is built around the so-called
neural attention mechanism.
Modern neural attention emerged out of a specific setup of using RNNs, namely Encoder-Decoder. Con-
cretely, any RNN/LSTM of one or more layers which unfolds across K time steps accepts a sequence of K input
vectors in order to finally produce a corresponding sequence of K output vectors. However, in a wide range of
practical tasks the temporal lengths of the input/output sequences are not identical. If the length of one is K
while the other’s is 1, the problem is trivially solved by unfolding the network across K time steps and consid-
ering only the final activation of the K-th time step as the network prediction. However, sequence-to-sequence
mapping tasks between sequences of different lengths other than 1 are more complicated.
Typically, RNNs are adapted to solve such problems (e.g., machine translation) using a mixed Encoder-
Decoder scheme. The input sequence is fed to a recurrent coding network which processes it over K time
instants (where K is, e.g., the length of the input sequence), but only the final network output from the K-th
time step is stored. Thus, it constitutes a coded vector (of fixed dimensionality equal to the number of the En-
coder’s output neurons, independent of K) representing the entire input sequence. This vector is then fed to a
recurrent decoding network unfolding across L time steps (L can be arbitrary and not necessarily equal to K
or 1). At the first time step of the Decoder’s inference stage it is given as input the coded vector. During the
following time steps, its processing is based only on the stored internal state. The L Decoder outputs constitute
the final output sequence. The overall network is trained uniformly by BPTT.
As an improvement over this basic idea, the neural attention mechanism was introduced in [29] to allow
the Decoder of a mixed Encoder-Decoder RNN architecture to consider all the outputs of the Encoder, and not
just that of the last encoding time step, with a different weighting factor. These weighting coefficients, known
as attention weights, are given by an attention distribution that the Decoder produces at each time step of its
inference stage, in order to read selectively and at will the Encoder’s outputs according to its own current internal
state. This is achieved by the attention mechanism: a differentiable and continuous way to access a sequence of
stored discrete key vectors. Thus, the mechanism allows a neural network to learn suitable access patterns on its
own from proper training on a dataset, through usual back-propagation and gradient descent optimization.
Attention operates by generating a continuous probability distribution defined over the entries of the key
sequence. This distribution is produced in the following way. First, the network generates a query vector that
essentially needs to be searched for in the key sequence. Then, the dot product of that query with each key
vector is separately computed, with the ordered results essentially forming a new sequence of cosine similarities
between the query and each key vector. This similarity sequence is converted to a probability distribution by
passing it through a softmax function. Then, a weighted sum of all key vectors is generated, using the attention
weights as coefficients. Optionally, this weighted sum can be computed on a different set of value vectors, instead
of the key vectors through which the attention weights were estimated. Queries, vectors and keys can be derived
by the DNN during inference through projecting given vectors (linearly or non-linearly) via learned separate
transformations. These operations are differentiable and their parameters are learned while training the overall
network with a typical, task-specific cost function. The process of constructing the weighted vector sum using
the attention weights is referred to as the query attending to the keys and/or values.
In the case of Encoder-Decoder RNN architectures, the key/value sequence is the temporal sequence of
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Encoder internal states/outputs across K time steps, respectively, while the L separate queries are the Decoder’s
internal states at each time step of its inference stage. Alternatively, the key and the value sequence may coincide.
This setup allows the Decoder to read at each time step an aggregate context vector before it generates its current
output: such a context is a parameterized summary of all K Encoder outputs, adjusted according to the Decoder’s
own current state.
2.1.2. Transformers
The Transformer architecture [30] was an attempt to replace RNNs for sequence-to-sequence mapping tasks,
while simultaneously maintaining the mixed Encoder-Decoder scheme. Both the Encoder and the Decoder con-
sist of N consecutive macrolayers each. The Decoder operates at discrete time steps, with its final layer out-
putting at the end of each step the next element of the requested output sequence. Its first layer’s input at the
beginning of each step is the output of its final layer from the previous step, i.e., the Decoder is autoregressive.
However, the Encoder operates at a single pass, processing the entire input sequence at once. The first Encoder
layer receives as its input a list of at most K vectors, i.e., an ordered list of all elements/tokens in the input
sequence. Each vector in this sequence is the sum of a suitable representation of the corresponding token (e.g.,
a sparse one-hot encoding of a word from the supported vocabulary) and a ”positional encoding”, i.e., a dense
vector representation of the index of the respective input token within the overall sequence. Each of the sub-
sequent Encoder layers receives as its input a list of K corresponding, transformed vectors, i.e., the outputs of
the previous Encoder layer.
Each layer of the Encoder or the Decoder is composed of two consecutively placed sublayers: a self-attention
sublayer and a succeeding small MLP. The self-attention mechanism enables the layer to process its input se-
quence in parallel, while the following fully connected layers transform the output of the self-attention process.
However, a self-attention sublayer is itself composed of M parallel, independent self-attention heads. Each head
receives a linearly transformed version of each input vector as a query and two linearly transformed versions
of the overall input sequence as a key and as a value sequence. Within a head, a common key/value sequence
representation is utilized for all queries. The transformations are performed by multiplying each input vector
with suitable weight matrices, separately learned per self-attention head, as model parameters. Thus, although
all heads of one layer separately receive the same input sequence as a list of queries, of keys and of values, this
sequence is differently transformed per head before being fed to them. The output of each self-attention head is
one new vector representation per input token, which inherently incorporates appropriate context information
from the entire sequence. The outputs of all heads are concatenated and subsequently linearly transformed,
using an additional learned weights matrix, before being fed to the succeeding MLP.
The Decoder has a structure similar to the Encoder, but includes an additional, regular attention mechanism
within each of its layers, for also attending to the Encoder’s final outputs. However, the use of both an Encoder
and a Decoder is not strictly necessary in tasks that do not involve sequence-to-sequence mapping with in-
put/output sequences of different lengths. The original Transformer’s Encoder-Decoder architecture is depicted
in Figure 1.
Overall, the simultaneous processing from multiple, parallel self-attention heads and the resulting lack of
recurrence in the Encoder render the Transformer able to achieve faster training and inference times, compared
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
+
Add & Norm
MLP
Add & Norm
Multi-Head Attention
Positional Encoding
Input Embedding
+
Output Embedding
Positional Encoding
Add & Norm
Add & Norm
Masked Multi-Head Attention
Multi-Head Attention
MLP
Add & Norm
Linear
Softmax
Outputs (shifted right)
Inputs
Output probabilities
Nx
Nx
Figure 1: The original Transformer Encoder-Decoder architecture.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
to previous RNNs/LSTMs that process the input sequentially. Additionally, the learnable self-attention mechan-
ism allows the Transformer to easily, selectively and adaptively capture contextual information and long-term
dependencies from the entire input sequence, when analyzing each individual token during inference. Thus,
Transformer layers effectively have a global receptive field from the get-go. Finally, the use of multiple self-
attention heads per layer allows each layer to simultaneously compute multiple different representations from
its input sequence, thus capturing different features at once.
Eq. (1) below succinctly captures the inference-stage processing of a self-attention head:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V,
(1)
where Q ∈RNq×dk are the Nq queries, K ∈RNk×dk are the Nk keys and V ∈RNk×dv are the Nk values. Each
query vector and each key vector has a dimension of dk, while each value vector has a dimension of dv.
Multihead self-attention can be formulated as:
Multihead(Q, K, V) = [h1; ...; hM]WO,
(2)
where
hi = Attention(QWQ
i , KWK
i , VWV
i ).
(3)
In this formulation, WQ
i ∈Rda×dk, WK
i
∈Rda×dk, WV
i
∈Rda×dv, WO
i ∈RMdv×da are learned parameter
matrices, M is the number of heads, dk = dv = da
M , and the operator [; ] implies concatenation.
Note that the softmax function in Eq. (1) is separately applied to each row of its argument, resulting in a
matrix output. Each row of each hi matrix is a convex combination of the rows of VWV
i , with the respective
row of the output of the softmax providing the corresponding weighting coefficients. Scaling by √dk in Eq. (1)
serves to ensure training stability.
2.2. Neural Building Blocks for Document Analysis
2.2.1. Word Embeddings
Modern NLP algorithms typically require a very important preprocessing phase: during this phase, each
input token is transformed into a semantically meaningful, fixed-size, dense vector, which is typically called
word embedding. The resulting sequence of word embeddings is the actual input to the main DNN that executes
the desired NLP task [31]. Such word embeddings are utilized both at the training and at the inference stage.
One trivial way to achieve this is to simply append an initial embedding layer at the employed DNN architecture,
which is subsequently trained end-to-end. Thus, the embedding layer receives the raw tokens as its input, e.g., as
sparse, one-hot encoded vectors, and transforms them to a semantically meaningful, dense vector representation.
However, the most widespread approach is to exploit pretrained, separate, dedicated embedding neural networks
and utilize their outputs as dense word embedding vectors.
One of the most historically significant word embedding neural networks was Google’s Word2Vec [31]. It
is a shallow MLP with one hidden layer, able to compute a useful representation of a word token in the form
of a real, dense, fixed-size vector with a dimensionality equal to H, i.e., the number of hidden neurons in the
model. Word2Vec[31] representations/embeddings have rich semantic content: words with similar or related
meaning are mapped to vectors that are approximately parallel in the representation/embedding space (i.e., they
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
have high cosine similarity), while applying typical vector operations to such representations is semantically
meaningful (e.g., corresponds to semantic analogies between the represented words) [32].
The Word2Vec MLP receives as its input a non-semantic (e.g., one-hot) vector encoding of a word with a
dimensionality of L (equal to the supported vocabulary size). It has been pretrained according to the follow-
ing self-supervised objective. First, for each occurrence of each significant word (e.g., nouns, verbs, adjectives,
proper nouns) in the available training dataset/text corpus, the D words immediately before and the D words
immediately after the one in question are selected. Each such mapping from a word to its 2D neighboring ones in
the context of each occurrence is exploited as a training pattern/label pair, using typical error back-propagation
and gradient descent. Thus, the co-occurrence of words within a given context is implicitly utilized to learn the
relationships between these words.
The input/hidden/output layer has L/H/2DL neurons, respectively. After the model has been trained, the
output layer is discarded and the remaining network can be exploited to produce a semantically rich represent-
ation of each input word: this is a dense, H-dimensional real vector. Obviously, a very large data set is required
to properly train such a model, and in Word2Vec’s case that was GoogleNews (100 billion words).
Other word embedding algorithms followed-up and improved upon the Word2Vec concept, such as GloVE
[33]. However, the next significant milestone was the development of context-sensitive word embedding net-
works, which were able to generate different vector representations for a single word depending on its context,
i.e., its position in a sentence. ELMo [34] was able to achieve this using an LSTM architecture, but it was Bi-
directional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [35] which originally exploited the power of
Transformers in order to significantly advance the relevant SoA. Such DNNs that learn to generate contextual-
ized word embeddings, by being trained to predict the next word of an input sentence, are essentially language
models.
2.2.2. BERT
BERT is a bidirectional, deep Transformer Encoder, without an attached Decoder. It receives an input se-
quence consisting of numerical representations of a text’s tokens/words (e.g., non-semantic indices to a suppor-
ted vocabulary), to generate a corresponding sequence of refined, semantically encoded output vectors as this
text’s representation. Initially, the special token [CLS] is externally appended to the beginning of the overall in-
put sequence, so that its output semantic representation will aggregate global contextual information about the
entire textual sequence. Also, the special token [SEP] is inserted after each input sentence to separate consec-
utive sentences. The ordered token representations are then transformed by a preliminary, trainable embedding
layer. Subsequently, a learned dense “segment embedding” vector and a learned position embedding vector3 are
added to the vector representation of each input token. Finally, the first actual Transformer layer receives these
ordered vector sums as its input sequence. The segment embedding of a token belonging to the i-th sentence
simply indicates whether i is odd or even4.
The output word embeddings have specialized semantic content in comparison to corresponding Word2Vec
3This differs from the original Transformer’s statically defined positional encoding vector.
4The baseline BERT supports only 2 sentences, but each of these is a segment of consecutive textual content and not an actual individual
sentence in the linguistic sense.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
representations, i.e., adapted to the context of the specific input sentence. This is because the network processes
a complete input text at each iteration of its training stage, taking into account all its words and their order at a
single pass, through the self-attention mechanism. Thus, during inference, it processes each input word in the
context of its bilaterally ordered phrasal contexts. Therefore, the same word in the context of different sentences,
or even placed at a different position in an otherwise identical sentence, can be mapped to different embedding
vectors by the pretrained network.
More difficult objectives are employed for pretraining BERT, compared to simply predicting the previous and
next words of the current sentence, as in Word2Vec. These objectives are tailored to the Transformer’s special
features. The most common goal is to predict a few randomly chosen masked words of a complete input sentence
based on its remaining words. This is a ”Masked Language Model” (MLM) pretraining objective, inspired by
the Cloze task [36], where a subset of the input’s tokens are randomly masked, i.e., each one is replaced by a
special [MASK] token, and the goal is to predict the original words based on the context. The MLM objective
encourages the model to fuse the left and the right context and, thus, is particularly suited to deep bidirectional
Transformers [35]. A complementary pretraining objective is to classify two jointly fed input sentences as either
consecutive or non-consecutive ones (Next Sentence Prediction, NSP). This teaches BERT to understand longer-
term dependencies across sentences. In both cases, after training the final prediction head or classification layers
are discarded and only the trained Encoder is retained, to generate the word embeddings of input sentences.
A shallow, pretrained Word2Vec model encodes a fixed 1-1 mapping of words to representations/embedding
vectors and, thus, can be used in a variety of NLP tasks only for feature extraction at a preprocessing stage. In
contrast, a pretrained deep BERT model can optionally be adapted itself to the desired downstream NLP task,
by appending appropriate additional final neural layers (usually fully connected or recurrent) and performing
minimal fine-tuning on the overall network. During inference, BERT must be given as input a complete sentence,
so as to generate the most contextually appropriate embeddings of its words. Due to the fixed maximum sequence
size accepted by Transformers, BERT is restricted to receiving at most 512 tokens as its input text. Finally, a
pretrained BERT comes with a dictionary of words it has been trained to embed. Thus, if during inference it is
found out that the current word is unknown, it is broken into subwords which are considered by the network
as different, consecutive elements of the input sequence (subword tokenization). In the case of compound words,
such a subword is indeed potentially known, otherwise the token decomposition eventually reaches the level of
the individual alphanumeric characters of the original word, which always belong to the known dictionary. The
final representation of an input word can be derived as the vector average of the embeddings of its subwords.
Thus, BERT can easily handle ”unsupported” out-of-vocabulary words. Figure 2 depicts how the input to BERT
is constructed.
2.2.3. RoBERTa and ELECTRA
Various improvements over the original BERT have been proposed over the past few years. For instance,
”Robustly Optimized BERT pre-training Approach” (RoBERTa) [37] aggregated several minor improvements in
the training process and slightly modified the MLM pretraining objective, by dynamically changing the masking
pattern applied to the training data.
One of the most significant recent improvements over BERT is ”Efficiently Learning an Encoder that Clas-
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
A
A
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
[CLS]
my
dog
is
cute
[SEP]
he
likes
play
-ing
[SEP]
[CLS]
”my”
”dog”
”is”
”cute”
[SEP]
”he”
”likes” ”play”
”-ing”
[SEP]
Input
Token Embeddings
Segment Embeddings
Position Embeddings
Transformer
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
A
A
[CLS]
”my”
”dog”
”is”
”cute”
[SEP]
”he”
”likes”
[CLS]
my
Figure 2: BERT input representation. The input embeddings are the sum of the token embeddings, the segmentation embeddings and the
position embeddings.
sifies Token Replacements Accurately” (ELECTRA) [38], which was also motivated by the shortcomings of the
MLM self-supervised pretraining objective. The latter ”corrupts” the input sentence by replacing a small subset
of its tokens with [MASK] and then training the model to reconstruct/predict the original ones. This requires
a lot of training iterations/sample to be effective, since the task is essentially defined only over the masked
tokens. Thus, ELECTRA proposed ”Replaced Token Detection” (RTD) as an alternative self-supervised pretrain-
ing task. In RTD, the model learns to distinguish real input tokens from plausible but synthetically generated
replacements: a randomly selected subset of the input tokens are replaced with synthetic alternatives (typically
the output of a small language model), instead of being masked. The pretraining task is defined over all input
tokens, since each of them has to be classified as original or synthetic. Learning from all input tokens leads
to a learning process which is both much faster and more efficient; thus, ceteris paribus, ELECTRA achieves
increased performance in downstream tasks due to better contextual word embeddings. Figure 3 graphically
compares the MLM and the RTD tasks.
MLM
Discriminator
the
chef
cooked
the
chef
ate
original
original
replaced
pizza
pizza
original
(RTD)
Figure 3: Graphical comparison between the MLM and the RTD tasks.
2.2.4. T5
T5 [39] is a renowned, general-use Transformer architecture for NLP. The modus operandi of T5 is to trans-
form each desired NLP task, either discrimnative or generative, into a sequence-to-sequence mapping problem
(text-to-text). Thus, it follows the standard Encoder-Decoder architectural paradigm, a design choice that allows
it to easily handle input and output sequences of different sizes. This is unlike BERT, which is a bidirectional
Encoder-only Transformer. Similarly to other language models, T5 is first pretrained on a large-scale corpus
with a self-supervised objective, before being finetuned on the desired, typically supervised downstream task.
Pretraining enables the model to learn general language patterns and representations, while downstream fine-
tuning specializes it to task-specific nuances. Both training modes fall under the text-to-text format, therefore a
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
common maximum likelihood loss function is employed regardless of the task.
The text-to-text nature of the architecture allows T5 to be pretrained with a masked language modelling
objective that uses targets composed of multiple consecutive words per each [MASK] token. Unlike BERT,
this is done through random corruptions of text segments with varying masking ratios and segment sizes. A
simplified example of the T5 self-supervised objective is depicted in Figure 4. The use of a complete Transformer
Encoder-Decoder architecture, coupled with this fitting self-supervised pretraining task and a very large-scale
pretraining dataset, jointly permit T5 to achieve remarkable performance across a variety of different language
tasks (e.g., document summarization, sentiment analysis, etc.), after proper finetuning.
The bus got stuck in traffic for half an hour yest…
The bus [X] in traffic for half [Y] yeste…
[X] got stuck [Y] an hour [Z].
Original
Inputs
Targets
Figure 4: The T5 pretraining objective.
2.2.5. BART
Similarly to T5, BART [40] is also a Transformer language model that follows a full Encoder-Decoder ar-
chitecture and is pretrained with a self-supervised sequence-to-sequence mapping objective. As in BERT, the
Encoder is bidirectional and pretraining consists in mapping arbitrarily corrupted textual sentences to their
original form. However, BART generalizes the BERT objective since a single [MASK] token can cover several
consecutive target tokens (as in T5), while alternative corruptions are also possible. After pretraining, down-
stream finetuning can take place without any corruptions to the input. With this setup, BART achieves very
good results in a variety of downstream language analysis tasks.
Notably, both T5 and BART utilize a full Transformer Encoder-Decoder architecture with an autoregressive
Decoder and an inherent suitability to text-to-text mapping. An important consequence of this choice is that they
can easily be finetuned for generative NLP tasks (text generation, e.g., for document summarization) without any
architectural additions after pretraining, while this is not possible with the bidirectional Encoder-only BERT. In
this sense, BERT and its derivatives can be considered deprecated as of 2023 [41].
2.2.6. GPT and Large Language Models
Recently, NLP algorithms employing pretrained GPT (Generative Pretrained Transformer) [42] neural models
have been gaining a lot of traction. Similarly to other SoA language models, GPT is a large-scale autoregressive
Decoder-only Transformer pretrained in a self-supervised manner and on a gigantic corpus for predicting the
next token in a sequence. Due to this traditional causal language modelling objective, pretrained GPT models
can be directly employed for text generation without any finetuning: they are given a text prompt as input,
and they generate a corresponding textual response as an output. Although pretrained GPT models can be
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Name
Year
#Parameters
Input
Size
(#tokens)
BERT[51]
2019
110M
512
BART[40]
2019
140M
1024
T5[39]
2019
Up to 11B
512
GPT[42]
2018
120M
-
GPT-2[43]
2018
1.5B
1024
GPT-3[52]
2020
175B
4096
BLOOM[47]
2022
176B
-
OPT[53]
2022
125M to 175B
-
PALM[45]
2022
540B
3072
Chinchilla[49]
2022
70M to 16B
-
LLaMa[50]
2023
7B to 65B
2048
GPT-4[54]
2023
Undisclosed †
128,000 as of writing
Gemini[46]
2023
1.8B to undisclosed
30720
† Rumoured at 1.76 trillion [55]. The original GPT-4 paper does not disclose any details about the size or
architecture of the model.
Table 1: Comparing modern language models by model complexity and input tokens limit (where available).
finetuned in a typical supervised manner for a specific downstream task, their most impressive capability is
that of zero/few-shot downstream language task execution during inference, through careful prompting and
without any finetuning. In this case, the desired task is essentially described in natural language on-the-fly via
the prompt. However, this setting falls outside the scope of this article.
When it comes to long document analysis, the latest openly available pretrained GPT model is GPT 2.0 [43],
which remains regularly outperformed by smaller language models, such as BART [44], in the finetuning setting.
However, the publicity GPT models have attracted due to their text generation capabilities makes them a serious
competitor for BERT and its variants. GPT 3.0 achieves more impressive results [44], but is not openly available
to the public. GPT 4.0 is even more powerful, but similarly closed-source, like a number of its competitors such
as [45] and the recently announced Gemini [46]. Open-source alternatives are BLOOM [47] and OPT [48]. The
scale factor, i.e., highly complex Decoder-only Transformer DNN architectures and a gigantic pretraining cor-
pus/dataset, has proven instrumental for obtaining good performance in all the above cases of Large Language
Models (LLMs). However, the observation that scaling up the DNN architecture is only beneficial when accom-
panied by a corresponding increase in the dataset size has recently led to more reasonably sized models of this
nature, i.e., less complex ones, such as Chinchilla [49] and LLaMA [50].
Table 1 showcases the escalation of language model complexity in recent years.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
3. Long Document Analysis
3.1. Definition
This article focuses exclusively on document-level analysis, or long text/long document classification and
summarization. There is, however, currently no commonly-accepted definition of what constitutes a “long
text/document”. Most distinctions in current literature focus on specific sub-genres of text (for example, al-
gorithms considering only research papers or books as input). This has led to a fuzzy and unclear definition,
where texts such as tweets, product and movie reviews are considered “short documents”, while research pa-
pers, legal documents and books are considered “long documents” [56, 57, 58]. Texts such as news reports,
individual chapters of books and research paper abstracts are arbitrarily classified as both. An example of these
qualitative definitions is presented in [57], where the authors argue that short texts are often characterized by
their brevity, their structured nature with explicit facts presented in a logical order and the absence of long-range
causal relationships and dependencies, making the task much easier for an NLP model. This highlights the dif-
ficulty of defining long documents with just quantitative criteria, since even “long” documents may actually be
easily handled if their structure and contents are “simple” enough.
To reach a practical, strict definition of long texts/documents for the purposes of this article, various types of
documents that are typically considered to be long have been taken into account. This includes research papers,
which are often utilized as input for long document analysis tasks [56, 59, 60, 61] and that typically feature a word
count in the range 3, 000 to 10, 000 words [62]. This also includes books, which have an average of 80, 000 to
170, 000 words, and long document datasets such as arXiv [61] and Pubmed (see Section 7). Thus, the following
definition is utilized in the sequel:
A “long document” dataset contains documents with an average word count of at least 2000 words
per document, reaching potentially up to 170, 000 words or more. Additionally, each long document
must not be semantically segmented, in the sense that context and entity relationships may persist
across different paragraphs and sections. Long document NLP algorithms must be able to cope with the
relatively large average size of these documents, but also handle cases with sizes way above that average. They
must also be able to hold and analyze dependencies and contexts across vast sections of text.
This definition covers the typical document types outlined above (tweets, reviews, research papers, books,
etc.), while also clearly distinguishing between fuzzier datasets. For example, despite being of identical domain
and very similar content, the CNN/Daily Mail, [63], 20NewsGroups [64] and Hyperpartisan [65] datasets do
not fall under the same category. The first one does not meet the quantitative or qualitative criteria (average
word threshold/long-span dependencies) of the proposed definition, as opposed to both 20NewsGroups and
Hyperpartisan that are indeed frequently used for long document analysis research.
3.2. Shared Challenges
Long document analysis algorithms, irrespectively of the specific task, inevitably face various challenges due
to the nature of the inputs. A subset of them are common for all input texts, while others are specific to the case
of long documents. Below, follows a non-exhaustive list of the most significant relevant challenges.
• The curse of dimensionality. As the supported vocabulary size grows, the number of possible test-
stage word combinations grows exponentially, unlike the fixed training dataset size [66]. Thus, in semantic
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
document analysis, the longer the test text, the more likely it is for the DNN to encounter sentences unseen
during training. This is a challenge for DNNs in the common case of data distribution shifts that lower
generalization ability and degrade inference accuracy.
• Polysemy. A word may express multiple different meanings in different contexts. For example, the word
“bank” may mean a financial institution or a building. DNN models must learn to appropriately differenti-
ate the exact meaning of a word, depending both on the local context (sentence, paragraph) and the global
context (document).
• Homonymy. Homonyms are words that either share spelling (homographs), pronunciation (homo-
phones) or both, but are not semantically related. For instance, the term “bank” may refer to a financial
institution or to the shore of a river. The difference between homonymy and polysemy is that homonyms
are not at all related to each other in meaning.
• Figurative language. Sarcasm, irony and metaphors pose serious challenges to NLP, since the real mean-
ing of a phrase is different from the immediately obvious one [67]. Figurative language is common to both
short and long texts, but in the latter case it can take the form of sustained allegories (e.g., in literary
books).
• Unstructured text. Long texts may be very unstructured for the most part, while communicating in-
formation in rather indirect and abstract ways. For example, consider a novel, partitioned in a few dozens
of chapters, and contrast it with short texts, such as product reviews or tweets. In the first scenario, crucial
information and layers of meaning may be distributed across numerous very long chapters [1]. Further-
more, long documents tend to follow constantly evolving textual and contextual conventions, leading to a
higher chance of shifts between learned and actual probability distributions. This is especially problematic
for literary works, which are fluid and susceptible to changing cultural biases [3].
• Foreign language datasets. There is limited availability of training content for languages other than
the most popular ones (e.g., English, French, Spanish, etc.). Given that both the word embedding net-
works and the main, task-specific NLP DNNs are typically trained on one language at a time, the lack of
extensive datasets in rarer languages leads to less optimal embeddings and, as a result, reduced perform-
ance in downstream tasks. The situation is aggravated by limited training sets for the downstream tasks
themselves. Thus, less data-intensive machine learning algorithms may be preferred over DNNs for rare-
language texts, such as decision tree classifiers [3], or the existing datasets can be artificially augmented
[68].
Additionally, certain challenges are tied to the nature of the existing DNN architectures. Below, follows a list
of such issues that are common across most document analysis tasks (e.g., classification, summarization, etc.),
but they are prominent in the case of long document inputs, in contrast to short texts.
• Input size. The size of the input document is the most significant challenge in long document analysis.
For example, the computational overhead of CNNs tends to grow proportionally to their inputs; thus,
they are unable to process documents with thousands of sentences, without specialized hardware. On
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
the other hand, RNNs/LSTMs struggle to conserve information and identify long-term dependencies over
huge spans of text [2]. Transformer DNNs, such as BERT and most of its variants, are typically constrained
by a rather low maximum token sequence length; usually 512 or 1024 tokens. This limits their training to
relatively short texts, forcing brutal token selection during inference. As a result, their performance on
long texts is severely limited [69]. Additionally, vanilla Transformer architectures [30] rely on the typical
global self-attention mechanism, comparing each token to all other input tokens at each self-attention head,
leading to a quadratic (O(n2)) increase in computational and memory requirements with respect to input
size.
• Long-range dependencies. SoA DNN architectures for long document analysis do not rely entirely on a
global context, due to computational and qualitative constraints [69], thus they may attempt to reduce the
input’s segments where they consider local context. However, this strategy may not work sufficiently well
for documents with long-range context dependencies spanning over multiple, and often highly separated
sections of text. This is mostly an issue with unstructured inputs (e.g., novels), but in fact it may arise even
with highly structured documents if they are long enough.
Ignoring these challenges is equivalent to turning one’s back to a plethora of very important use cases and
real-world applications. As stated in [57], small-to-medium document summarization is not as important as
long document summarization, given that smaller texts can be reasonably read by a human without the need
for AI automation. In today’s era of pretrained LLMs, this is also a task commonly designated to them via
prompting [70, 53, 71], but this case falls outside the scope of this article. Additionally, document classification
is impossible in important domains such as books (e.g., genre identification [1, 2, 3, 4], library management [4]),
academic papers [5] and legal documents [8, 9, 10] without specialized models.
3.3. Common Strategies
In order to cope with the above challenges, DNNs specifically targeting long document analysis frequently
use a combination of the following strategies:
• Sliding Window, where embeddings are created using a sliding window over the input tokens. This is
frequently used to capture local context from long spans of text.
• Truncation, which involves minimizing the input text or input embedding size in order to conform to
input size limits. This is usually achieved by raw text selection, but can be applied to embeddings as well.
• Sparse Attention, where the underlying Transformer architecture is changed in order to allow for larger
inputs.
• Iterative Embedding Creation, where embeddings are iteratively combined and aggregated in order to
finally produce a fixed-sized document embedding. This is most often met in hierarchical architectures.
These strategies are frequently combined with Transformer architectures, in order to allow them to cope
with high document length. Further details can be found in the next sections.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
3.4. Categorization and Evolution of Long Document Deep Neural Architectures
This subsection offers an original taxonomy of SoA deep neural methods for long document analysis. This
taxonomy is composed of two main categories: neural architectures which abide by the Transformer token input
limit, and ones that modify the underlying Transformer architecture to allow for very large token limits.
The first category contains methods employing one of two main strategies: i) either carefully selecting the
most representative text and feeding it as-is to the model (Feature Selection) or, ii) transforming the input in
order to encode as much information as possible given the fixed token limit (Hierarchical Models). Feature
selection may be as simple as using user-defined rules from common heuristics, or as complex as using DNNs and
Information Retrieval (IR) theory to select the passages with the largest information gain. Hierarchical Models,
on the other hand, use stacked neural layers to iteratively aggregate and combine knowledge from distinct parts
of the text, finally generating a “document embedding” that is fed to a typical Transformer (usually BERT).
Another valid strategy is bypassing the token limitation all-together. This is achieved by two main strategies:
i) the attention mechanism may either be modified to allow for linear growth of model parameters with respect
to the input tokens (frequently called Sparse Attention), or ii) the Transformer itself may be modified to contain
hidden states much like an RNN, allowing the model to access previous knowledge from arbitrary points in the
past. Using the terminology presented in [72], the latter approach is called a Recurrent Transformers in this
article.
A complete view of the presented taxonomy can be found in Figure 5. Note that certain DNNs may belong
to more than one categories, borrowing ideas from both strategies. The taxonomy includes the approaches that
are being detailed in further sections of this article. The evolution of these methods over time is summarized,
with respect to this established taxonomy, in Figure 6.
4. Document Classification
Document classification is the automatic assignment of one or more class labels to a piece of text, based
purely on its contents and assuming a known finite set of discrete labels. In the long document case, the text
in question is typically an entire document. As an example, a book of fiction could automatically be assigned a
genre label by a text classifier deployed in a library, supporting labels such as ”Romance” or ”Science Fiction”.
However, a classification-specific challenge is that of multiple labels: the longer an input document is, the
more probable is that it belongs to multiple semantic classes concurrently.
Overall, recent methods for neural long text/document classification mostly rely on pretrained Transformer
language models (e.g., BERT) with a classification head appended at the end. The language model may be fine-
tuned for the desired downstream classification task, while training the head. This approach is suitable for most
relevant tasks [19] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77]. However, Transformers may be suboptimal for specialized tasks
or domains [78], allowing CNN and RNN architectures to occasionally outperform them on long documents.
Relevant issues and solutions are discussed below.
4.1. Solutions
Traditional machine learning algorithms, such as Naive Bayes [79], SVMs (Support Vector Machines) [80] and
ID3 decision trees [81] have been repeatedly applied for document classification [3] [82], being competitive even
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Long-Document NLP Models
No Token Input Limit
Conforms with Token Input Limit
Sparse Attention
Recurrent Transformers
Hierarchical Models
Feature Selection
Classification
Summarization
Classification and Summarization
Hierarchical Sparse Transformer
Sparse Transformer
BigBird
Performer
Transformer-XL
ENRIE-Doc
Hi-Transformer
Text Sampling
Information Retrieval
GBT-EXTSUM
BERTSUM-EXT / BERTSUM-ABS
HiStruct+
HEGEL
LoBART
Top-Down, Bottom-Up Inference
Longformer
Hierarchical Transformer
Hierarchical BERT-Based Dynamic Fusion
Figure 5: A proposed taxonomy of DNNs designed for long document analysis, focusing on methods that can be applied for classification or
summarization. The methods are presented as the tree leaves, while their color denotes the NLP task they were designed for.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Figure 6: A timeline of DNNs for long document analysis, focusing on methods that can be applied for classification or summarization,
according to the taxonomy in Figure 5. Notice the gradual shift from Sparse to Hierarchical Models. The most recent approaches, such as
EMMA, tend to diverge from most common strategies.
in large literary texts [83]. Ensemble algorithms have also proven capable in such tasks especially in the context
of hybrid schemes [84]. However, the field has generally moved decidedly towards DNNs and this subsection
presents the relevant SoA. The innovations of the various existing approaches mostly fall under the following
categories, which are more or less tied to the challenges faced by long document classification.
4.1.1. Multi-label Classification
Multiple labels are essential for many real-world applications [85] [86], thus many methods attempt to
identify a document as belonging to multiple classes concurrently. This may be trivial to achieve in itself, using
well-known DNN models that have been properly adapted. The varying number of labels per document and class
imbalance issues, which may lead to learning extremely biased patterns from the training data, can be handled
by applying weighted loss functions. However, multi-label classification poses unique challenges with regard to
how accuracy is measured.
One representative SoA approach attempting to tackle this scenario is [83], where multiple different classifi-
ers (including a pretrained BERT) are comparatively evaluated in multi-label multi-class document classification,
using the book genre recognition task as a benchmark. The steps taken in [83] to build a successful genre recog-
nizer are telling of more general difficulties with long document classification. Regarding the issue of multiple
labels, a modified accuracy metric is exploited to measure classification accuracy: the true positive and true
negative classifier predictions are first computed separately per class label, with the proposed metric being the
weighted average of correctness over all the label classes. Per-class weights are proportional to the class label
frequency and normalized to sum to 1. Similarly, the loss function employed during training (Binary Cross En-
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
tropy) is modified to include weights for each label, so that each class is scaled inversely to the prominence of
the class in the training set.
4.1.2. Feature Selection and Pruning
This is the traditional way to handle long textual inputs. It involves systematically discarding as much text
as possible at the preprocessing stage, while minimizing information loss. In order to cope with the potentially
huge input size in long document analysis, almost all relevant NLP methods are prefaced by a preprocessing
stage, where less useful input elements are removed. Appropriately reducing the input size improves both com-
putational efficiency and accuracy.
4.1.2.1. Text Sampling. The simplest way to achieve this is by sampling the document, with a combination
of user-defined rules and random chance. For instance, the book genre recognizer of [83] uses an aggressive
sampling method which first discards:
• ”stopwords”, i.e., known, extremely frequent words such as ”a”, ”and”, ”he”, etc.,
• words that appear less than 20 times,
• words that appear in more than 75% of all books,
• words that appear in more than 75% of all classes,
• paragraphs where the frequency of the remaining words is less than a certain threshold,
• the contents of each remaining paragraph after the 512th token, because of technical limitations imposed
by BERT.
Thus, each remaining paragraph is represented by a subset of its words that fall within a restricted, book-level
set of “keywords”. Finally, the sampled paragraphs are only those with the highest concentration of keywords.
The goal of this ruthless sampling is to keep the input’s length manageable for documents containing many
thousands of pages. Methods similar or identical to this one are present in most NLP models specialized for long
texts; thus, they are utilized extensively in most research cited in this paper.
On the other hand, the book genre recognizer of [1] employs only minimal preprocessing, just enough to
allow the DNN to run relatively efficiently. It relies on an index, consisting of the 5000 most common words from
the supported vocabulary. No other preprocessing/sampling takes place, under the intuition that exposing the
DNN to even statistically unimportant words facilitates an understanding of patterns and grammatical modifiers,
such as tense and plurality. Words are represented by typical neural embeddings. Different strategies were
evaluated for feeding the document to the classification DNN:
• Feed only the first 5000 words of the document.
• Feed only the last 5000 words of the document.
• Feed only 5000 random words of the document.
• Feed the entire document, split into chapters.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
• Utilize a traditional bag-of-words approach.
These strategies were then employed on a series of different architectures. Ultimately, the random word
selection proved to consistently outperform other selection strategies for a multitude of classifiers, with the best
performer being a CNN-Kim [87] architecture.
4.1.2.2. Using Information Retrieval (IR). A more advanced and recent approach to text/feature selection is presen-
ted in Li et al. [88]. It relies on local query-block pre-ranking, allowing the selection of blocks of text that hold
the largest semantic significance; these can then be fed to a computationally demanding DNN such as BERT.
Segmentation of the document into blocks is accomplished using the CogLTX Block Decomposition method
[89]. CogLTX is a dynamic programming segmentation approach which emphasizes text containing punctuation
marks such as ”.” and ”!”. It uses an upper token limit on blocks, ensuring a manageable and uniform structure.
The ranking of each individual block is based on their Retrieval Status Value (RSV), which is measured either by
BM25 (a ranking function frequently used by search engines [90]) or by simple cosine similarity.
KeyB(vBERT) is a BERT variant whose inputs are derived by the above feature selection process. KeyB(PARADEk)
instead uses PARADE [91], a SoA set of IR methodologies (involving DNNs) that compute a query-document rep-
resentation. The latter one is fed alongside the text to a pretrained BERT. Both approaches outperform vanilla
ones on IR, although concerns over the memory requirements of KeyB(PARADEk) are raised in Li et al. [88].
Similar IR-based methods for feature selection may significantly contribute to the use of full Transformer
architectures, in parallel with Hierarchical and Sparse Attention Transformer variants that follow a different
rationale for bypassing computational/memory limitations (see below).
As a side-note, it must be pointed out that such IR-based methods for feature selection are not identical to the
use of pretrained extractive summarization DNNs. While in principle the preprocessing steps are indeed similar,
their computational and memory requirements are significantly higher, while they are likely to be outperformed
by modern, dedicated summarization DNNs (see Section 5).
4.1.3. Sparse Attention Transformers
Given the quadratic computational complexity of Transformer DNNs and their prominence in recent years,
attempts have been made to reduce their cost. Such approaches try to achieve linear complexity with respect to
the input size, by keeping track of a small, fixed-size window of neighboring tokens around each input token,
instead of considering all n tokens of the input sequence within each self-attention head. However, the unavoid-
able trade-off is a reduced ability of the DNN to capture long-term dependencies, which is as important for long
texts as the complexity with respect to the input size. It must be noted that such efficient Transformer architec-
tures are task-agnostic and generic ones for long input sequence analysis, not tied to a specific task, although
they are presented here in the context of document classification. Below, the terms token and element are used
interchangeably, although strictly speaking only the first Transformer layer receives actual tokens as input.
4.1.3.1. Sparse Transformer. The Sparse Transformer was introduced in Child et al. [92], to lower asymptotic
complexity from O(n2) to O(n√n). This is done by applying sparse factorizations to each self-attention mat-
rix computed by the Transformer during inference, which contains the current attention weights of each input
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
a) Full n attention
2
b) Sliding window attention c) Dilated sliding window
d) Global + sliding window
Figure 7: Comparing the full self-attention pattern and the configuration of attention patterns in a standard Longformer.
element against each of the other elements of the input sequence. Given that such a matrix is separately construc-
ted at each self-attention head of each layer, it is important to effectively reduce the computational and memory
cost of this operation. The sparse attention mechanism relies on replacing full attention with several small, op-
timized attention operations, which jointly approximate the original mechanism sufficiently. Essentially, each
token attends to only a subset of the overall input sequence tokens. Additional optimizations, such as efficient
sparse attention kernels and improved weight initialization, contribute to a less demanding architecture, which
is thus able to handle longer sequential inputs. The Sparse Transformer is a general model suitable for various
applications involving very long input sequences, ranging from image compression to document analysis.
4.1.3.2. Longformer. Surpassing the Sparse Transformer’s computational gains, the Longformer [59] achieves a
linear asymptotic cost and is specialized for long document NLP. Its self-attention mechanism can be directly
incorporated within other Transformer models and operates by employing a dilated sliding attention window,
which is a modification of the classical sliding window approach for local attention [93, 94]. In the typical case,
each token’s window consists of w tokens surrounding it:
w
2 tokens to its left and right, respectively. The
underlying intuition is that the semantic context of a token can be mostly derived from its neighboring tokens,
while the computational complexity of this operation is O(n × w). In a sense, the end effect resembles the local
receptive fields of neurons in convolutional layers. Similarly to CNNs, stacking l Longformer layers gradually
increases this receptive field, so that representations of tokens faraway from the query can be attended within
the later layers.
The dilated sliding window approach modifies the sliding window with a predetermined dilation factor d
added at each step, which determines the spacing between adjacent window positions and allows data analysis
at multiple scales simultaneously. Thanks to the introduced ”gaps” in the attention pattern, a larger range of
tokens within the self-attention matrix can be covered without increasing calculations and computation time.
Thus the effective receptive field of the window is of length l×d×w, while memory and processing costs remain
steady.
Since windowed and dilated attentions may not be enough to extract a suitable sequence representation,
certain additional, pre-selected locations of the full self-attention matrix are also allowed to be considered as
global context. These global tokens attend to/are attended by the entire sequence as normal, but their number
is kept constant and relatively small to limit complexity to O(n). The [CLS] token is a good candidate for being
selected as a global one, since its generated representations should convey information about the entire sequence.
Overall, as a result of Longformer’s innovations, it has been successfully evaluated with inputs of length up to
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
4096 tokens (compared to BERT’s maximum of 512 tokens). A comparison between full, sliding, dilated sliding
and global-dilated sliding window self-attention patterns is depicted in Figure 7.
4.1.3.3. BigBird. BigBird [60] can be seen as a variation of the Longformer, attempting to support much longer
input sequences by reducing the complexity of self-attention from quadratic to linear. It also employs a sliding
window, since in typical NLP tasks the semantic context of a token can be mostly derived by its neighbor-
ing tokens. Instead of the Longformer’s dilated sliding windows, it employs random token selection to reach
faraway tokens and provide context. This complements the global attention and the regular sliding window at-
tention schemes, adopted and adapted from the Longformer. It has been demonstrated mathematically that this
modified sparse attention mechanism satisfies many theoretical properties of the original full attention mech-
anism, such as universal approximation and Turing-completeness, but seems to require more layers to retain
accuracy comparable to full attention architectures.
4.1.3.4. Performer. Performers [95] are Transformer architectures which can estimate regular full-rank-attention
Transformers with provable accuracy, but using only linear space and time complexity. They achieve this through
two key aspects, described below.
To efficiently compute approximate attention, Choromanski et al. [95] introduces the FAVOR+ (Fast Attention
Via positive Orthogonal Random features) algorithm. It enables linear-time and constant-memory complexity,
making it more scalable for long sequences of data such as long documents. As established in Section 2.1.2, the
standard attention mechanism involves calculating an attention matrix A, which has a quadratic time and space
complexity with respect to the sequence length L. In FAVOR+, the attention matrix A is approximated through
a randomized mapping ϕ and a kernel function K. The kernelized attention is defined as A(i, j) = K(qT
i , kT
j )
where qT
i and kT
j are the i-th query and j-th key row-vectors, respectively. The key innovation lies in the use
of random feature maps ϕ, with the mapping function defined as ϕ(x) = h(x)
√m (f1(ωT
1 x), · · · , fl(ωT
1 x) allowing
the modeling of various kernels used in practice.
The resulting attention mechanism, denoted as FAVOR+ attention, is characterized by significantly improved
time and space complexity compared to regular attention. FAVOR+ has a space complexity of O(Lr + Ld +
rd)O(Lr + Ld + rd) and a time complexity of O(Lrd), where r is the dimensionality of the random features.
This represents a substantial reduction from the quadratic complexities associated with standard attention mech-
anisms. Moreover, FAVOR+ addresses stability concerns associated with negative dimension-values in random
feature maps. By introducing a robust mechanism, it mitigates potential issues and generally provides a more
reliable and effective solution for approximating attention scores.
The last step of FAVOR+ utilizes the standard Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure in order to trans-
form the ωi, i = 1, · · · , m vectors to orthogonal vectors, reducing the variance of the attention mechanism’s
estimator. The authors prove that by utilizing orthogonal features, the variance reduction applies to any dimen-
sionality d, instead of previous results necessitating large values of d.
A recent improvement on Performer is the Permuteformer architecture [96] that adds a position embed-
ding vector to the Performer’s input, while keeping its linear scaling for long sequences. The permutations are
achieved by applying a position-aware transformation on query features and key features to encode positional
information. The cost of these permutations is negligible compared to the overall computational cost of the Per-
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
former, resulting in these two being almost equally efficient and requiring almost identical amount of training
time and resources. Regarding results, Permuteformer improves upon Performer in all classification tasks and
accelerates its convergence.
4.1.4. Hierarchical Transformers
Hierarchical architectures attempt to handle the large input size of long texts by appropriately building
upon original Transformers, instead of modifying them. As before, they are task-agnostic and generic ones,
but presented here in the context of document classification. There are two main approaches to building a
hierarchical Transformer:
• By transforming the Transformer’s input via a suitable DNN (e.g., a CNN or RNN/LSTM). The latter one
generates a single document representation (document embedding) able to fit into a standard Transformer
(e.g., BERT), thus bypassing the input size limitations.
• By segmenting the input document. The input segments are independently truncated to the Transformer’s
input size and the network (e.g., BERT) generates embeddings for each of these segments. A separate DNN
then combines the segment embeddings and predicts the document label.
4.1.4.1. Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN). The first attempt towards a Hierarchical Transformer [97] [58]
was built on top of standard BERT. During inference, the input document is split into paragraphs that are trun-
cated to fit into BERT. The latter one generates independent paragraph embeddings, which are combined by the
succeeding HAN into a single output. The end result is an increased ability to handle long texts, by exploiting
the natural partitioning of documents into paragraphs.
A similar approach was later used in [98], where the base models were BERT, RoBERTa, DeBERT [99], Legal-
BERT [100] and CaseLaw-Bert [101]. In long text analysis tasks, the hierarchical versions proved competitive
with Sparse Attention Transformers, such as Longformer and BigBird.
The method in [102], relying on BERT or on Universal Sentence Encoders (USEs) [103] (models learning
sentence representations for transfer learning), follows up on this methodology, but replaces the final HAN with
a CNN or an LSTM architecture. The BERT+LSTM combination proved to be the best among the evaluated
hierarchical approaches, which however were generally outperformed by Sparse Attention Transformers.
4.1.4.2. Hi-Transformer. The main alternative to [98] and its variants is to essentially reverse the process: that is,
to employ a hierarchical DNN for obtaining a fixed-size document-level representation/embedding from the en-
tire input, which is then fed to a regular classification DNN. Hi-Transformer [104] achieves this via a Transformer
acting as a ”Sentence Encoder” (SE), i.e., aggregating and projecting the regular, individual word embeddings of
the input document into sentence-level embeddings. Once every sentence has passed through SE, these embed-
dings are subsequently ordered by positional embedding and fed as input to a subsequent Transformer called
”Document Encoder” (DE). The latter’s output is a context-aware document embedding, which is fed as input
to the next SE along with the original sentences. Thus, the generated, revised sentence embeddings are aware
of the global, document-level context. This process is repeated by stacking multiple such layers, until the final
output is passed to a pooling layer that extracts the final document embedding. According to [104], two such
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
layers seem to be sufficient for outperforming Sparse Attention Transformers in long text analysis. This can
be attributed to the readily accessible global/document-level context. Since the final classifier has to analyze a
fixed-size document representation and the SE’s complexity is linear to the number of sentences, computational
demands are not higher than in the sparse attention case. More impressively, Hi-Transformer’s accuracy has
been observed to actually increase with longer documents, since more relevant context can be extracted.
4.1.4.3. Hierarchical Sparse Transformer. Hierarchical Transformers have been combined with the sparse atten-
tion mechanism, in order to ameliorate the latter’s inability to capture all the necessary global/document-level
context, in the case of long texts. This inability arises from the low level of global context diffusion in the gener-
ated token representations, since the global tokens are limited in number. The ERNIE-SPARSE architecture [105]
merges the two schools of thought by using hierarchical attention, which is then fed to a Sparse Transformer in
order to increase the information extracted from the global context.
ERNIE-SPARSE utilizes a modified attention mechanism, where each query is allowed to attend to a limited
number of additional representative tokens within each fixed-size window of the self-attention matrix, along
with regular global and local tokens from the input sequence. These inserted representative tokens carry global
context from the entire document and are derived in two steps: first, the regular Sparse Transformer is applied
to the unaltered input sequence and, then, regular full self-attention is applied to a small collection of selected
outputs. ERNIE-SPARSE has been shown to outperform the competition on well-known document classifica-
tion datasets. It can be considered both a hierarchical and a sparse attention approach, since it modifies the
Transformer’s internal architecture. Figure 8 depicts the modified attention mechanism of ERNIE-SPARSE, in
comparison to that of the Sparse Transformer.
4.1.4.4. Hierarchical BERT-Based dynamic fusion. Another approach taken by Onan [106] for processing very
long documents combines hierarchical information through nodes capturing nested relationships and semantic
structures in text data, contextual information through pretrained Transformer models such as BERT or GPT,
and a novel dynamic fusion approach. The latter combines outputs from previous stages with an external model,
enhancing overall performance. The architecture proceeds via the following stages:
• Linguistic Feature Extraction where features such as Part-of-Speech (POS) Tagging, Dependency Pars-
ing, Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Coreference Resolution are extracted.
• Hierarchical Node Construction with Domain-Specific Knowledge The Hierarchical Graph is first
defined as follows: a graph Gi is constructed for each document ti, where Ni represents nodes (document
and sentences) and Ei represents hierarchical relationships. Document nodes are formalized as Ni =
{n1, n2, · · · , nmi}, where n1 is the document node, and n2 to nmi are sentence nodes. Edges Ei represent
relationships between the document and its sentences. For each document node, a document graph is
created in a similar fashion: domain-specific knowledge graphs, such as WordNet [107], are integrated to
enhance the capture of relationships and semantic meanings between words. Word nodes are formalized
as Vi = {v1, v2, · · · , vmi}, where vi is the node of the i-th word. The edge Ei =< vk, vl > exists only if
a domain-specific relationship exists between the vk and vl words. The two graphs are then fused into a
single hierarchical graph.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
l
l+1
a) Sparse Transformer
b) Information Flow for ST
l
l+1
d) Information Flow for HST
c) HST: Hierarchical Sparse Transformer
bottleneck
Figure 8: Comparison of Sparse Transformer (ST) and Hierarchical Sparse Transformer (HST). (a) Sparse Transformer comprises global
attention and local attention. (b) ST faces a limitation where all sequence details are compressed into a fixed vector size. (c) HST addresses
this limitation by incorporating representative tokens into local attention, enabling hierarchical attention. (d) The information flow in HST
demonstrates how the interaction among representative nodes can enhance global information interaction pathways.
• Dynamic Text Sequential Feature Interaction which the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [108] al-
gorithm to align word embeddings, facilitating clearer distinction of temporal relationships between words.
The algorithm identifies the optimal path through the sequence of embeddings, minimizing the distance
between two sequences. In this context, the involved sequences are the word embeddings for a specific
document and a reference sequence, typically represented by average embeddings for a designated cat-
egory. The integration of the DTW algorithm markedly enhances the model’s capacity to capture temporal
relationships between words, augmenting the model’s understanding of the sequential structure inherent
in textual data. This holds particular significance in text classification scenarios, where discerning the
temporal order of words is imperative for tasks such as sentiment analysis.
• Hierarchical Graph and Knowledge Graph Fusion. The fusion process involves combining the hier-
archical graph and knowledge graph to obtain an integrated graph. Several approaches can be employed
for fusion, such as graph convolutional networks or attention mechanisms.
• Model Functionality. The hierarchical/linguistic representation is fed into a pretrained BERT model,
which generates a contextual vector that is processed by an MLP. The latter one outputs the class labels.
The architecture achieves SoA results in many different benchmark datasets.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
4.1.5. Recurrent Transformers
The fixed input size of baseline Transformers leads, during both training and inference, to context fragment-
ation in long document analysis: essentially, the DNN analyzes the input as independent, consecutive segments.
Thus, a complementary direction of the SoA is to allow the Transformer to learn and extract long-term de-
pendencies beyond the preset fixed input sequence size, while maintaining linear computational complexity and
retaining local and global context. As before, they are task-agnostic and generic architectures, but presented
here in the context of document classification.
4.1.5.1. Transformer-XL and XR-Transformer. The Transformer-XL architecture [72] introduces recurrence into
the Transformer, thus integrating the RNN concept of retained hidden states. These states are passed within the
Transformer from one segment to the succeeding one, thus effectively transmitting the previously established
context and allowing the identification of long-term dependencies across segments. Unlike RNN/LSTM recur-
rence, where each layer’s stored state is exploited at the next time step by the same layer, the corresponding
Transformer-XL mechanism shifts the transmitted state one layer downwards. For example, layer l = n has
access to 2 hidden states from layer l = n −1, 4 hidden states from layer l = n −2 and 2n from layer l = 1,
which are the original input word embeddings.
This mechanism guarantees O(n×l) cost, where l are the number of layers, and significantly faster inference
compared to baseline Transformer, since representations computed for previous segments are re-used instead of
being computed from scratch for each new segment. It also allows different input sequence sizes between the
training and the inference stage. Ultimately, Transformer-XL achieves competitive results on extremely long
document analysis, while being significantly more efficient than the baseline Transformer.
Another similar approach aimed at extreme multi-label text classification is the XR-Transformer [109] which
employs a three-stage framework, those being partitioning, shortlisting, and ranking. During the partitioning
stage, the set of labels is divided into clusters or groups based on certain criteria, in the shortlisting stage a subset
of candidate labels are selected from the entire label set, allowing the XR-Transformer to focus on a smaller, more
manageable set of potential relevant labels. Finally, the ranking stage involves assigning a priority or order to
the selected labels based on their relevance or likelihood of being correct. The XR-Transformer also employs
a structure similar to recurrence, but additionally introduces a Hierarchical Label Tree (HLT) that captures the
relationships and dependencies between different labels in a structured manner. The HLT is constructed during
the training phase through recursive label clustering, forming a tree-like, hierarchical organization of labels that
allows training the Transformer on multi-resolution objectives.
4.1.5.2. ERNIE-Doc. ERNIE-Doc [110] builds upon Transformer-XL but makes two passes over the input se-
quence, similarly to how humans first ”skim” a document before paying attention to important sections. To
achieve this, the cached hidden state is computed as follows:
ˆH = [ ˆH1
1:T ; ...; ˆHN
1:T ] (skim phase)
(4)
˜hn−1
r+1 = [ ˜H; hn−1
r+1 ] (retrospective phase),
(5)
where T is the number of consecutive document segments, L is the length of the document, N is the number of
layers. ˆHi
1:T = [ˆhi
1; ...; hi
T ] is the concatenation of the T cached hidden states initially derived in the skimming
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
ERNIE-Doc
Layer-1
Layer-2
Layer-3
s1
s2
s3
s4
s1
s2
s3
s4
The Retrospective Phase
Large Effective Context Length
s1
s2
s3
s4
Layer-1
Layer-2
Layer-3
Recurrent Transformer
Effective Context
Effective Context
Memory concatenation
Hidden states input
Transformer block
Figure 9: Comparison of 3-layer ERNIE-Doc and Recurrent Transformer, assuming a long document D that is divided into four segments
(S1, S2, S3, S4). Recurrent Transformer (upper): While training on S4, it can only incorporate contextual information from the preceding two
consecutive segments, S2 and S3, due to the linear growth of the effective context length in relation to the number of layers. ERNIE-Doc
(lower): With the assistance of an enhanced recurrence mechanism, the effective context length is significantly increased. Consequently, S4
can assimilate the information from S1, which was discarded by the Recurrent Transformer. Segments in the retrospective phase contain
the contextual information of the entire document.
phase for the i-th layer. Thus, ˜H ∈R(LT N)×d is the concatenation of all ˆHi
1:T (one per layer), Thus, context
from the entire document can be exploited in the retrospective phase in order to form the extended hidden state
˜hn
t .
This skimming architecture is incompatible with the recurrence mechanism from [72] and, due to its linear
cost with regard to the number of layers, it may be prohibitive for long documents. To solve this, [110] ”flattens”
the hidden state dependency from one-layer-downwards recurrence to same-layer recurrence, similarly to RNNs.
Additionally, a novel, document-level task for self-supervised pretraining is introduced that is called ”Segment-
Reordering Objective” (SRO). It entails randomly splitting a long document into m segments, shuffling them,
then letting the Transformer reorganize them in order to learn their interrelations. After pretraining on both
the MLM task and on SRO, ERNIE-Doc proved highly competitive in several long document analysis datasets
for a range of tasks such as classification, question answering and key-phrase extraction. Figure 9 depicts the
modified recurrent mechanism of ERNIE-Doc, in comparison to that of basic Recurrent Transformers.
4.2. Sparse, Hierarchical or Recurrent Transformers?
Sparse attention, hierarchical and recurrent approaches dominate the current literature for long document
analysis using Transformers. However, a number of challenges remain, such as:
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
• Sparse Attention Transformers tend to suffer in accuracy, due to their reliance on a small number of global
tokens that must encapsulate all document-level context.
• Hierarchical Transformers are particularly susceptible to context fragmentation, since the individual seg-
ment embeddings are derived either without sufficient local context [69], or with no access to the global
document context [104].
In general, there is no consensus on which approach performs better, nor any empirical rule on which tasks
each architecture performs best in. Given that each approach features its own benefits and drawbacks, as well
as potentially domain-specific strengths, the literature as of 2024 recommends manual architecture selection by
the user, taking into account the specific problem. However, at a high level of abstraction, hybrid algorithms and
recurrence seem to be promising avenues for advancing long text analysis.
5. Document Summarization
Automatic Text Summarization (ATS) is the task of generating a short summary from a source input docu-
ment. In the context of long documents, such as medical and legal records, it is often called ”document summar-
ization”. The generated summary must be coherent, concise and avoid redundancy, while accurately maintaining
the meaning of the most important information in the source material. There are two main approaches to ATS:
extractive and abstractive summarization.
Extractive summarization generates its summary by selecting verbatim sentences found in the source
text. This practically reduces summarization into finding a binary selection vector s = [s1, s2, ..., sn]T , si ∈
{0, 1}∀i ∈[1, n], where si = 1/si = 0 if the i-th source input text sentence is/is not included in the summary,
respectively. The simplicity and the tolerable computational cost of this approach have made it very common for
on-line article summarization. However, its applicability is inherently limited by the fact that not all document
types can be summarized well by just a few of their sentences taken verbatim and re-arranged. For example,
there is no way to describe the content of most books by using a selection of their own sentences.
Abstractive summarization is the alternative approach of generating new text. It is the method humans
use when trying to manually summarize text, by reading the source, extracting its meaning and then writing
a condensed document which contains as much of the source’s meaning as possible. As expected, modern ab-
stractive algorithms are DNNs [111]. Compared to extractive alternatives, they generate more meaningful and
condensed summaries, while being more adaptable to the input document type. However, there is a much larger
risk of the output summary misrepresenting facts and/or not being coherent at all. The most commonly used
method for abstractive summarization involves employing a sequence-to-sequence mapping (Seq2Seq) model
[112], via an Encoder-Decoder DNN architecture. RNNs and Transformers have both been employed in this
context, where the Encoder captures suitable representations of the document’s tokens and feeds them to the
Decoder that generates a summary.
Document summarization comes with its own set of task-specific challenges, essentially applying almost
exclusively to the long input document case, since there is typically no reason to summarize a short text.
• Multiple topics: The length of the input document gives rise to significant issues which go beyond simple
computational and hardware requirements. Extractive DNNs particularly struggle with long documents
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[113]; the greater the length of the input, the more topics it typically covers, thus the harder it is for a
DNN to generate a summary covering effectively all of them.
• Evaluation metrics: The ROUGE evaluation metric [114], which is the most commonly used metric
for summarization tasks, might not be sufficient for abstractive DNNs. It has been claimed to perform
considerably worse than in the case of extractive summarization, since it lacks semantic understanding of
the words it compares [115].
• Sentence extraction: Framing extractive summarization as a binary decision task assumes that the mean-
ing of individual sentences is independent of that of others, leading to high redundancy. Even accounting
for this fact, such DNNs are still vulnerable to greedily picking general sentences, instead of finding a
combination of specific sentences which together summarize the document much more effectively [116].
• Repetition: One of the most common issues of abstractive DNNs dealing with long texts is sentence
repetition; this is potentially caused by the over-reliance of a Decoder to its input, which gives rise to
an endless loop of phrase repetition [117]. Internal issues concerning RNNs with attention mechanisms
have been pointed out as the root cause of both this issue and of false information appearing in the output
summary [118].
• Hallucinations: Abstractive DNNs additionally suffer from the opposite issue of hallucinations, i.e., gen-
erating summaries with content that is not actually present in the original document [119]. According to
recent research [120], hallucinations tend to appear during summary generation when the DNN is uncer-
tain about how to continue, thus favouring common phrases it has memorized from its training set.
5.1. Solutions
This section reviews the commonly employed ROUGE evaluation score, as well as extractive and abstractive
text summarization methods. The evolution of relevant algorithms, as well as how each family attempted to
handle the challenges it faces, are briefly discussed.
5.1.1. Evaluation Metrics
ROUGE is a very commonly used metric for evaluating ATS algorithms, featuring as many as 192 variations.
The base ROUGE metric [114] measures the number of overlapping n-grams/sequences between the generated
and ground-truth summary. This is sufficient for many extractive summarization tasks, but faces severe chal-
lenges when used for abstractive summarization. ROUGE is unable to distinguish between different grammatical
versions of the same word [118] and synonyms [115], while being agnostic towards sentence ordering [121].
Most importantly, the underlying assumption made by ROUGE, that the quality of a summary is correlated to
its coverage compared to the human-generated summary, may not be statistically significant [122].
The reasons why ROUGE is still popular despite such severe drawbacks are multiple, including the unavail-
ability of proven competitors and the lack of easy-to-use software implementations or standardized benchmarks
for ATS evaluation [123]. Besides, alternative metrics may suffer from similar weaknesses, since they typically
do not account for factual consistency between the source document and its evaluated summary [124]. For a
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
detailed discussion of text summarization metrics, the reader is referred to [123]. For the purposes of this article,
a number of common and/or recent alternatives to ROUGE are briefly mentioned below:
• METEOR [125] (recommended by [118]), functions similarly to ROUGE, while being largely invariant to
grammatical variants and synonyms.
• Sem-nCG [115] is a recent, semantically-aware metric focused on extractive summarization.
• BERTScore [126] uses the similarity of the contextual embeddings between the generated and the ground-
truth summaries.
• S3 [127] combines other evaluation metrics through a model, in order to produce an aggregated evaluation
of the summary.
• BLANC [128] is an unsupervised evaluation metric which does not depend on human-generated ground-
truth summaries, by comparing BERT’s performance on the Cloze task (on the source document) when it
has and when it has not additional access to the generated summary.
• BARTScore [129] offers multiple directions (Faithfulness, Recall, Precision, F-score) which make it a flex-
ible metric for different evaluation scenarios.
• Contextualized Topic Coherence Metrics [130] are a group of metrics which evaluate the coherence and
semantic similarity among the topics covered by a generated text.
Many more evaluation metrics have been proposed, but none has taken a foothold yet. The question of a capable
successor to ROUGE is still an open one.
Besides summarization evaluation metrics themselves, factuality metrics have also recently proven instru-
mental in abstractive summarization due to their application in evaluating or fighting hallucinations. Three
important and relevant recent metrics are the following ones:
• FactCC (Factual Consistency Checking) [124] is essentially a BERT model that has been finetuned on pre-
dicting, as a binary output, the factual consistency of each summary sentence with the original document.
• SummaC (Summary Consistency) [131] is somewhat similar to FactCC in conception, but is implemented
as a Natural Language Inference (NLI) DNN [132] that checks whether each summary-document sentence
pair is consistent. Per-sentence scores can be combined into a single score per summary.
• CTCScore (Compression, Transduction and Creation Scores) [133] is a suite of various metrics for evalu-
ating different aspects of natural language generation, including a consistency aspect, based on pretrained
DNN language models that are utilized for evaluating information alignment between different texts. The
particular property of CTCScore is that, by design, it can be exploited for evaluating performance in many
different generative NLP tasks.
5.1.2. Extractive summarization
This Subsection presents the gradual evolution of extractive summarization DNNs towards the current SoA.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
5.1.2.1. Building Summaries Using Hierarchies. The first attempts to use DNNs for extractive summarization,
while certainly obsolete today, developed core concepts that were later re-used and improved.
Thus, the method in [134] developed a neural Encoder-Decoder architecture, which is trained in a supervised
manner by preprocessing human-written summaries to construct extractive ground-truth summaries (binary
selection vectors). Architecturally, the Encoder is composed of a shallow CNN, called ”Convolutional Sentence
Encoder”, and a subsequent LSTM, called ”Recurrent Document Encoder”. The first one analyzes a matrix of
Word2Vec word embeddings, separately for each sentence of the source text, aggregating them to dense sentence
embeddings. The second one sequentially receives these embeddings as input and generates a document-level
embedding in the form of a fixed-size vector.
The Decoder is one of two models following different, mutually exclusive strategies: a ”Sentence Extractor”,
which approaches the extraction task as a sentence selection problem, and a ”Word Extractor” which approaches
it as a word generation task. The latter one is practically a limited-efficiency abstractive summarizer, with its
supported vocabulary constrained to that of the source document, so it will not be detailed here. The Sentence
Extractor is an LSTM-MLP combination, sequentially labeling individual source sentences for inclusion in the
summary based on two criteria: i) whether they are relevant, and ii) whether they are mutually redundant with
other sentences. The selection decision for the t-th sentence is computed as follows:
ˆht = LSTM(pt−1st−1, ˆht−1),
(6)
pt = σ(MLP(ˆht; ht)),
(7)
where ˆht/ht is the Extractor’s/Encoder LSTM’s hidden state for the t-th sentence/time step, respectively. pt−1
represents the assigned probability that the previous sentence st−1 belongs to the summary, and ; is the concat-
enation operation.
Following-up on [134], ”SummaRuNNer” [135] was proposed as an extractive summarization RNN with
the useful ability to be directly trainable on abstractive ground-truth summaries. It contains multiple layers
of bidirectional GRUs and a hierarchical Encoder. Similarly to [134], the first subnetwork generates sentence
embeddings from individual word representations, which are sequentially fed as input to the second GRU. The
latter one analyzes them and outputs a document-level embedding from the sentence representations; this is
done by average pooling the second subnetwork’s hidden states. The Decoder is simply a logistic binary classifier,
assigning to each source sentence a ”summary”/”non-summary” label. To be directly trainable on datasets with
abstractive ground-truth summaries, a separate RNN Decoder can be optionally attached to the Encoder only
during training and tasked to emit the most probable word at each time step. Figure 10 depicts the SummaRuNNer
architecture.
The method ”LSTM-Ext” [113] improves on [134] and [135] by considering both global and local context
information along with each sentence, in order to decide on its inclusion into the generated summary. Inspired
by how humans read lengthy text, it was reasonably hypothesized that hierarchical information could benefit
ATS. The ”LSTM-minus” algorithm [136] is applied to generate local context-aware embeddings at the section
level. Similarly to [134] and [135], an Encoder-Decoder architecture is employed. The Encoder is again composed
of a Sentence Encoder (SE) and a Document Encoder (DE), but now also includes a ”Topic Encoder” (TE) that
provides access to local (section) context surrounding each sentence.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
1
0
1
Doc Rep
Sentence 1
Sentence 2
Sentence 3
Input layer
Word layer
Sentence layer
Classification layer
Figure 10: The SummaRuNNer architecture. Bidirectional RNNs are represented by double-pointed arrows.
SE is a GRU that maps input word embeddings to a fixed-size sentence-level vector, while DE is a bidirectional
GRU that encodes the sentence embeddings into a document-level vector representation. The final document
embedding is computed as the concatenation of the final hidden states of the backward and the forward GRU. TE
[136] separately embeds local context about each sentence’s section by employing the LSTM-minus method; the
result is an additional vector per section. Subsequently, for each sentence, the embeddings of itself, of its section
and of the entire document are concatenated, optionally with weights assigned by an attention mechanism, and
fed to the Decoder. The latter one is simply a binary MLP classifier that predicts whether each sentence should
be included in the summary or not.
The architecture’s efficiency seems to increase with increasing document length, making it a powerful archi-
tecture for long documents, while the most benefit comes from the use of local rather than global context. Thus,
LSTM-Ext was among the first modern document summarization methods that explicitly handle the fact that
longer texts tend to cover multiple topics. On the other hand, it is not designed to avoid unnecessary repetitions
in the generated summary, resulting in outputs with potentially high redundancy.
5.1.2.2. Hierarchical Summaries using BERT. In recent years, Transformer and BERT variants gradually replaced
RNN and Word2Vec/GloVe variants in extractive summarization. However, older ideas have been retained and
improved, with their efficiency increased, in an attempt to resolve long-standing challenges of document sum-
marization.
The method in [137] uses BERT for both extractive and abstractive summarization (BERTSUM-EXT and
BERTSUM-ABS, respectively). Instead of using sentence-level vector representations/embeddings, BERT inher-
ently generates individual token representations. Thus, BERTSUM-EXT inserts special [CLS] tokens in-between
sentences as separators, to notify the DNN of distinct sentences and capture sentence-level context within the
respective generated token representations. This modified pretrained BERT is utilized as the Sentence Encoder
component within an Encoder-Decoder architecture. The Document Encoder is a Transformer that receives the
sentence-level embeddings of the [CLS] tokens that are derived by BERT and transforms them so as to contain
richer document-level context. The final resulting sentence embeddings are fed to a shallow, fully connected
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
binary classifier that predicts whether each sentence is to be included in the summary or not. All input docu-
ments are truncated to a fixed number of supported tokens. The overall architecture is finetuned in a supervised
manner, using ground-truth binary selection vectors.
Despite the relatively strong performance of BERTSUM-EXT, it faces the typical challenges encountered by
Transformers in long document analysis, such as varying and diverse topics. To counter this, the approach
in [138] extends BERTSUM-EXT by taking advantage of the usually strong hierarchical structure of long texts
(individual sentences compose titled sections, which jointly form the document). Thus, it computes hierarch-
ical positional embeddings that capture the relative position of a token within each section and the position of
that section in the document. These representations, along with additional representations of the section titles,
are incorporated into the sentence-level embeddings by the Document Encoder, which feeds the final shallow,
fully connected binary classifier. Of course, the overall ”HiStruct+” architecture is finetuned for extractive sum-
marization. The method seems to perform well in long scientific articles with a rigid section structure, while
still achieving SoA performance in less formal documents of short-to-medium length. Finally, by evaluating the
method using pretrained Transformer language models other than BERT, the Longformer seems to come at the
top.
Another approach aimed at long document extractive summarization is GBT-EXTSUM (Global BERT-based
Transformer for Extractive Summarization) [139]. It is an architecture composed of stacked propagation layers,
each consisting of a Transformer layer, a BiGRU for inter-block information propagation and an MLP. GBT-
EXTSUM achieves scalability to long document sequences without relying on attention mechanisms, by intro-
ducing a hierarchical structure with recurrent hierarchical modules and Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units
(BiGRU). This design allows for the propagation of information between text blocks at different levels, elimin-
ating the need for attention mechanisms and providing an effective solution for processing lengthy documents.
Furthermore, it eliminates the need for positional encoding on block representations, contributing to the effi-
ciency of summarization tasks.
5.1.2.3. HyperGraph Transformers. HyperGraph Transformers are a recently proposed approach to long docu-
ment extractive summarization, exploiting ideas from previous hierarchical methods and implementing them
using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
The method in [140] attempts to deal with the Transformer’s quadratic complexity and context retention
problems by developing a hybrid architecture called ”HEGEL” (HypErGraph transformer for Extractive Long
document summarization), relying on the so-called Hypergraph Transformer. HEGEL models the document as a
graph G = (V, E), where V is a set of nodes and E a set of hyperedges: an edge that can connect two or more
nodes. We use the notations u ∈e and u /∈e to represent whether a node is connected to a hyperedge in the
graph G or not, respectively.
In HEGEL, the graph nodes are the document’s sentences and extractive summarization is modelled as a
node classification task. Each sentence is initially semantically embedded to a dense vector using a pretrained
BERT. There are three kinds of hyperedges in this document graph:
• A section hyperedge connects all sentences that belong to the same section. For instance, in the context
of a scientific article, a section could be the problem statement, the methodology or the conclusions. An
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
incidence matrix Asec is defined as:
Asec
i,j =





1, if si ∈esec
j
0, if si /∈esec
j
,
(8)
where si ∈ekw
j
means the i-th sentence belongs in the j-th section.
• A topic hyperedge connects all sentences sharing the same topic. Topic clustering is implemented by using
Latent Dirichlet Allocation [141]. The incidence matrix Atopic is defined as:
Atopic
i,j
=





1, if si ∈etopic
j
0, if si /∈etopic
j
,
(9)
where si ∈ekw
j
means that the i-th sentence belongs to the j-th topic.
• A keyword hyperedge connects all sentences containing the same keywords. These keywords are extracted
using Key-BERT [142] from the training sample. The incidence matrix Akw is defined as:
Atopic
i,j
=





1, if si ∈ekw
j
0, if si /∈ekw
j ,
(10)
where si ∈ekw
j
means that the i-th sentence contains the j-th keyword.
The overall incidence matrix A ∈Rn×m is generated by concatenating the three incidence matrices as:
A = Asec; Atopic; Akw.
(11)
HEGEL receives as its input both the sequence of initial sentence embeddings and the overall incidence
matrix. It adopts the hierarchical positional embeddings from [138] and defines an alternative ”hypergraph at-
tention” mechanism, along with the corresponding multihead hypergraph attention module, instead of regular
self-attention heads. As in the vanilla Transformer, these components are contained within a deep neural ar-
chitecture with standard fully connected layers, skip connections and layer normalization mechanisms. This
Hypergraph Transformer extracts semantically rich sentence-level representations that are well aware of local
context, global context and semantic interrelations between different parts of the document. The overall archi-
tecture is trained end-to-end for binary sentence classification using a ground-truth binary selection vector per
document.
HEGEL manages to outperform all extractive and abstractive baselines on several datasets of scientific art-
icles, demonstrating the potential of GNNs for long document summarization. It remains to see if such archi-
tectures can retain this level of performance on less rigid and hierarchical document types. Figure 11 depicts
schematically HEGEL’s architecture.
5.1.3. Abstractive Summarization
Abstractive summarization is typically approached as a sequence-to-sequence language modeling task, where
a neural Decoder predicts the next word of the summary at each time step. The vast majority of modern relevant
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
s1
s2
…
sn
ENCODER
h1
h2
…
hn
+
Node representation H
Hierarchical Position Embedding
Incidence Matrix A
Hypergraph Construction
MLP
HyperGraph Transformer Layer
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
Add & Norm
Multi-head Hypergraph Attention
Prediction
Figure 11: The overall HEGEL architecture.
methods are trained in a supervised manner, using ground-truth summaries. This is arguably a more advanced
task than its extractive alternative.
5.1.3.1. Pointer-Generator Networks. One of the first truly successful abstractive summarizers is essentially a
hybrid one: a DNN that dynamically chooses whether to select a source sentence verbatim, as an extractive
method, or synthesize the next word in the summary [117]. Inspired by the human ability to refer to unknown
objects by pointing at them, such Pointer-Generator Networks (PGNs) are an improvement over the ”Word
Extractor” proposed by [134].
PGN can copy out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words from the source document, making it possible to generate text
with rare words and keep a smaller vocabulary, thus reducing computational and memory costs. Essentially, it
is a modified, attention-augmented sequence-to-sequence Encoder-Decoder architecture implemented similarly
to [135], where both the Encoder and the Decoder are one-layer, bidirectional LSTMs. The Decoder ends at
a softmax layer and at each time step generates a new word, originating either in the source document or in
a global supported vocabulary. Thus, at each time step of the Encoder’s/Decoder’s unfolding, the next token
is read/outputted from the input/to the generated summary, respectively. In order to decide on the course of
action for the next word, the PGN defines its output distribution over the union of the global and the document’s
vocabulary (called the ”extended vocabulary”), thus deciding at each time step whether it should copy or generate
the next word. If a word is OOV, it will be copied from the source document by sampling from the attention
distribution, while if it does not exist in the document a new word will be generated.
The attention mechanism is defined as in [29]. During inference, a coverage vector is updated at each Decoder
time step, containing the sum of attention distributions over all previous time steps. It is provided as an additional
input to the attention mechanism, so that the latter avoids giving attention to already extracted words and, thus,
repeating them in the summary. To enhance this behaviour, PGN is also guided during training by an extra
coverage loss: a regularizer that penalizes repeated attention to the same input tokens. Thus, the overall loss
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
function computed at the t-th Decoder’s time step is:
Lt
o = Lt
ML + λ
X
i
min(at
i, ct
i),
(12)
where λ is a scalar weighting hyperparameter, at is the current attention distribution, index i traverses the
Encoder’s time steps, ct is the current coverage vector, while Lt
ML is the primary loss term at the t-th Decoder’s
time step. Typically, Lt
ML is the negative log likelihood of the t-th ground-truth summary word according to the
final Decoder output, i.e., a generated probability distribution defined over all supported words of the extended
vocabulary. The overall loss is summed over all the Decoder’s time steps.
PGN does not use any pretrained word embeddings, learning instead token representations from scratch.
At the time of its appearance it showed remarkable success in handling OOV words, while also featuring a
smaller vocabulary size and faster training times. It thus successfully handled most of summarization challenges.
However, although historically significant, PGN cannot handle long documents well. As a result, more efficient
and specialized architectures were later developed.
5.1.3.2. BERT & Sparse Attention Transformers. As described in Subsection 5.1.2, BERT has been adapted for
extractive summarization in the form of BERTSUM-EXT [137]. That neural architecture has also been employed
for abstractive summarization in the form of BERTSUM-ABS.
The Encoder of BERTSUM-ABS is a pretrained BERTSUM-EXT model, a choice which provides efficiency
gains, due to transfer learning, and task-specific gains, due to emerging synergies between extractive and ab-
stractive summarization [143, 144]. The Decoder is a regular, randomly initialized 6-layer Transformer. Different
finetuning and training schedules are utilized for the Encoder and the Decoder, respectively, to avoid stability
issues during optimization. Overall, the approach attained only marginal performance gains over competitors.
Section 4.1 reviewed the issues vanilla Transformers face with very long documents, with the biggest chal-
lenge being the quadratic cost of the self-attention mechanism. The various sparse attention solutions that
attempt to bypass this restriction can also be employed for document summarization, by replacing a regular En-
coder with a Sparse Transformer variant. One such architecture is the ”Longformer-Encoder-Decoder” (LED),
i.e., where Longformers are utilized both for the Encoder and the Decoder. Critically, the Decoder pays full
attention to the entire Encoder and to already decoded positions of the input. As expected, LED scales linearly
with the input size, and has been shown to achieve highly competitive performance.
Similarly, BigBird has also been employed for abstractive document summarization [60]. The sparse attention
mechanism is used only in the Encoder, which handles the long input, while the Decoder exploits full attention,
as the length of the summary (in tokens) is small by definition. BigBird achieved significant performance gains
on long document summarization and competitive performance on smaller ones.
BigBird makes use of Gap-Sentences Generation (GSG) for abstractive summarization [145]. It is a self-
supervised pretraining objective especially constructed to aid downstream finetuning for text summarization.
Essentially being a variant of T5’s pretraining objective, it consists in masking an entire sentence with a single
[MASK] token. Then, during pretraining, each input is a set of consecutive sentences, with a subset of them
selected and hidden according to GSG. The DNN is tasked to generate the masked sentences jointly, in the form
of a pseudo-summary, based on the seen ones. The selection of which input sentences to mask is not random,
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
but based on the ROUGE score of each sentence with the remaining input text. Thus, the ones finally hidden
with [MASK] tokens are those that have been automatically judged as the most important ones. It must be noted
that GSG was originally introduced as the main novelty of the PEGASUS neural language model, following a
Transformer Encoder-Decoder architecture, like BART or T5.
GSG and a variant of the sparse attention mechanism is also employed for abstractive document summar-
ization in LongT5, which is a modification of the basic T5 neural architecture [146]. Thus, the LongT5 Encoder
contains self-attention sublayers where each input token attends to its local neighbourhood plus to all global
tokens. The latter ones are being dynamically constructed before each attention operation, by summing and
normalizing different, non overlapping subsets of the input token embeddings. Despite the approximate nature
of this sparse attention mechanism, the resulting ability to process longer inputs leads to overall improved ac-
curacy in long document summarization.
Another variant of the Sparse Attention Transformer mechanism is the EMMA Memory-Augmented Trans-
former Summarizer [147], which was developed for low resource systems and uses text segmentation in order
to better process the text in chunks. It then feeds the data into a modified version of BART which utilizes a long-
term memory matrix for each layer, combining the previous and current memory matrices in order to avoid
losing long-term details. This modified BART model also features cross-memory attention in order to consider
information from previous chunks when processing the current chunk. This results in the EMMA model gen-
erating more contextually coherent summaries, while retaining its low space complexity of O(L2
c) (where Lc is
the predetermined max chunk size).
5.1.3.3. Local Attention and Content Selection. The majority of modern abstractive summarizers learn to impli-
citly select pertinent content from the input in order to generate the summary. Recently, attempts have been
made to combine the advantages of Sparse Attention Transformers, which allow the handling of longer docu-
ments, with explicit content selection before the abstractive summary generation [5].
The main abstractive DNN in [5] is a modified version of BART [40], called LoBART. Vanilla BART supports
input sequences with a length up to 1024 tokens. LoBART modifies its layers so as to employ the sparse attention
scheme of Longformer, with the difference that only local and no global attention is utilized. This allows LoBART
to drop its memory requirements significantly, at the cost of missing context over large spans of text. The
reduced costs result in a sliding window of W = 700 tokens, which is calculated as 2 × D where D is the
empirical average attention distance of D ∈[250, 350] tokens for an attention mechanism with uniform weights,
attending to a distance of 1024. Even with this compromise, important context may still be missed, especially in
long documents.
As a result, the method in [5] feeds LoBART with suitably preprocessed input sequences, so as to effectively
increase its context span. This preprocessing takes place separately during the training and the test stage. At
training, the input data are first passed through a content selection algorithm. This can either be an “oracle”
(ORC), which selects sentences based on the ground-truth (the ROUGE score of the selected input vs its abstract),
or a hierarchical, extractive DNN pretrained for multitask content selection (MCS). The straightforward ”ORC”
preselection keeps an average of 21.3% of sentences, drastically reducing the input’s size and leads to 56% of
the input documents being shorter than the typical BART input length of 1024. Missing sentences are padded
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
with random sentences sampled from the input document. On the other hand, MCS is a GRU-based, attention-
augmented Encoder-Decoder architecture followed by a classification layer. It employs a hierarchical design
similar to that of [105] (see Section 4.1), but in this case it is only utilized to preprocess the input document. In
order to exploit synergies between extractive and abstractive summarization, similarly to [137], MCS is jointly
pretrained (in a multitask fashion) both for predicting the ground-truth summary token-by-token and for binary
sentence classification as ”summary” or ”non-summary”.
During inference, each sentence is first scored for retention by suitably combining the two different predic-
tions (one per task) made by MCS. The top-scoring ones are fed to LoBART as the input sequence. LoBART has
been trained for abstractive summarization in the usual manner, but the two-stage content preselection stage
(explicit during preprocessing, implicit during the main summarization process) allows the method to efficiently
handle longer documents.
5.1.3.4. Combining Top-Down and Bottom-Up Inference. An innovative abstractive methodology relying on a
composite Transformer architecture is proposed in [148], aiming to facilitate the sharing of global and local
context between different token representations. This is done by allowing information to flow both from the
individual token representations to the document embedding (bottom-up) and vice versa (top-down).
The Encoder in [148] features a hierarchical approach similar to certain ones utilized for extractive summar-
ization (e.g., [113]): individual token representations computed by an initial (bottom-level) deep Transformer are
pooled in segments to form top-level embeddings of coarse granularity at a paragraph/section-level. This is the
so-called ”bottom-up” route. The preliminary top-level embeddings (one per section) are then transformed via a
separate, shallow Transformer. However, the main novelty of [148] is that these final top-level representations
are then injected to the individual token embeddings via a separate, subsequent deep”top-down” Transformer.
The latter’s layers are equipped with regular self-attention, as well as with cross-attention between the top-level
representations and the individual token embeddings. The final output token representations are attended by
the Decoder to generate the desired abstractive summary in the usual manner.
By properly adapting Sparse Attention Transformers, the bottom-level and the top-down layers are assigned
efficient local attention mechanisms only. Top-level layers can afford to be assigned full attention due to the
much smaller number of sections, compared to the number of tokens. Thus, the top-down information flow
enriches the lower-level embeddings with global context and the ability to capture long-range dependencies:
individual token representations effectively attend to aggregated global information from the entire document,
despite the local attention-only mechanisms of bottom-level layers.
The methodology is rather generic and model-agnostic, allowing it to be used with efficient Sparse Attention
Transformers. This fact and the hierarchical design facilitate exceptional summarization performance in long
documents, even at book-length texts. Exploring its applicability to other tasks, such as document classification,
is a promising research direction.
5.1.3.5. Instruction-tuned summarization. An orthogonal direction of recent research is that of supervised fine-
tuning of pretrained language models on “instruction” and corresponding ground-truth summary pairs. The
instruction is a command to summarize in natural language, followed by the long text to be summarized. The
goal is to then use, during inference, the finetuned DNN like one would use a pretrained LLM under a zero/few-
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
shot prompting mode. This can be done both with Encoder-Decoder Transformer architectures pretrained on
masked token objectives and with LLMs, which typically are Decoder-only Transformer architectures pretrained
on traditional next token prediction objectives. Both T5-based architectures [149] [150] and LLM-based architec-
tures [70] [53] [71] have recently followed this approach, typically under a multitask instruction tuning setting
where text summarization is one among multiple tasks. According to common automated evaluation metrics,
this approach typically leads to subpar summarization results in common public benchmarks, compared to SoA
dedicated summarization DNNs. However, such summaries generated from instruction-tuned LLMs can actually
be better than ones obtained from dedicated summarizers and even surpass the ground-truth ones in quality, ac-
cording to manual, subjective evaluation [151]. Although instruction-tuned summarizers tend to perform a lot
worse with long text inputs, there have been recent breakthroughs such as the Longform dataset [152], construc-
ted via diverse instruction generation methods; finetuning LLMs on Longform has recently led to good results
on various downstream tasks. Overall, this is a still an open area of cutting-edge research, where progress in
automated evaluation metrics is a crucial prerequisite for further advances (as discussed in Subsection 5.1.1).
5.1.3.6. Dealing with hallucinations. A few dedicated methods have appeared in the abstractive summarization
literature, concerned with how to reduce the appearance of hallucinations in the generated summary. Thus, these
methods are not summarizers themselves, but can be employed in conjunction with an abstractive summarization
DNN in order to improve its output.
There are two main families of hallucination containment methods: post-processing approaches and faithfulness-
aware training. In the first case, a separate DNN is appended after the summarizer and evaluates the latter one’s
outputs. An important such method is [153], where a sequence-to-sequence summarizer is followed by a scor-
ing RoBERTa model. The summarizer outputs multiple candidate summaries and the scoring model is trained
to rank the candidates according to their ROUGE evaluation score with regard to the ground-truth summary,
using contrastive learning. Thus, the two models are being trained separately in a supervised manner, while
during the test phase the scoring model predicts quality scores without access to ground-truth. The candidate
summary with the highest score is finally selected. An alternative post-processing approach [154] models the
issue as a trade-off between faithfulness to the original document and abstractiveness (in contrast to extraction),
and then attempts to generate a summary that transcends said trade-off by being both faithful and abstractive.
This is achieved by training a follow-up selector DNN to explicitly choose among a set of candidate summaries,
at different levels of extractiveness, the one that is both the most abstractive and faithful.
In contrast to such approaches, faithfulness-aware training trains the summarizer itself with additional ob-
jectives for hallucination containment. Several methods have appeared in this direction, for example focusing
on filtering the training data [155] [156]. A more recent method [157] modifies the GSG pretraining objective
of the PEGASUS architecture [145], where the employed ROUGE score is combined with the factuality metric
FactCC [124]. Downstream finetuning for summarization is also modified in three complementary ways: i) the
[MASK] token from the GSG pretraining objective is inserted into the downstream training document as well,
so that factuality knowledge acquired during pretraining is better retrained, ii) hallucinations are explicitly re-
moved from the ground-truth summaries of the downstream dataset, and iii) an additional finetuning objective,
borrowed from the contrastive self-supervised learning literature [158], encourages the summarizer to intern-
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
ally generate summary representations that are close to the embedding of the original document and away from
those of artificially constructed non-factual summaries.
An alternative method for faithfulness-aware training [159] explicitly quantifies faithfulness as the ratio of
the summary’s named entities derived from the original document. This is measured for all training documents,
with respect to the corresponding ground-truth summaries, and converted to a suitable code representation
which is given to the summarizer as a conditioning mechanism during training. During inference, the code de-
noting high faithfulness is given as input along with the test document. The method in [160] also focuses on the
consistency of named entities, attempting to eliminate hallucinated entities that do not appear in the original
document, while retaining ones that do appear in the ground-truth summary. This is achieved by incorporating
the proposed “SpanCopy” mechanism into the summarizer’s Decoder, assuming an Encoder-Decoder architec-
ture. SpanCopy directly copies in the output entities from the full-length source document and its activation is
controlled by a final classifier that decides whether the next span of text will be copied or generated in the usual
manner; thus, the method bears similarities to the PGN architecture, but operates the named entity level. The
entire DNN is trained end-to-end in a supervised manner.
A different aspect has been explored in [119], where alternative strategies by which the Decoder decides on
the exact next output token during summary generation are compared with regard to their effect on hallucin-
ations. There are various such decoding strategies, beyond the default greedy selection of the most probable
output token, which are commonly utilized in text generation tasks. The most widespread alternatives to greedy
selection are nucleus sampling [161] and beam search, with the latter one identified in [119] as the one that gener-
ates the most faithful summaries. The authors modify it to more explicitly consider hallucinations containment
in two ways: i) by internal re-ranking of the candidates, based on summarization evaluation metrics that re-
ward faithfulness, and ii) by looking ahead into the future contingent summary that can be generated based on
the current partial summary and scoring it for faithfulness; this added heuristic is incorporated into the search
process.
Overall, dealing with hallucinations in abstractive summaries is a currently very active research topic that
overlaps with factuality/constistency checking and NLI.
5.2. Extractive or Abstractive Summarization?
SoA summarization models for long texts are divided into 2 categories, abstractive and extractive summar-
izers, each with their own strengths and weaknesses.
• Extractive summarization DNNs tend to be more simple, factually consistent and have a much smaller risk
of introducing errors, since the extracted sentences come directly from the source text. However, they lack
creativity and may suffer from redundant, repeated information.
• Abstractive summarization DNNs solve the problems that extractive summarizers present, generating
more creative and diverse summaries without significant repetitions, and are also able to condense in-
formation more efficiently[162]. However, they suffer from hallucinations and lack of factual consistency,
introducing a much bigger risk of containing inaccurate information. As a result, it is more complex and
difficult to properly utilise them in practical situations.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Generally, both approaches have their strengths and SoA architectures can employ both to achieve good results.
For instance, certain recent approaches for fighting hallucinations in the abstractive case essentially attempt
to force the DNN to become more extractive. Extractive summarization DNNs seem to outperform abstractive
ones in relevancy and informativeness, however longer text input size seems to narrow that gap down. Hybrid
models seem to be the most promising avenue for long text summarization in most tasks where the human-like
element that abstractive summarizers provide is important. A thorough review and comparison of the two types
of architectures specifically for long texts can be found in [162].
6. Sentiment Analysis
Opinion mining (OM) or sentiment analysis (SA) is the extraction of polarity sentiment (positive/negative)
from a piece of text using NLP algorithms [163, 164]. It is typically approached as a particular case of text classi-
fication, although sentiment score regression is also common [67]. Thus, possible opinions are modelled either
as a set of discrete classes (e.g., ”positive”, ”neutral”, ”negative”), or as a continuous range of sentiment scores
(e.g., in the [−1, 1] range). Additionally, emotional dimensions besides polarity are occasionally considered (e.g.,
classes such as ”fear”, ”joy”, ”sadness”, etc.), potentially by relying on psychological theory (e.g., [165]). Common
use-cases mainly concern SA of short texts, such as social media posts, product reviews and online discussions,
with obvious applications in marketing and brand management [166, 167, 168] or political analysis [169, 170, 171].
For an in-depth review of SA applications, the reader is referred to [172].
SA for long texts is not the most common task, since context and tone can change throughout a lengthy
passage, making it difficult to maintain a constant sentiment. Moreover, the presence of complex language
structures and nuanced expressions in long texts can pose challenges for SA models. Additionally, in certain
domains SA is meaningless due to the typical lack of emotionally charged words (e.g., in academic articles,
medical or legal documents, etc.). However, it is important for automatic analysis of long journalistic articles,
to extract their political viewpoint, financial texts, to predict how markets will react to the presented news,
or literary books, in order to process narrative hints. For example, it can be used to determine characters’
emotional states, or for identifying key narrative points, sections and anticipated reader feelings [173]. These
predictions are potentially useful in themselves, but they can also be exploited as auxiliary input for particular
book classifications tasks (e.g., automatic genre recognition in library software).
6.1. Solutions
SA has peculiarities that distinguish it from vanilla document classification. Traditional SA algorithms rely on
“sentiment lexicons”, i.e., predefined vocabularies of words that are heavily weighed towards positive or negative
emotions. For example, words such as “good”, “bad”, “great”, “terrible”, etc. are likely candidates for inclusion
in such as lexicon [174]. Algorithms relying on lexicons and/or traditional classifiers (e.g., Naive Bayes, SVMs,
ensembles [175], etc.) were common before the advent of DNNs [176] [177]. However, texts with complicated
vocabulary often lack “simple” keywords that are included in most lexicons. In such cases, most lexicon-based
algorithms struggle to classify accurately.
As a result, long document SA has moved decisively towards DNNs in the past few years. The main body
of relevant research approaches the field as simply an instance of document classification, so the content of
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Section 4 will not be repeated here. The relevant challenges are common or analogous to those found in most
long document analysis tasks, such as prohibitive computational costs, difficulty to process long input sequences,
long-range dependencies that are hard to identify and sentiment variation across different sections or paragraphs.
For example, [178] utilizes a BiLSTM with an embedding layer and a group-wise enhancement mechanism,
which is an alternative to a “traditional” attention mechanism [179]. The group-wise enhancement mechan-
ism adjusts the significance of sub-features within specific spatial and semantic groups in the text. It employs
attention factors for each spatial position in semantic groups, allowing independent enhancement of learned ex-
pressions and suppression of noise. Inspired by [180], it utilizes feature weighting schemes on LSTM and GRU to
extract informative features. Its goal is to leverage general information from critical regions, approximating the
semantic vector for each group. It does so by dividing feature groups, obtaining global statistical features through
spatial averaging, and scaling context vectors based on generated importance coefficients. This approach aims to
refine representation and discriminative capabilities in DNNs, particularly concerning uninformative features.
SA can greatly benefit from sarcasm/figurative language (S/FL) detection [181], to a degree much greater than
vanilla document classification. Neural S/FL detection has mostly been conducted using Bi-LSTMs, GRU or CNNs
for short-to-medium length texts [182, 183], therefore integrating such approaches into document/book-level
analysis is an open challenge. An interesting avenue would be to exploit related short text semantic detectors
of high specificity (e.g., S/FL detection) at the sentence-level, given that such tools are mature [184] [174] and
are indeed being used to aid short text SA [67], aggregating their results in a hierarchical fashion to facilitate
document-level SA. However, this research direction has not been significantly exploited.
Existing deep neural methods for long text SA that offer a particular angle, compared to simple document
classification, are reviewed below. The majority of these and other similar methods have not been evaluated on
actually long documents, due to the lack of relevant public annotated datasets, but they can in principle support
them. Overall, however, long document SA is more of a near-future vision, rather than a currently blooming
field.
6.1.1. Hybrid architectures
Initial efforts tackled documents that were a few paragraphs long, instead of book-length. For example, a
composite, hierarchical deep neural architecture is proposed in [185] for classifying long user reviews (e.g., of
movies, restaurants, etc.). In order to handle polysemy, the method exploits the ”principle of compostitionality”
[186], which states that the meaning of a body of text (a sentence, a paragraph or a document) depends on the
meanings of its constituents, by using an LSTM to generate sentence-level embeddings for the entire document.
These are sequentially fed to a subsequent GRU that encodes their relations and semantics, outputting a docu-
ment representation that is classified by a final softmax layer. The GRU was explicitly selected due to its virtual
lack of an output gate, since it was deemed necessary for all available sentence-level information to be used in
the construction of the document representation. The overall architecture is trained end-to-end for classification
and receives dense Word2Vec embeddings at its input layer.
A similar method [187] combines a CNN and a bidirectional LSTM to extract the sentiment of newspaper
articles. It uses Doc2Vec [188] to pre-generate paragraph-level embeddings that form the input matrix for the
CNN. An alternative hierarchical method is presented in [189], where an initial bidirectional LSTM sequentially
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
receives word embeddings per sentence and transforms them to sentence embeddings. A second bidirectional
LSTM equipped with an attention mechanism receives the latter representations to generate a document-level
embedding in the form of a matrix, which is then fed to a final 2D CNN followed by the softmax classifier layer.
As a general statement, it can be said that such straightforward hierarchical approaches (e.g., [190]) have become
a de facto baseline in long text SA, with the recurrence of LSTMs typically exploited to handle the variable and
large number of tokens, sentences and paragraphs in long documents.
6.1.2. Sentiment Analysis with Transformers
SoA models make use of Transformers, with BERT and its variations being very commonly used for SA [35].
The employed pretrained language model is typically finetuned on the desired SA dataset. For instance, this is
how RoBERTa is utilized in [191] for SA of financial texts. However, the document-level sentiment classification
task is implemented in an ensemble learning fashion, using weighted joint prediction from multiple independent
classifiers, and then combined with a separate pipeline for key entity detection, so that specific entities (e.g.,
companies, countries, etc.) are identified in the text. Each of these entities is individually fed to an instance of an
appropriately finetuned RoBERTA model (different than the SA ensemble participants) along with the document,
in order for the DNN to predict whether each recognized entity is critical for its meaning.
7. Public Long Document Datasets
Long text analysis is not a well-explored field, particularly for document-level analysis of book-length texts
(e.g., literary fiction). As a result, compared to small text analysis, the amount of relevant public, annotated
datasets remains fairly limited. Furthermore, there is a clear imbalance with regards to the different NLP tasks;
document summarization datasets dominate the field, while long document datasets for SA are nearly non-
existent.
Traditionally, concerning document summarization, the most commonly used dataset is CNN/DailyMail
[192], featuring over 330k articles and their respective highlights, as written by journalists at CNN and the
Daily Mail. On average, each article has 781 input tokens and 56 summary (target) tokens. While the dataset is
certainly large and ships with convenient APIs [193, 194, 63], its individual articles are not be long enough for
modern long document summarization. This has not prevented its continuing use as a benchmark, for measuring
the efficiency of contemporary summarizers in short-to-medium length documents [60].
Two of the most prominent long document datasets at the time of writing are the arXiv [61] [195] and
PubMed datasets. Both are composed of scientific research articles, and are used mainly for summarization.
They feature a huge number of documents, remarkable document length and user-curated summaries in the
form of article abstracts. Their success is evident from their inclusion in many popular machine learning libraries
[196] [197] [198] [199] and from their popularity as benchmarks in current document summarization literature.
Besides these “main” datasets, many variations have been made available. For example SumPubMed [56] is a pre-
processed, curated variant of the Pubmed dataset and which aims at making summarization more challenging.
Certain datasets are notable for their focus on literary texts, rather than scientific articles which are the
subject of most commonly used long-document datasets. An example would be the Project Dialogism Novel
Corpus (PDNC dataset) [200], which comprises 22 English novels. A modern large-scale dataset for literary
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
fiction texts is also LitBank [201], a dataset of 100 English literature works that fully includes word annotations
and co-reference relations between words that belong in different groups.
Recently, two more challenging datasets have been released: BookSum [57] and SummScreen [202]. Book-
Sum covers fiction books from multiple domains in literature, including short stories, novels and plays. SummScreen
includes pairs of movie transcripts and respective human-written summaries. They both require the summarizer
to combine narrative plot events from implicit subplots, potentially progressing in parallel, forcing it to rely on
extremely long context spans and dependencies.
Other notable datasets include a subset of long texts, such as the OPUS dataset for machine translation [203],
while domain-specific datasets are crucial for domain-specific NLP algorithms, either for training or for domain
finetuning [69]. Below is a brief list of such datasets, featuring primarily long documents for classification or
summarization tasks:
• LexGLUE [98], a classification dataset containing a collection of smaller datasets of legal texts.
• ContractNLI [204], a classification dataset for document-level Natural Language Inference (NLI). Each
data point is a contract text and a set of hypotheses, with the three classes indicating whether each hypo-
thesis agrees with, contradicts or is not mentioned by the contract.
• 20 Newsgroup [64], a dataset containing approximately 20,000 Usenet newsgroup documents partitioned
evenly across 20 different newsgroups. This dataset provides a great amount and variety of data, but its
articles tend to be significantly shorter than dedicated long document datasets.
• Hyperpartisan News Detection [65], which contains documents for political standpoint classification.
This dataset contains both long and short articles, therefore a split must be performed based on the text’s
length for long document analysis.
The above-mentioned datasets are summarized in Table 2. The posted dataset statistics have been either made
available on their original citation, computed for the purposes of this article, or mentioned in other, properly
cited papers. Given that these datasets are of gigantic size, utilize different formats and present drifts due to
occasional expansions, certain sources may conflict on the exact size of these datasets.
8. Conclusions
Analyzing long documents currently presents a daunting challenge, even with the recent NLP breakthroughs.
While traditional machine learning and statistical methods provide limited functionality on these tasks, they
ultimately prove less adaptable and less accurate than modern DNNs. However, the latter ones need to face
long-standing issues, such as the curse of dimensionality, limited datasets, prohibitively large inputs and difficult
writing formats (e.g., in literary fiction).
Most major issues are common to all long document analysis tasks and currently tend to require similar solu-
tions, such as limiting the model’s vocabulary, modifying existing Transformer architectures to handle longer
input sequences, efficiently exploiting the hierarchical structure of documents and artificially augmenting the
training datasets. Task-specific solutions have also been proposed, such as using content preselection and spe-
cialized GNNs to capture long-spanning context in summarization, or passing over the input twice and using
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Name
Domain
Tasks
Documents
Average
Doc-
ument
Size
(words)
Language
CNN/Daily
Mail (bench-
mark) [192]
News Articles
Document Summarization
300K
781
English
Litbank [201]
Literature
Named Entity Recognition
100
2,000
English
PDNC [200]
Literature
(Old)
Quote Attribution, Speaker
identification
35,978
79,745
English
arXiv [61]
Academic
Document Summarization,
Text Retrieval
1.7M
8,029.19 [205]
English
Pubmed
Academic
Language Modeling, Docu-
ment Classification, Docu-
ment Summarization
19,717
4,000 [56]
English
SubPubPubmed
[56]
Academic
Document Summarization
33,772
4,227/1,578/1,891
depending
on
version
English
BookSum
[57]
Literature
Text (Narrative) Summariz-
ation
405
112,885.15 (Book-
Sum Full)
English
SummScreen
[202]
Screenplays
Document Summarization
22,503
7,605.4 (FD sub-
set)
/
6,420.7
(TMS subset)
English
LexGLUE
[98]
(only
classification
subsets)
Legal
Multiclass Document Clas-
sification
184,214
4,761.9
English
ContractNLI
[204]
Legal
Multiclass Document Clas-
sification, Natural Language
Inference
607
2,254.3
English
20
News-
group [64]
News
Multiclass Document Clas-
sification
50,139
2,036.3
English
Hyperpartisan
[65]
News
Document Classification
750,645
4,848.17
English
Table 2: Reviewed long document datasets and their properties, compared to the well-known and popular CNN-DailyMail dataset of short
texts.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Method
Addressed Issues
Details
Metrics & Preprocessing
Weighted Multi-label Classi-
fication [83]
Varying Count of Labels Per
Document, Class Imbalance
By using multi-label metrics and loss functions using weighting, effective multi-label multi-
class classifiers can be trained and accurately evaluated.
Feature Pruning [83, 1]
Dataset
Size
Computational Cost
Ruthless pruning and careful selection / sampling can significantly cut down on the com-
putational/memory costs of long documents. On the other hand, even words traditionally
considered semantically useless can be significant for a model to understand subtle gram-
matical and syntactical rules.
Sparse Attention Transformers
Sparse Transformers [92]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
By utilizing a sparse attention mechanism, and with various mathematical optimizations,
a standard Transformer can become viable at parsing entire long document inputs.
Dilated
Sliding
Window
(Longformer) [59]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Context Fragmentation
Using local self-attention with a dilated sliding window, while also allowing a limited
number of global tokens, the Longformer becomes capable of successfully parsing ever-
increasing-length documents, while keeping track of local context.
Sliding Window + Random
Selection + Global Attention
(BigBird) [60]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Context Fragmentation
Combining Longformer’s sliding window, block attention scheme and random token selec-
tion can encapsulate local and global context more efficiently while keeping computational
costs low.
Hierarchical Transformers
Hierarchical
Transformers
combined
with
traditional
networks [97, 58, 102, 103]
Transformer Input Limit
Instead of using Transformers for the entire document, they can be used to produce seg-
ment embeddings, which are then combined by traditional networks (HAN, LSTM, CNN).
Hierarchical
Transformers
with BERT (Hi-Transformer)
[104]
Global
Context
Context Fragmentation
BERT can be used to produce sentence embeddings, then document embeddings which can
be fed to new, context-aware sentence embeddings iteratively.
Hierarchical
Sparse
Trans-
formers
(ERNIE-Sparse)
[105]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Local/Global
Context
is-
sues
By using a hierarchical architecture embedded in a Sparse Transformer, ERNIE-SPARSE
imparts token representations with additional global context.
Recurrent Transformers
Recurrent Transformers [69]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Context
Fragmentation
Global Context
By keeping the context of previously inputted segments in hidden states and by utilizing re-
lative positional embeddings, the Recurrent Transformer effectively supports much longer
input sequences during inference, irrespective of training-stage sequence length.
Skimming Recurrent Trans-
formers [72]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Context
Fragmentation
Global
Context
Forward context
Forward and global context of greater quality can be obtained by passing through the input
text twice, once by peeking small text segments (skimming phase), and then by performing
a full pass (retrospective phase), fully utilizing the recurrence mechanism.
Table 3: Issues and solutions for long document classification.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Method
Addressed Issues
Details
Extractive Document Summarization
Hierarchical
Summarization
[134, 135, 113]
DNN Use for Summarization
Document Structure Under-
utilization
Traditional Encoder-Decoder DNN architectures attempt to explicitly incorporate context
and hierarchical elements to the features used by CNN and RNN/LSTM extractive models.
BERTSUM-Ext [192]
Poor
Traditional
DNN
Performance
Weaknesses
in
Sentence
Embeddings
By using BERT as Encoder and attaching stacked Transformer layers, BERT’s expressive
power leads to accurate extractive summaries.
HiStruct+ [138]
Segment/Document
Context
Loss
Under-utilization
of
Doc-
ument Structure
By encoding the hierarchical and topical structure of a document, the Transformer can
leverage more information about rigidly structured documents (e.g., research articles).
HEGEL [140]
Under-utilization
of
Document
Structure
O(n2)
Transformer
Cost
Long-span Dependencies
Encoding each document as a hypergraph under multiple different views leads to the model
being exceptionally adept at summarizing very long and rigidly hierarchical documents.
Abstractive Document Summarization
Pointer-Generator Networks
[117]
Word
Repetition
Vocabulary
Limitations
Long
Document
Compu-
tational Cost
By allowing the network to choose whether to copy the next summary word from the
source text or predict its own, the model can benefit from a significantly expanded vocab-
ulary, reduce computation costs by keeping a smaller vocabulary and bypass the word
repetition problem found in many extractive summarization models.
Sparse
Attention
Trans-
formers [59, 60, 146]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Vocabulary Limitations
By using a modified Sparse Transformer as the Encoder, the model can leverage the ex-
pressive power of Transformers on long documents.
Local Attention and Content
Selection [5]
O(n2) Transformer Cost
Long
Document
Compu-
tational Cost
Pretrained models can be used for content selection in order for a Sparse Attention model
to be fed only useful data, both in training and inference.
Table 4: Issues and solutions for long document summarization.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
document-level representations to enrich sentence-level representations in classification. The identified issues
and existing solutions are summarized in Tables 3 and 4, concerning document classification and summarization,
respectively. Overall, further investigation of hybrid and recurrent Transformer architectures, as well as of the
top-down Transformer, seem to be promising directions for near-future improvements. Incorporation of such
advances into generic LLMs is also an avenue worth exploring, along with the development of novel, improved
evaluation metrics for automatic text summarization.
While this survey focuses only on document-level analysis for long texts, it becomes apparent how attempts
at solving specific tasks can lead to solutions or insights with impact to all NLP fields. However, it is important
to note that existing SoA solutions rely on useful trade-offs and, therefore, cannot be used universally. Finally,
there is significant research potential for research into literary sentiment analysis, in collaboration with the
digital/computational Humanities community. The necessary theoretical background already exists, while the
mentioned breakthroughs in long document NLP have not been yet applied.
Automated analysis of long documents is essentially a field still in its infancy, with breakthroughs leading
to large jumps in computational efficiency and accuracy still frequent. Since 2015 neural network models have
evolved from being constrained to (occasionally artificially) small-sized documents, to being able to effectively
parse large articles and books. It is not unreasonable to expect that continuing research will help bypass most
of the current limitations within the next few years.
Acknowledgement
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union’s Internal Security Fund
under grant agreement No 101103298 (KLEPTOTRACE). This publication reflects only the authors’ views. The
European Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.
References
[1] J. Worsham, J. Kalita, Genre identification and the compositional effect of genre in literature, in: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2018.
[2] J. M. Worsham, Towards Literary Genre Identification: Applied Neural Networks for Large Text Classific-
ation, University of Colorado, 2014.
[3] D. M. Monte-Serrat, M. T. Machado, E. E. S. Ruiz, A machine learning approach to literary genre classific-
ation on portuguese texts: circumventing NLP’s standard varieties, in: Anais do XIII Simp´osio Brasileiro
de Tecnologia da Informac¸˜ao e da Linguagem Humana, SBC, 2021.
[4] A. L¨uschow, J. C. Tello, Towards genre classification in the library catalog, in: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Digital Curation Technologies (Qurator), 2021.
[5] P. Manakul, M. J. F. Gales, Long-span dependencies in Transformer-based summarization systems, arXiv
arXiv:2105.03801 (2021).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[6] N. Nabizadeh, D. Kolossa, M. Heckmann, MyFixit: An annotated dataset, annotation tool, and baseline
methods for information extraction from repair manuals, in: Proceedings of the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, European Language Resources Association, 2020.
[7] X. Chen, P. Cong, S. Lv, A long-text classification method of chinese news based on BERT and CNN, IEEE
Access 10 (2022) 34046–34057.
[8] L. Wan, G. Papageorgiou, M. Seddon, M. Bernardoni, Long-length legal document classification, arXiv
arXiv:1912.06905 (2019).
[9] R. Dale, Law and word order: NLP in legal tech, Natural Language Engineering 25 (2019) 211–217.
[10] K. Merchant, Y. Pande, NLP-based latent semantic analysis for legal text summarization, in: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics
(ICACCI), 2018.
[11] I. Mademlis, M. Mancuso, C. Paternoster, S. Evangelatos, E. Finlay, J. Hughes, P. Radoglou-Grammatikis,
P. Sarigiannidis, G. Stavropoulos, K. Votis, G. T. Papadopoulos, The invisible arms race: digital trends in
illicit goods trafficking and AI-enabled responses, Authorea Preprints (2023).
[12] M. Bayer, M.-A. Kaufhold, B. Buchhold, M. Keller, J. Dallmeyer, C. Reuter, Data augmentation in Natural
Language Processing: a novel text generation approach for long and short text classifiers, International
Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics 14 (2023) 135–150.
[13] V. Yogarajan, J. Montiel, T. Smith, B. Pfahringer, Transformers for multi-label classification of medical
text: An empirical comparison, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine, 2021.
[14] P. Bambroo, A. Awasthi, LegalDB: Long DistilBERT for legal document classification, in: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Advances in Electrical, Computing, Communication and Sustainable
Technologies (ICAECT), 2021.
[15] K. Kowsari, K. Jafari Meimandi, M. Heidarysafa, S. Mendu, L. Barnes, D. Brown, Text classification al-
gorithms: A survey, Information 10 (2019).
[16] A. Torfi, R. A. Shirvani, Y. Keneshloo, N. Tavaf, E. A. Fox, Natural Language Processing advancements by
deep learning: A survey, arXiv arXiv:2003.01200 (2020).
[17] J. Chai, A. Li, Deep learning in Natural Language Processing: A state-of-the-art survey, in: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (ICMLC), 2019.
[18] C. Schr¨oder, A. Niekler, A survey of active learning for text classification using Deep Neural Networks,
arXiv arXiv:2008.07267 (2020).
[19] Q. Li, H. Peng, J. Li, C. Xia, R. Yang, L. Sun, P. S. Yu, L. He, A survey on text classification: From traditional
to deep learning, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 13 (2022).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[20] S. Gupta, S. K. Gupta, Abstractive summarization: An overview of the state of the art, Expert Systems
with Applications 121 (2019) 49–65.
[21] D. M. E.-D. M. Hussein, A survey on sentiment analysis challenges, Journal of King Saud University-
Engineering Sciences 30 (2018) 330–338.
[22] D. E. Rumelhart, Learning internal representations by error propagation, in parallel distributed processing,
MIT press, 1986, pp. 318–362.
[23] M. I. Jordan, Serial order: A parallel distributed processing approach 121 (1997) 471–495.
[24] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haffner,
Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,
Proceedings of the IEEE 86 (1998) 2278–2324.
[25] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, ImageNet classification with deep Convolutional Neural Net-
works, Communications of the ACM 60 (2017) 84—-90.
[26] H. T. Siegelmann, E. D. Sontag, Turing computability with neural nets, Applied Mathematics Letters 4
(1991) 77–80.
[27] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long Short-Term Memory, Neural computation 9 (1997) 1735–80.
[28] K. Cho, B. Van Merri¨enboer, D. Bahdanau, Y. Bengio, On the properties of neural machine translation:
Encoder-Decoder approaches, arXiv arXiv:1409.1259 (2014).
[29] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, Y. Bengio, Neural Machine Translation by jointly learning to align and translate,
in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[30] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention
is all you need, in: Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
[31] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, J. Dean, Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[32] D. Jurafsky, J. H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing, Pearson, 2000.
[33] J. Pennington, R. Socher, C. Manning, GloVe: Global vectors for word representation, in: Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2014.
[34] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, L. Zettlemoyer, Deep contextualized
word representations, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
[35] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional Transformers
for language understanding, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[36] W. L. Taylor, “cloze procedure”: A new tool for measuring readability, Journalism Quarterly 30 (1953)
415–433.
[37] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, RoBERTa:
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach, arXiv arXiv:1907.11692 (2019).
[38] K. Clark, M. Luong, Q. V. Le, C. D. Manning, ELECTRA: pre-training text encoders as discriminators
rather than generators, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2020.
[39] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, P. J. Liu, Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer, Journal of Machine Learning Research
21 (2020) 5485–5551.
[40] M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed, O. Levy, V. Stoyanov, L. Zettlemoyer, BART:
denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation and compre-
hension, arXiv arXiv:1910.13461 (2019).
[41] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, V. Q. Tran, X. Garcia, J. Wei, X. Wang, H. W. Chung, D. Bahri, T. Schuster, S. e. a.
Zheng, UL2: Unifying language learning paradigms, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[42] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever, Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training, 2018.
[43] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners, 2018.
[44] B. Tan, Z. Yang, M. Al-Shedivat, E. P. Xing, Z. Hu, Progressive generation of long text with pretrained
language models, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2021.
[45] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton,
S. e. a. Gehrmann, PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311
(2022).
[46] G. Team, Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, arXiv preprint 2312.11805 (2023).
[47] T. L. Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, E. Pavlick, S. Ili´c, D. Hesslow, R. Castagn´e, A. S. Luccioni, F. Yvon, M. e. a. Gall´e,
BLOOM: A 176B-parameter open-access multilingual language model, arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100
(2022).
[48] S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen, C. Dewan, M. Diab, X. Li, X. V. e. a. Lin, OPT:
Open pre-trained transformer language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068 (2022).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[49] J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. de Las Casas, L. A.
Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark, T. Hennigan, E. Noland, K. Millican, G. van den Driessche, B. Damoc, A. Guy,
S. Osindero, K. Simonyan, E. Elsen, J. W. Rae, O. Vinyals, L. Sifre, Training compute-optimal large language
models, 2022. arXiv:2203.15556.
[50] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi`ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro,
F. e. a. Azhar, LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971
(2023).
[51] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding, 2019. arXiv:1810.04805.
[52] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
A. e. a. Askell, Language models are few-shot learners, arXiv arXiv:2005.14165 (2020).
[53] S. Iyer, X. V. Lin, R. Pasunuru, T. Mihaylov, D. Simig, P. Yu, K. Shuster, T. Wang, Q. Liu, P. S. e. a. Koura,
OPT-IML: Scaling language model instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.12017 (2022).
[54] OpenAI, Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
[55] M. Schreiner,
Gpt-4 architecture,
datasets,
costs and more leaked,
2023. URL: https://
the-decoder.com/gpt-4-architecture-datasets-costs-and-more-leaked/.
[56] V. Gupta, P. Bharti, P. Nokhiz, H. Karnick, SumPubMed: Summarization dataset of PubMed scientific
articles, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: Student Research Workshop, Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 292–303.
[57] W. Kry´sci´nski, N. Rajani, D. Agarwal, C. Xiong, D. Radev, BookSum: A collection of datasets for long-form
narrative summarization, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), 2022.
[58] Z. Yang, D. Yang, C. Dyer, X. He, A. Smola, E. Hovy, Hierarchical Attention Networks for document
classification, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2016.
[59] I. Beltagy, M. Peters, A. Cohan, Longformer: The long-document Transformer, arXiv arXiv:2004.05150
(2020).
[60] M. Zaheer, G. Guruganesh, K. A. Dubey, J. Ainslie, C. Alberti, S. Ontanon, P. Pham, A. Ravula, Q. Wang,
L. e. a. Yang, Big Bird: Transformers for longer sequences, in: Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2020.
[61] C. B. Clement, M. Bierbaum, K. P. O’Keeffe, A. A. Alemi,
On the use of arXiv as a dataset,
arXiv
arXiv:1905.00075 (2019).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[62] B.-C. Bjork, A. Roos, M. Lauri, Scientific journal publishing: yearly volume and open access availability,
Information Research: An International Electronic Journal 14 (2009).
[63] Hugging
Face
CNN-DailyMail
Dataset,
https://pan.webis.de/data.html#
pan-semeval-hyperpartisan-news-detection-19, nodate. Accessed: 2023-05-30.
[64] 20 Groups, 20 newsgroups, http://qwone.com/jason/20Newsgroups/, nodate. Accessed:
2023-04-30.
[65] Hyperpartisan,
Hyperpartisan
dataset,
https://pan.webis.de/data.html#
pan-semeval-hyperpartisan-news-detection-19, nodate. Accessed: 2023-04-30.
[66] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, C. Jauvin, A neural probabilistic language model, Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3 (2003) 1137–1155.
[67] D. Karamouzas, I. Mademlis, I. Pitas, Neural knowledge transfer for sentiment analysis in texts with
figurative language, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing (MLSP), 2022.
[68] T. I., Development and application of language models in Greek literature, 2020. doi:10.26262/heal.
auth.ir.323350.
[69] X. Dai, I. Chalkidis, S. Darkner, D. Elliott, Revisiting Transformer-based models for long document clas-
sification, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EMNLP),
2022.
[70] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. e. a.
Ray, Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, Proceedings of the Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) (2022).
[71] N. Muennighoff, T. Wang, L. Sutawika, A. Roberts, S. Biderman, T. L. Scao, M. S. Bari, S. Shen, Z.-X.
Yong, H. e. a. Schoelkopf,
Cross-lingual generalization through multitask finetuning,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.01786 (2022).
[72] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, Q. Le, R. Salakhutdinov, Transformer-XL: Attentive language models
beyond a fixed-length context, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2019.
[73] C. Chalkidis, M. Fergadiotis, P. Malakasiotis, I. Androutsopoulos, Large-scale multi-label text classification
on EU legislation, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2019.
[74] I. Chalkidis, M. Fergadiotis, S. Kotitsas, P. Malakasiotis, N. Aletras, I. Androutsopoulos, An empirical
study on large-scale multi-label text classification including few and zero-shot labels, Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2020).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[75] N. Zhang, Q. Jia, K. Yin, L. Dong, F. Gao, N. Hua, Conceptualized representation learning for chinese
biomedical text mining, arXiv arXiv:2008.10813 (2020).
[76] M. Khadhraoui, H. Bellaaj, M. B. Ammar, H. Hamam, M. Jmaiel, Survey of BERT-based models for scientific
text classification: COVID-19 case study, Applied Sciences 12 (2022).
[77] J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Kim, C. H. So, J. Kang, BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language
representation model for biomedical text mining, Bioinformatics 36 (2019) 1234–1240.
[78] H. Chen, L. Wu, J. Chen, W. Lu, J. Ding, A comparative study of automated legal text classification using
random forests and deep learning, Information Processing & Management 59 (2022) 102798.
[79] S. Russell, P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey 07458, 2016.
[80] C. Cortes, V. Vapnik, Support-vector networks, Machine Learning 20 (1995) 273–297.
[81] J. R. Quinlan, S.L. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Upper Saddle
River, New Jersey 07458, 1994.
[82] B. Xu, X. Guo, Y. Ye, J. Cheng, An improved random forest classifier for text categorization, Journal of
King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 7 (2012) 2913–2920.
[83] S. Liu, Z. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Sun, J. Wu, H. Zhang, DeepGenre: Deep neural networks for genre classification
in literary works, 2020.
[84] A. Onan, S. Koruko˘glu, H. Bulut, A hybrid ensemble pruning approach based on consensus clustering and
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for sentiment classification, Information Processing & Manage-
ment 53 (2017) 814–833.
[85] C.-C. Hsu, P.-C. Chang, A. Chang, Multi-label classification of ICD coding using deep learning, in: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Community-centric Systems (CcS), 2020.
[86] A. Haghighian Roudsari, J. Afshar, W. Lee, S. Lee, PatentNet: multi-label classification of patent documents
using deep learning-based language understanding, Scientometrics (2022) 1–25.
[87] Y. Kim, Convolutional Neural Networks for sentence classification, in: Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014.
[88] M. Li, D. N. Popa, J. Chagnon, Y. G. Cinar, E. Gaussier, The power of selecting key blocks with local pre-
ranking for long document information retrieval, ACM Transactions on Information Systems 41 (2023)
1–35.
[89] M. Ding, C. Zhou, H. Yang, J. Tang, CogLTX: Applying BERT to long texts, in: Proceedings of the Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 12792–12804.
[90] G. Amati, BM25, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2009, pp. 257–260.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[91] C. Li, A. Yates, S. MacAvaney, B. He, Y. Sun, PARADE: Passage representation aggregation for document
reranking, ACM Transactions on Information Systems 42 (2023) 1–26.
[92] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, Generating long sequences with Sparse Transformers, arXiv
arXiv:1904.10509 (2019).
[93] H. A. Saeed, H. Wang, M. Peng, A. Hussain, A. Nawaz, Online fault monitoring based on Deep Neural
Network & sliding window technique, Progress in Nuclear Energy 121 (2020) 103236.
[94] O. Krystalakos, C. Nalmpantis, D. Vrakas, Sliding window approach for online energy disaggregation
using Artificial Neural Networks, in: Proceedings of the Hellenic Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(SETN), 2018.
[95] K. Choromanski, V. Likhosherstov, D. Dohan, X. Song, A. Gane, T. Sarl´os, P. Hawkins, J. Davis, A. Mo-
hiuddin, L. Kaiser, D. Belanger, L. J. Colwell, A. Weller, Rethinking attention with performers, CoRR
abs/2009.14794 (2020). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.14794. arXiv:2009.14794.
[96] P.
Chen,
Permuteformer:
Efficient
relative
position
encoding
for
long
sequences,
2021.
arXiv:2109.02377.
[97] I. Chalkidis, I. Androutsopoulos, N. Aletras, Neural legal judgment prediction in English, in: Proceedings
of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2019.
[98] I. Chalkidis, A. Jana, D. Hartung, M. Bommarito, I. Androutsopoulos, D. Katz, N. Aletras, LexGLUE: A
benchmark dataset for legal language understanding in English (2021).
[99] Y. Chen, Y. Sun, Z. Yang, H. Lin, Joint entity and relation extraction for legal documents with legal feature
enhancement, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2020.
[100] I. Chalkidis, M. Fergadiotis, P. Malakasiotis, N. Aletras, I. Androutsopoulos, LEGAL-BERT: The Muppets
straight out of law school, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), 2020.
[101] L. Zheng, N. Guha, B. R. Anderson, P. Henderson, D. E. Ho, When does pretraining help? assessing self-
supervised learning for law and the casehold dataset of 53,000+ legal holdings, in: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, 2021.
[102] S. I. Khandve, V. K. Wagh, A. D. Wani, I. M. Joshi, R. B. Joshi, Hierarchical neural network approaches for
long document classification, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning and
Computing (ICMLC), 2022.
[103] D. Cer, Y. Yang, S.-Y. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John, N. Constant, M. Guajardo-Cespedes, S. Yuan,
C. e. a. Tar, Universal sentence encoder, arXiv arXiv:1803.11175 (2018).
[104] C. Wu, F. Wu, T. Qi, Y. Huang, Hi-Transformer: Hierarchical interactive Transformer for efficient and
effective long document modeling, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, 2021.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[105] Y. Liu, J. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Lu, S. Feng, Z. Feng, Y. Sun, H. Tian, H. Wu, H. Wang, ERNIE-SPARSE: Learning
hierarchical efficient Transformer through regularized self-attention, 2022.
[106] A. Onan, Hierarchical graph-based text classification framework with contextual node embedding and
BERT-based dynamic fusion, Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 35
(2023) 101610.
[107] G. A. Miller, WordNet: A lexical database for English, Communications of the ACM 38 (1995) 39–41.
[108] R. Bellman, R. E. Kalaba, On adaptive control processes, IRE Transactions on Automatic Control 4 (1959)
1–9.
[109] J. Zhang, W. Chang, H. Yu, I. S. Dhillon, Fast multi-resolution Transformer fine-tuning for extreme multi-
label text classification,
CoRR abs/2110.00685 (2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
00685. arXiv:2110.00685.
[110] S. Ding, J. Shang, S. Wang, Y. Sun, H. Tian, H. Wu, H. Wang, ERNIE-Doc: A retrospective long-document
modeling transformer,
in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, 2021.
[111] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C. G¨ulc¸ehre, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, y. Bengio, Learning phrase represent-
ations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation, Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (2014).
[112] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, Q. V. Le, Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks, in: Z. Ghahramani,
M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, K. Weinberger (Eds.), Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Inform-
ation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2014.
[113] W. Xiao, G. Carenini, Extractive summarization of long documents by combining global and local context,
in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019.
[114] C.-Y. Lin, ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries, in: Text Summarization Branches
Out, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004.
[115] M. Akter, N. Bansal, S. K. Karmaker, Revisiting automatic evaluation of extractive summarization task:
Can we do better than ROUGE?, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), 2022.
[116] M. Zhong, P. Liu, Y. Chen, D. Wang, X. Qiu, X. Huang, Extractive summarization as text matching, 2020.
[117] A. See, P. J. Liu, C. D. Manning, Get to the point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator Networks, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.04368 (2017).
[118] D. Suleiman, A. Awajan, Deep learning-based abstractive text summarization: approaches, datasets, eval-
uation measures, and challenges, Mathematical problems in engineering 2020 (2020) 1–29.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[119] D. Wan, M. Liu, K. McKeown, M. Dreyer, M. Bansal, Faithfulness-aware decoding strategies for abstract-
ive summarization, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2023.
[120] L. van der Poel, R. Cotterell, C. Meister, Mutual information alleviates hallucinations in abstractive sum-
marization, in: Proceedings of the ACL Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
2022.
[121] Y. Graham, Re-evaluating automatic summarization with BLEU and 192 shades of ROUGE, in: Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2015.
[122] E. Pitler, A. Louis, A. Nenkova, Automatic evaluation of linguistic quality in multi-document summariza-
tion, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010.
[123] A. R. Fabbri, W. Kry´sci´nski, B. McCann, C. Xiong, R. Socher, D. Radev, SummEval: Re-evaluating sum-
marization evaluation, Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021) 391–409.
[124] W. Kryscinski, B. McCann, C. Xiong, R. Socher, Evaluating the factual consistency of abstractive text
summarization, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
2020.
[125] S. Banerjee, A. Lavie, METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with
human judgments, in: Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures
for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005.
[126] T. Zhang, V. Kishore, F. Wu, K. Q. Weinberger, Y. Artzi, BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT,
in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
[127] M. Peyrard, T. Botschen, I. Gurevych, Learning to score system summaries for better content selection
evaluation, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization, 2017.
[128] O. Vasilyev, V. Dharnidharka, J. Bohannon, Fill in the BLANC: human-free quality estimation of document
summaries (2020).
[129] W. Yuan, G. Neubig, P. Liu, Bartscore:
Evaluating generated text as text generation, 2021.
arXiv:2106.11520.
[130] H. Rahimi, J. L. Hoover, D. Mimno, H. Naacke, C. Constantin, B. Amann, Contextualized topic coherence
metrics, arXiv preprint 2305.14587 (2023).
[131] P. Laban, T. Schnabel, P. N. Bennett, M. A. Hearst, SummaC: Re-visiting NLI-based models for inconsist-
ency detection in summarization, Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10 (2022)
163–177.
[132] P. Jeretic, A. Warstadt, S. Bhooshan, A. Williams, Are Natural Language Inference models IMPPRESsive?
Learning IMPlicature and PRESupposition, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[133] M. Deng, B. Tan, Z. Liu, E. P. Xing, Z. Hu, Compression, transduction, and creation: A unified framework
for evaluating natural language generation, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2021.
[134] J. Cheng, M. Lapata, Neural summarization by extracting sentences and words, in: Proceedings of the An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,
2016.
[135] R. Nallapati, F. Zhai, B. Zhou, SummaRuNNer: A Recurrent Neural Network-based sequence model for
extractive summarization of documents, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2016.
[136] W. Wang, B. Chang, Graph-based dependency parsing with bidirectional LSTM, in: Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
[137] Y. Liu, M. Lapata, Text summarization with pretrained encoders, in: Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
[138] Q. Ruan, M. Ostendorff, G. Rehm, HiStruct+: Improving extractive text summarization with hierarchical
structure information, arXiv arXiv:2203.09629 (2022).
[139] Q. Grail, J. Perez, E. Gaussier,
Globalizing BERT-based Transformer architectures for long document
summarization, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
[140] H. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Zhang, HEGEL: Hypergraph Transformer for long document summarization, in:
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2022.
[141] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Journal of Machine Learning Research 3
(2003) 993–1022.
[142] M. Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT, 2020. URL: https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.4461265. doi:10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
[143] W. Li, X. Xiao, Y. Lyu, Y. Wang, Improving neural abstractive document summarization with explicit
information selection modeling, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), 2018.
[144] S. Gehrmann, Y. Deng, A. Rush, Bottom-up abstractive summarization, in: Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2018.
[145] J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. Saleh, P. Liu, PEGASUS: Pre-training with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive
summarization, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR,
2020.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[146] M. Guo, J. Ainslie, D. Uthus, S. Ontanon, J. Ni, Y.-H. Sung, Y. Yang, LongT5: Efficient text-to-text trans-
former for long sequences, in: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAAC), 2022.
[147] G. Moro, L. Ragazzi, L. Valgimigli, G. Frisoni, C. Sartori, G. Marfia, Efficient memory-enhanced Trans-
former for long-document summarization in low-resource regimes, Sensors 23 (2023).
[148] B. Pang, E. Nijkamp, W. Kry´sci´nski, S. Savarese, Y. Zhou, C. Xiong, Long document summarization with
top-down and bottom-up inference, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), 2023.
[149] S. Victor, W. Albert, R. Colin, B. Stephen, S. Lintang, A. Zaid, C. Antoine, S. Arnaud, R. Arun, D. e. a. Manan,
Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization, in: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[150] H. W. Chung, L. Hou, S. Longpre, B. Zoph, Y. Tay, W. Fedus, E. Li, X. Wang, M. Dehghani, S. e. a. Brahma,
Scaling instruction-finetuned language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 (2022).
[151] T. Goyal, J. J. Li, G. Durrett, News summarization and evaluation in the era of GPT-3, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.12356 (2022).
[152] A. K¨oksal, T. Schick, A. Korhonen, H. Sch¨utze, LongForm: Optimizing instruction tuning for long text
generation with corpus extraction, arXiv preprint 2304.08460 (2023).
[153] Y. Liu, P. Liu, SimCLS: A simple framework for contrastive learning of abstractive summarization, in:
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, 2021.
[154] F. Ladhak, E. Durmus, H. He, C. Cardie, K. McKeown,
Faithful or extractive?
On mitigating the
faithfulness-abstractiveness trade-off in abstractive summarization, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
[155] F. Nan, R. Nallapati, Z. Wang, C. N. Santos, H. Zhu, D. Zhang, K. McKeown, B. Xiang, Entity-level factual
consistency of abstractive text summarization, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
[156] T. Goyal, G. Durrett, Annotating and modeling fine-grained factuality in summarization, in: Proceed-
ings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, 2021.
[157] D. Wan, M. Bansal, FactTPEGASUS: Factuality-aware pre-training and fine-tuning for abstractive sum-
marization, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2022.
[158] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, G. Hinton, A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual
representations, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), PMLR,
2020.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[159] H. Zhang, S. Yavuz, W. Kryscinski, K. Hashimoto, Y. Zhou, Improving the faithfulness of abstractive
summarization via entity coverage control, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2022.
[160] W. Xiao, G. Carenini, Entity-based SpanCopy for abstractive summarization to improve the factual con-
sistency, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Discourse (CODI), 2022.
[161] A. Holtzman, J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, Y. Choi, The curious case of neural text degeneration, in: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
[162] H. Y. Koh, J. Ju, M. Liu, S. Pan, An empirical survey on long document summarization: Datasets, models,
and metrics, ACM Computing Surveys 55 (2022) 1–35.
[163] W. Ahmad, M. Edalati, Urdu speech and text based sentiment analyzer, arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09163
(2022).
[164] S. Barreto, R. Moura, J. Carvalho, A. Paes, A. Plastino, Sentiment analysis in tweets: an assessment study
from classical to modern word representation models, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 37 (2023)
318–380.
[165] R. Plutchik, The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots, a fact that may
explain their complexity and provide tools for clinical practice, American scientist 89 (2001) 344–350.
[166] M. Rambocas, B. G. Pacheco, Online sentiment analysis in marketing research: a review, Journal of
Research in Interactive Marketing (2018).
[167] M. Rambocas, J. Gama, et al., Marketing research: The role of sentiment analysis, Technical Report, Uni-
versidade do Porto, Faculdade de Economia do Porto, 2013.
[168] A. Micu, A. E. Micu, M. Geru, R. C. Lixandroiu, Analyzing user sentiment in social media: Implications
for online marketing strategy, Psychology & Marketing 34 (2017) 1094–1100.
[169] J. Ramteke, S. Shah, D. Godhia, A. Shaikh, Election result prediction using Twitter sentiment analysis, in:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Inventive Computation Technologies (ICICT), 2016.
[170] M. Kaya, G. Fidan, I. H. Toroslu, Sentiment analysis of Turkish political news, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, 2012.
[171] D. Karamouzas, I. Mademlis, I. Pitas, Public opinion monitoring through collective semantic analysis of
tweets, Social Network Analysis and Mining 12 (2022) 91.
[172] Z. Drus, H. Khalid, Sentiment analysis in social media and its application: Systematic literature review,
Procedia Computer Science 161 (2019) 707–714.
[173] Y. Mori, H. Yamane, Y. Mukuta, T. Harada, Computational storytelling and emotions: A survey, arXiv
arXiv:2003.01200 (2022).
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[174] P. Mehndiratta, S. Sachdeva, D. Soni, Detection of sarcasm in text data using deep convolutional neural
networks, Scalable Computing: Practice and Experience 18 (2017) 219–228.
[175] A. Onan, S. Korukoglu, A feature selection model based on genetic rank aggregation for text sentiment
classification, Journal of Information Science 43 (2017) 25–38.
[176] B. Pang, L. Lee, S. Vaithyanathan, Thumbs up? sentiment classification using machine learning techniques,
in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
[177] B. Pang, L. Lee, A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on
minimum cuts, in: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
’04), Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004.
[178] A. Onan, Bidirectional convolutional Recurrent Neural Network architecture with group-wise enhance-
ment mechanism for text sentiment classification, Journal of King Saud University - Computer and In-
formation Sciences 34 (2022) 2098–2117.
[179] G. Liu, J. Guo, Bidirectional LSTM with attention mechanism and convolutional layer for text classification,
Neurocomputing 337 (2019) 325–338.
[180] X. Li, L. Peng, X. Yao, S. Cui, Y. Hu, C. You, T. Chi, Long Short-Term Memory neural network for air
pollutant concentration predictions: Method development and evaluation, Environmental Pollution 231
(2017) 997–1004.
[181] A. Onan, Topic-enriched word embeddings for sarcasm identification, in: Proceedings of the Computer
Science On-line Conference, 2019.
[182] A. Onan, M. A. Toc¸o˘glu, A term-weighted neural language model and stacked bidirectional LSTM-based
framework for sarcasm identification, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 7701–7722.
[183] A. Onan, Sentiment analysis on product reviews based on weighted word embeddings and Deep Neural
Networks, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 33 (2021) e5909.
[184] D. Davidov, O. Tsur, A. Rappoport, Semi-supervised recognition of sarcasm in Twitter and Amazon, in:
Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2010.
[185] D. Tang, B. Qin, T. Liu, Document modeling with Gated Recurrent Neural Network for sentiment clas-
sification, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015.
[186] F. Pelletier, The principle of semantic compositionality, Topoi 13 (1994) 11–24.
[187] M. Rhanoui, M. Mikram, S. Yousfi, S. Barzali, A CNN-BiLSTM model for document-level sentiment ana-
lysis, Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction 1 (2019) 832–847.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[188] Q. Le, T. Mikolov, Distributed representations of sentences and documents, in: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2014.
[189] Y. Mao, Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, H. Zhang,
Document-level sentiment analysis using attention-based bi-
directional Long Short-Term Memory network and two-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network, Elec-
tronics 11 (2022) 1906.
[190] P. Bhuvaneshwari, A. N. Rao, Y. H. Robinson, M. Thippeswamy, Sentiment analysis for user reviews using
Bi-LSTM self-attention-based CNN model, Multimedia Tools and Applications 81 (2022) 12405–12419.
[191] L. Zhao, L. Li, X. Zheng, J. Zhang, A BERT-based sentiment analysis and key entity detection approach
for on-line financial texts, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), 2020.
[192] R. Nallapati, B. Zhou, C. dos Santos, C. Gulcehre, B. Xiang, Abstractive text summarization using sequence-
to-sequence RNNs and beyond, in: Proceedings of the SIGNLL Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, 2016.
[193] TensorFlow
CNN-DailyMail
Dataset,
https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/
catalog/cnndailymail, nodate. Accessed: 2023-05-30.
[194] Kaggle CNN-DailyMail Dataset, https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/gowrishankarp/
newspaper-text-summarization-cnn-dailymail, nodate. Accessed: 2023-05-30.
[195] J. Gong, X. Chen, X. Qiu, X. Huang, End-to-end neural sentence ordering using pointer network, arXiv
arXiv:1611.04953 (2016).
[196] tf-datasets, TensorFlow scientific papers dataset, https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/
catalog/scientificpapers, nodate. Accessed: 2023-04-22.
[197] T. Bozsolik, Kaggle arXiv dataset, https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/
scientificpapers, 2020. Accessed: 2023-04-22.
[198] arxiv-hugging-face, Hugging Face library arXiv dataset, https://www.tensorflow.org/
datasets/catalog/scientificpapers, nodate. Accessed: 2023-04-22.
[199] pubmed-hugging-face,
Hugging
Face
library
arXiv
dataset,
https://huggingface.co/
datasets/pubmed, nodate. Accessed: 2023-04-22.
[200] K. Vishnubhotla, A. Hammond, G. Hirst, The Project Dialogism Novel Corpus: A dataset for quotation
attribution in literary texts, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05836 (2022).
[201] D. Bamman, O. Lewke, A. Mansoor, An annotated dataset of coreference in English literature, in: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), European Language
Resources Association, 2020.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
[202] M. Chen, Z. Chu, S. Wiseman, K. Gimpel, SummScreen: A dataset for abstractive screenplay summariza-
tion, 2021.
[203] J. Tiedemann, Parallel data, tools and interfaces in OPUS, in: Proceedings of the International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), European Language Resources Association (ELRA), 2012.
[204] Y. Koreeda, C. Manning, ContractNLI: A dataset for document-level natural language inference for con-
tracts, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EMNLP), 2021.
[205] C. B. Clement, M. Bierbaum, K. P. O’Keeffe, A. A. Alemi, On the use of arXiv as a dataset, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.00075 (2019).
[206] V. Wagh, S. Khandve, I. Joshi, A. Wani, G. Kale, R. Joshi, Comparative study of long document classification,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON), 2021.
[207] J. Fields, K. Chovanec, P. Madiraju, A survey of text classification with transformers: How wide? how
large? how long? how accurate? how expensive? how safe?, IEEE Access (2024).
[208] P. J. Uppalapati, M. Dabbiru, K. V. Rao,
A comprehensive survey on summarization techniques,
SN
Computer Science 4 (2023) 560.
[209] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, D. Metzler, Efficient Transformers: A survey, ACM Computing Surveys 55
(2022).
[210] Q. Fournier, G. M. Caron, D. Aloise, A practical survey on faster and lighter Transformers, ACM Com-
puting Surveys 55 (2023) 1–40.
[211] Y. Elouargui, M. Zyate, A. Sassioui, M. Chergui, M. El Kamili, M. Ouzzif, A comprehensive survey on
efficient transformers, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Wireless Networks and
Mobile Communications (WINCOM), 2023.
[212] M. Treviso, J.-U. Lee, T. Ji, B. Aken, Q. Cao, M. R. Ciosici, M. Hassid, K. Heafield, S. Hooker, C. Raffel,
et al., Efficient methods for Natural Language Processing: A survey, Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics 11 (2023) 826–860.
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Appendix
Relevant Previous Review/Survey Articles
Review
[206]
[162]
[173]
[207]
[208]
[209]
[210]
[211]
[212]
This article
Document Classification
✓
✓
✓
✓
Document Summarization
✓
✓
✓
Sentiment Analysis
✓
✓
✓
Relevant Neural Networks
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Issue Discussion
✓
✓
✓
Issue Aggregation
✓
Long Document Datasets
✓
✓
✓
LLMs
✓
✓
Table 5: Comparisons between this article and notable recent review/survey publications pertaining to long document classification or
summarization.
Despite the existence of many overview/survey articles pertaining to NLP or relevant neural architectures
(e.g., efficient Transformers), there is a distinct scarcity of recent such publications that specifically concern long
document analysis and overlap with this article (i.e., focus on classification or summarization). This section
briefly presents a selection of existing overlapping surveys and highlights the points of differentiation from this
article.
In [206], the authors present an experimental comparative evaluation of traditional text classification meth-
ods and deep neural approaches, in the context of long document classification. However, they do not cover
recent neural architectures such as efficient Transformers, public long document datasets, document summar-
ization or sentiment analysis. Thus, they do not synthesize their findings across different NLP tasks and their
article is removed from today’s SoA. In [162], a thorough survey of SoA models, datasets and metrics for doc-
ument summarization is offered, which does cover a number of early efficient Transformer architectures and
systematically extracts insights regarding open issues and potential solutions. However, it does not correlate
its findings with long document classification and does not elaborate on how the presented neural architectures
operate, while its coverage is slightly outdated as of 2024. The survey in [208] is more up-to-date regarding long
document summarization while also presenting relevant metrics and datasets in brief, but otherwise it also does
not extend to document classification and does not detail the employed neural architectures.
Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining, typically concerns short documents, such as reviews,
comments and social media posts. However, a review of modern approaches to a specific subtask of sentiment
analysis is conducted in [173], where the goal is to analyze entire literary works with respect to their story and
emotions. Due to its particular scope, at the intersection of NLP and literary analysis with a strong emphasis on
emotion recognition, this survey does not cover generic document classification or document summarization,
does not elaborate on the operation of the discussed neural architectures and does not present public long docu-
ment datasets. In contrast, [207] surveys text classification in general across multiple datasets and classification
Article published by Elsevier’s Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
subtasks (such as sentiment analysis), including in long document datasets, focusing on recent Transformer
architectures. However, it does not specialize to the peculiarities of long texts, it does not cover document sum-
marization and does not present the discussed neural architectures in-depth, as its focus is on identifying the
currently optimal method per dataset. Finally, [207] focuses on Large Language Models (LLMs) in contrast to
this article that explicitly does not, emphasizing instead task-specific efficient Transformer architectures.
A number of recent surveys/reviews focus on efficient Transformer neural architectures, regardless of the
application domain, and thus are overlapping with this article from a different perspective, given that such DNNs
can better analyze lengthy input sequences. For instance, the survey in [209] covers efficient Transformers ex-
tensively and in-depth, but does not specialize in any long document analysis task and, therefore, does not
present relevant datasets or domain-specific issues. The situation is similar for [210] and [211], although the lat-
ter’s coverage of efficient Transformers is much less extensive. Moreover, [211] does present benchmark datasets
for lengthy input sequences, but only minimally touches upon document classification. Finally, significant over-
lap exists with the neural architectures covered in [212], but that survey’s emphasis is on efficient Transformers
for NLP with limited computational resources (not on long document analysis).
While all of the above surveys/reviews overlap with this article, there is no previous effort for aggregating
and comparing the issues and challenges specifically posed by long documents across both classification and
summarization, while focusing exclusively on modern DNNs. This article attempts to expose common issues
and encourage the sharing of tried-and-tested solutions across tasks. Additionally, due to the in-depth coverage
of the presented neural architectures, it possesses a tutorial value which is lacking from the majority of related
published surveys. In summary, a simplified comparison between this article and notable recent review pub-
lications pertaining to long document classification or summarization can be found in Table 5. The row “Issue
Discussion” indicates that the corresponding paper specifically discusses open issues with long document ana-
lysis, while the row “Issue Aggregation” indicates that issues are aggregated and compared across different NLP
tasks. Only officially published articles have been included in this comparison, i.e., no arXiv-uploaded preprints.
