Title: An Interactive Tool for Natural Language Processing on Clinical Text
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.01890v2
--------------------------------------------------

An Interactive Tool for Natural Language Processing on
Clinical Text
Gaurav Trivedi
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
trivedigaurav@pitt.edu
Phuong Pham
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
phuongpham@cs.pitt.edu
Wendy Chapman
Dept. of Biomed. Informatics
University of Utah
wendy.chapman@utah.edu
Rebecca Hwa
Dept. of Computer Science
& Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
hwa@cs.pitt.edu
Janyce Wiebe
Dept. of Computer Science
& Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Harry Hochheiser
Dept. of Biomed. Informatics
& Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
harryh@pitt.edu
ABSTRACT
Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems often make use
of machine learning techniques that are unfamiliar to end-
users who are interested in analyzing clinical records. Al-
though NLP has been widely used in extracting information
from clinical text, current systems generally do not support
model revision based on feedback from domain experts.
We present a prototype tool that allows end users to visual-
ize and review the outputs of an NLP system that extracts
binary variables from clinical text. Our tool combines mul-
tiple visualizations to help the users understand these results
and make any necessary corrections, thus forming a feedback
loop and helping improve the accuracy of the NLP models.
We have tested our prototype in a formative think-aloud user
study with clinicians and researchers involved in colonoscopy
research. Results from semi-structured interviews and a Sys-
tem Usability Scale (SUS) analysis show that the users are
able to quickly start reﬁning NLP models, despite having very
little or no experience with machine learning. Observations
from these sessions suggest revisions to the interface to better
support review workﬂow and interpretation of results.
Author Keywords
Clinical text analysis; electronic medical records;
visualization; interactive machine learning.
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.2. Graphical User Interface: User Interfaces; H.5.m. In-
formation Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI): Miscella-
neous; I.2.7 Natural Language Processing: Text analysis.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are organized collections
of information about individual patients. They are designed
Paste the appropriate copyright statement here. ACM now supports three different
copyright statements:
• ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the historical ap-
proach.
• License: The author(s) retain copyright, but ACM receives an exclusive publication
license.
• Open Access: The author(s) wish to pay for the work to be open access. The addi-
tional fee must be paid to ACM.
This text ﬁeld is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement assuming it is
single spaced.
Every submission will be assigned their own unique DOI string to be included here.
such that they can be shared across different settings for pro-
viding health care services. The Institute of Medicine com-
mittee on improving the patient record has recognized the
importance of using EHRs to inform decision support sys-
tems and support data-driven quality measures [7]. One of
the biggest challenges in achieving this goal is the difﬁculty
of extracting information from large quantities of EHR data
stored as unstructured free text. Clinicians often make use of
narratives and ﬁrst-person stories to document interactions,
ﬁndings and analyses in patient cases [15]. As a result, ﬁnd-
ing information from these volumes of health care records
typically requires the use of NLP techniques to automate the
extraction process.
There has been a long history of research in the application
of NLP methods in the clinical domain [4]. Researchers have
developed models for automatically detecting outbreak of dis-
eases such as inﬂuenza [23], identifying adverse drug reac-
tions [12, 17, 13], and measuring the quality of colonoscopy
procedures [10], among others. Due to the complexity of
clinical text, the accuracy of these techniques may vary [14].
Current tools also lack provision for end-users to inspect NLP
outcomes and make corrections that might improve these re-
sults. Due to these factors, Chapman et. al. [4] have identiﬁed
“lack of user-centered development” as one of the barriers in
NLP adoption in the clinical domain. There is a need to focus
on development of NLP systems that are not only general-
izable for use in different tasks but are also usable without
excessive dependence on NLP developers. In this paper, we
have explored the design of user-interfaces for use by end
users (clinicians and clinical researchers) to support the re-
view and annotation of clinical text using natural language
processing.
We have developed an interactive web-based tool that facili-
tates both the review of binary variables extracted from clin-
ical records, and the provision of feedback that can be used
to improve the accuracy of NLP models. Our goal is to close
the natural language processing gap by providing clinical re-
searchers with highly-usable tools that will facilitate the pro-
cess of reviewing NLP output, identifying errors in model
prediction, and providing feedback that can be used to retrain
or extend models to make them more effective.
arXiv:1707.01890v2  [cs.HC]  7 Jul 2017
Figure 1. (a) The grid view shows the extracted variables in columns and individual documents in rows, providing an overview of NLP results. Below
the grid, we have statistics about the active variable with (b) the distribution of the classiﬁcations and (c) the list of top indicators aggregated across
all the documents in the dataset. (d) Indicators from the active report are shown on the right. (e) The document view shows the full-text of the patient
reports with the indicator terms highlighted. (f) Feedback can be sent using the yellow control bar on the top, or by using the right-click context menu.
RELATED WORK
During the process of developing our interactive text analysis
tool for clinical domain, we studied relevant work from mul-
tiple research areas spanning across different domains, such
as Visualization, Interactive Machine Learning and Interface
Design. We have built upon the following work in these areas
for the design of our tool.
Visualization and Sensemaking
Visualization tools such as WordTree [21] and Tiara [22] help
in providing a visual summary of large amount of text data.
While Tiara focuses on content evolution of each topic over
time, WordTree provides a keyword in context method of ex-
ploring the text. Other tools such as Jigsaw [20] help users
interpret document collections by visualizing documents in
multiple graph, cluster and list views. Our task in reviewing
clinical documents is somewhat different, in that our goals
are to understand common textual patterns and to use those
patterns to improve NLP models. We have adapted elements
of these views - in particular, WordTree’s phrase view and
Jigsaw’s document view to support our goals.
The pur-
pose of these visualizations would be to provide both detailed
document-level views and also dataset-level overviews.
Interactive Machine Learning
There have been many efforts to develop user-centric tools for
machine learning and NLP making it easier for the end users
to build models. D’Avolio et. al. [6] have described a proto-
type that combines several existing tools such as Knowtator
[16] for creating text annotations, and cTAKES [18] for de-
riving NLP features, within a common user interface that can
be used to conﬁgure the machine learning algorithms and ex-
port their results. Our present work complements this effort,
focusing instead on facilitating expert review of NLP results
and provision of feedback regarding the accuracy and com-
pleteness of details extracted from NLP data.
Other efforts have taken this idea even further to build interac-
tive machine learning systems that learn iteratively from their
end-users.
Sometimes referred to as “human-in-the-loop”
methods, these techniques involve a learning system whose
output is used by the end-user to further inform the system
about the learning task. This forms a closed loop that can be
used to build continuously improving models of prediction.
Some examples include applications in interactive document
clustering [5], document retrieval [11], image segmentation
[8], bug triaging [1] and even music composition [9]. These
successes suggest that it may be promising to use feedback to
improve machine learning models in the clinical domain.
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
We assume that the users of our tool are domain experts who
are familiar with the contents of the documents being re-
viewed, but not with machine learning.
Our approach fo-
cuses on designing interaction methods and novel data visu-
alizations for the user to interact with and correct the learning
models.
Further, while most of the focus in previous work
has been towards developing usable interaction methods with
the learning algorithms, more often in real world applications,
we ﬁnd that obtaining reliable labels for the training examples
is very difﬁcult, costly or time-consuming. In domains such
as medicine, we require the help of skilled domain experts.
Labeled data are important to support training automated sys-
tems; yet, large amounts of training data do not exist for new
use cases or for applications that may arise in the future. It is
therefore of great practical interest to develop methods for ob-
taining good quality labels efﬁciently. Such methods are even
more in need for NLP applications because it is time consum-
ing for annotators to obtain the contextual information from
the text before labeling. Lastly, we need to design techniques
for the users to review the output of the NLP models. They
should allow the users to ﬁnd errors in predictions and make
changes to build revised models. This would form a closed
loop that would allow the users to iteratively create more ac-
curate models that can be useful in their analysis.
These
requirements are summarized as follows:
R1: The tool should facilitate interactive review of clinical
text and make it easier for machine learning non-experts
to work with NLP models.
R2: Visual presentation and interactive feedback components
should facilitate the building of accurate NLP models.
This includes providing efﬁcient techniques for annota-
tion and labeling the training examples and also for pro-
viding feedback that is consistent and informative.
R3: The interactive components should support the entire in-
teractive machine learning loop - i.e. a review, feedback
and retrain cycle that can be used to revise NLP models
iteratively.
INTERFACE DESIGN
To demonstrate our tool, we have used an example dataset of
colonoscopy reports by building on work done by Harkema
et. al. [10]. They have described an NLP system to extract
values against a set of boolean variables from these reports.
We have included a subset of 14 of these variables for the
demo. Each patient record in the example dataset can include
multiple linked reports from endoscopy and pathology. We
have considered such reports together as a single document
for learning and making predictions.
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of our web-based tool. We have
also uploaded a demo video of the tool at
http://vimeo.
com/trivedigaurav/emr-demo.
In the following sections,
we describe the individual components of the tool’s user-
interface, relating to the three requirements discussed above.
Review
An interactive machine learning cycle begins with the review
step where the output from the learning model is shown to the
user. Initial models can be trained on a few hand-annotated
training examples. We have designed the following views in
our tool to help the user inspect the prediction results.
Grid View
The grid-view is a table with columns showing the 14 vari-
ables and rows representing the individual documents. Each
cell in the table shows the predicted value – true or false –
corresponding to the particular document-variable pair. This
table is scrollable to accommodate all the documents in the
dataset and extends beyond what is visible in Figure 1(a).
We also have some cells with a question mark (?), where
the model is unsure about the classiﬁcation. This might hap-
pen for one of two reasons: either the classiﬁcation algorithm
does not identify a clear answer, or the learning system does
not have sufﬁcient examples in the training data to make any
predictions as yet. Subsequent feedback may tilt the classiﬁ-
cation in either direction.
If the user hovers the mouse over a particular cell, a pop-up
appears below it that shows the prediction probability, or how
conﬁdent the learning system is in making that prediction.
For example, the probability of a particular cell being true
may be 75 percent. The grid also doubles up as a way to nav-
igate through the documents. When a user clicks on a particu-
lar cell, the corresponding document-variable pair is activated
in the all other views. The document view opens up the active
document on the right-half of the screen. The highlighted cell
in the grid indicates the currently active document-variable
pair. Whenever the user clicks on a cell, we also mark it as
visited to keep track of them. Visited cells in the grid are
denoted by an asterisk symbol (*).
An overview bar at the top of each column displays the true-
false distribution (skew) of each variable. Exact distribution
percentages are shown when the user mouses over the vari-
able name.
We have followed a uniform color scheme throughout the
tool. Everything shaded blue represents a true value while the
orange shades stand for false values. The colors were selected
from a colorblind-safe palette. In the grid view, the cells with
higher probability have a darker background color. For exam-
ple, a light blue cell indicates a low probability about a true
classiﬁcation, and a darker blue for a higher probability.
Views for displaying Keywords and Statistics
Below the grid, we have views showing statistics about the
currently active document and the variable. We show a his-
togram with a distribution of the true, false and unknown val-
ues over all the documents in the grid for the activated vari-
able. Again, to reveal the exact counts under each prediction
class, a user may hover the mouse over chart. This display is
similar to the overview bar above the grid but is more detailed
and changes dynamically when the user uses the search box
or the WordTree view to ﬁlter the document collection.
Our NLP pipeline uses a bag of words feature-set and a sup-
port vector machine (SVM) learning model for every vari-
able, but it can be extended for use with different kinds of
models and complement other existing tools as well. It works
by identifying more informative features from a document
(top terms) to make predictions. Informative terms are high-
lighted when present in the current document in the right half,
with overall distributions presented on the left-hand side of
the screen. Terms are color-coded to indicate their contribu-
tion towards assigning the value of true or false against a vari-
able, using colors from the document-variable grid. A mouse
over each top term will reveal the feature weights from the
learning system. Note that the current implementation con-
sists of only unigram features but the same idea can be ex-
tended to n-grams as well.
(a) The WordTree view provides the ability to search for and explore
word sequence patterns found across the documents in the corpus, and
to provide feedback that will be used to retrain NLP models. In this
example, we built the tree by searching for the word ‘biopsy’ and then
drilled down upon the node ‘hot’. The word tree now contains all the
sentences in the dataset with the phrase ‘hot biopsy’ in them. It allows
the user to get an idea of all the scenarios in which hot biopsy has been
used. Hovering over different nodes in the tree will highlight speciﬁc
paths in the tree the selected term.
(b) The Re-Train view lists user-provided feedback, including any po-
tential inconsistencies, and speciﬁes changes in variable assignments
due to retraining.
Figure 2. Screenshots of the WordTree and Retrain views.
Document View
On the right hand side of the tool, we show the full-text of the
reports. The linked documents from a patient record, such as
endoscopy and pathology reports are listed on the top of this
view with shortcuts to jump to any of them. The top terms,
both true and false (as seen in the grid view), are highlighted
in the document. The keyword lists document the last view
can be used to navigate through the report as well. Clicking
on a keyword from the list causes the document to view to
scroll to and highlight the ﬁrst appearance of the term in the
current document. This can also be done from the top terms
list for the variables. However, since the term list contains the
aggregate of the terms from all the documents together, there
is a chance that a particular term doesn’t appear in the open
document. When such a term is clicked the keyword will be
animated with a brief jitter to indicate that it cannot be found.
The highlighted top-terms in the document view follow the
same color scheme for true and false indicators.
Clinical reports also contain boilerplate text, or portions that
can be considered to be having no effect on the predictions.
These include de-identiﬁcation headers, footers, and report’s
template text. These portions are dimmed in gray to improve
the readability of the reports.
WordTree View
We have discussed views that provide detailed document-
level visualization of the health records. But, we still need
a visualization that could give a quick overview of the com-
plete dataset.
The WordTree [21] visualization offers a vi-
sual search tool for unstructured text that makes it easy to ex-
plore repetitive word phrases. The main advantage of using
the wordtree is that it offers a complete data-set level visual-
ization while retaining sentence level contextual information.
A wordtree for a particular keyword consists of all the sen-
tences in the dataset having that word or phrase. If one thinks
of this keyword as the root of the tree, the branches represent
the phrases that precede or follow that word. All the nodes of
the tree are built recursively in this fashion. The font size of
a particular node is decided according to the total proportion
of sentences that have it as a common starting phrase.
We have made several improvements to the original wordtree
design by Wattenberg and Viegas [21]. Their design restricts
the root phrases to be present at the beginning or the end of
a sentence. This allows the tree to grow only in one direc-
tion. We have used a modiﬁed design of the wordtree (as
proposed in [19]) to construct a bi-directional tree that can
grow in both directions. A sentence reads from left to right
with the root phrase in the middle of the tree. Ends of sen-
tences are denoted by a period (.) node. This information is
also conveyed in plain-text and numbers as a tool-tip on one
corner of the WordTree view on mouse over. These gradi-
ents are dynamically updated according the variable selected
by the user and also as the models change prediction upon
retraining. The gradients provide an insight into how the ma-
chine learning model’s prediction changes as different words
or phrases are present or absent from the documents.
To start using the WordTree view, the user must enter a key-
word or a phrase in the search bar. The tool creates a wordtree
with the search query as the root after scanning all the sen-
tences in the dataset. One can interact with the wordtree and
navigate through its branches by clicking on individual nodes
as shown in Figure 2(a). Doing this prunes the tree and drill
down into the details by adding the clicked node to be a part
of the root node along with the search term. Clicking on the
same node again reverts the view to the previous state of the
tree. The gray bar below the wordtree, shows the number
documents and and the percentage of the dataset represented
in the tree. The WordTree view also has a full-screen mode
which hides the other views in the tool when required.
We have extended the wordtree to use color-coded gradients
to encode class distribution information. Each word is painted
in a gradient, with the extent of the blue/orange color indi-
cating the percentage of active documents in the grid classi-
ﬁed as true/false, using the previously-described color palette.
The grid view is also linked to the wordtree: pruning the
branches in the tree ﬁlters the set of documents to display
in the grid to contain only those that are represented in the
tree. The document ID list on the top right of the screen and
the statistics views are similarly coordinated. If a user wishes
to read more than what is available in the tree, they could just
click on the corresponding cell in the grid to switch back to
the document view and review the complete document. In the
following section we will describe how the wordtree can be
used for providing annotations as well.
Feedback
Feedback from the user is used by the system to improve upon
the machine learning models by providing labels for docu-
ments that were previously not part of the training set, or by
correcting any misclassiﬁed documents. Useful feedback to
the machine learning helps improve the prediction accuracy
of the NLP models. A user can provide feedback by simply
changing the prediction class of a document for a given vari-
able. The learning system would then be able to use this as a
training example to learn from its features. The marginal ben-
eﬁts may be greater if a user classiﬁes a group of documents
together instead of annotating them one by one. To classify a
group of documents, we could search for a selected text span
and label all the matching documents as belonging to a certain
class. For this approach to work correctly, selected text spans
must convey consistent meanings across different usage sce-
narios in the dataset, and feedback based on these selections
should not imply any contradictory classiﬁcations.
Our prototype supports both multiple mechanisms for pro-
viding feedback and a review display that will alert the user
to any potential inconsistencies associated with them.
To
provide feedback for a particular document-variable pair, the
user can select either true or false on the yellow control bar
above the document view (Figure 1(f)). The currently active
variable from the grid is pre-selected but the control also al-
lows the user to quickly change the variable of interest by
choosing from the drop-down options or by activating a dif-
ferent cell in the grid.
Users can also provide more speciﬁc feedback by manually
highlighting relevant text spans which could support docu-
ment’s classiﬁcation. Like most other text annotators, the se-
lection span automatically moves to ends of a word boundary
if it is left hanging in the middle of a word. Multiple words
forming a phrase can also be highlighted to be sent as a feed-
back.
Since the users are free to select their own text spans, there
is a scope for the feedbacks to be inconsistent or prove to be
less useful to the learning system. As a result, we have de-
signed a feedback mechanism using the wordtree to provide
them with some guidance in selecting these spans. Here the
root phrase takes the role of the highlight span. Phrases are
added before and after the root word as the user drills down
the tree and prunes it. We believe that the wordtree may be
useful while providing feedback step for it allows the users
to give feedback on several documents together. The users
are able explore the different use cases of a phrase in all the
documents in the dataset with a single glance. It also helps
in identifying tighter and more generic feedback phrases with
its click to drill down design. If the user is able to make a
choice without having to view the complete sentence, we can
identify phrases that may be more important for the machine
learning system. The varying font sizes of the phrases pro-
vide strong visual cues about their frequency of use in the
dataset and thus encourages the users to attend to more use-
ful phrases for training ﬁrst. Further feedback for multiple
documents based on a single phrase may help avoid poten-
tial conﬂict scenarios where the user may have highlighted
similar keywords but selected different classes for feedback.
To summarize, the wordtree not only provides an overview
of the entire dataset but the provision of interacting with it
allows the users to work directly with phrases and sentences
in the dataset. It helps them to browse the data easily, send
feedback actions to the learning systems, and see results with
the help of color gradients.
All of three kinds of feedback can be submitted from the yel-
low bar present at the top of the screen that shows available
options depending on the context. For example, an option for
providing a feedback like this appears as soon as a text span is
selected in the document.
The document view also provide
a right click menu as an additional affordance for the users to
send feedback.
Re-Train
Re-training is the ﬁnal step of the interactive machine learn-
ing cycle. The Re-Train view tab keeps a count of the number
of feedbacks sent by the user and can be selected to view the
list of proposed revisions to the model (Figure 2(b)). The list
includes all three kinds of feedbacks. Clicking on the re-train
button launches the re-training process. Once the retraining is
complete, a new model is created and the system updates the
predictions in the grid and the linked views. The grid view in-
dicates all the differences between the old and the new model
predictions. One can spot these changes in bold. These cells
will also have a bold underline in the bottom. This allows the
user to identify changes made in the model as a result of their
feedback.
The Re-Train view also provides guidance for resolving po-
tentially contradictory feedback items. For example, a user
may provide a particular text span indicating that a given
document-variable pair should be set to be true, even as they
label it false in another feedback setting.
In these cases,
the system will return an error message specifying the prob-
lem, and highlight conﬂicting feedback items in red. These
items can be revised or deleted from the Re-Train view, with
red highlights disappearing when conﬂicts are resolved. An-
other conﬂict scenario involves the submission of suggested
changes that undo the effects of earlier revisions to the model.
These items are highlighted in yellow, and accompanied by an
override option that will allow the newer input to take prece-
dence over the earlier feedback.
The repeated re-training
steps allow the users to build the learning models over sev-
eral iterations.
IMPLEMENTATION AND DEPLOYMENT
The system is implemented as a client-server architecture
with communication over HTTP(S) using JSON. The user-
interface has been built using the Angular (angularjs.org),
D3 [2] and jQuery (jquery.com) javascript frameworks and
libraries. The NLP learning system manages the model build-
ing and is deployed as a Tomcat Server Application. The tool
incorporates several other open-source libraries and pack-
ages, a list of which is available along with the source code at
request.
USER STUDY
We conducted a formative user study to gain insight into us-
ability factors of the tool that may be associated with errors
or confusion, and to identify opportunities for improvement
via re-design or implementation of new functionality.
Participants
We adopted a snowball sampling technique starting with clin-
icians identiﬁed by our colleagues to recruit participants for
the user study. We conducted a total of 4 (+1 pilot) studies
lasting between 60 to 90 minutes. Our participants worked as
both clinicians and clinical researchers and had at least an MD
degree. All participants were experienced with both clinical
text and the colonoscopy procedures. Their positions varied
from research faculty members to physician scientists. Three
out of the four participants had between 5-10 years of ex-
perience in that position. They had limited experience with
machine learning algorithms with average self-reported pro-
ﬁciency being 5.0 on a scale of 1 to 10 (Individual ratings:
2, 5, 6, 7), where 1 is for “No knowledge at all”, 5 – “Some
idea about the algorithms”, and 10 being “Can read and un-
derstand current research”.
The pilot study helped us with some initial comments about
the tool. This was done to identify any unnoticed bugs in our
software prototype or any problems with our study protocol.
Since we followed the same protocol in the pilot study as well
and ﬁxed only a couple of minor problems with the tool after
it, we have also included its results with the rest of the studies.
Study Protocol
We began with a pre-study survey to gauge background infor-
mation about the participants and their expectations from the
tool. We gave a short 15-minute walkthrough of the interface
before handing over the control to them. During the study,
the participants were asked review documents using the tool,
and revise NLP predictions by providing feedback wherever
required. We asked the participants to work and build mod-
els for only one of the variables – biopsy, indicating whether
or not the report discussed a sample biopsy. Actual interac-
tions with the tool lasted between 20-30 minutes for the 4
studies but was longer for the pilot. The participants worked
with 280 documents for providing feedback for a model built
against a set of 30 hand-annotated documents. We followed
the “think aloud” method to record their comments and re-
actions while using the tool. Sessions were conducted over
web-conferencing software, which was also used to capture
audio, screen content, and mouse interactions. At the end of
the study, we asked users to complete the System Usability
Scale [3] and to answer some questions regarding their un-
derstanding of the tool.
Results
System Usability scale
We used the System Usability Scale consisting of 10-
questions on a 5-point Likert scale to help get a global view of
Category
Recommendation
Workﬂow
1. Allow sorting (or ﬁltering) of the documents in the
grid based on the prediction probabilities. This would
make it easier for the users to prioritize documents to
review.
2. Add a button to open the next-in-line document for
review.
The order may be decided either trivially
based on ID number or by using an active learning ap-
proach. This would save the users to navigate through
the grid when they don’t have their own strategy for
selecting documents for review.
WordTree
1. Change the layout of the tool to show the WordTree
view along with the document view. This would al-
low the user to quickly go through the full report text
when the wordtree tree is unable to provide sufﬁcient
contextual information.
2. Allow selection of multiple branches in the tree to
give feedback on multiple paths in the tree at once.
Feedback
1. Provide a feedback mechanism to specify that a text
span does not indicate either of the classes.
This
would allow the user to remove non-informative but
possibly misleading features in re-training.
Re-Training
1. Perform auto-retraining in the background when a
sufﬁcient number of feedback items have been pro-
vided by the user.
2. Provide a built-in mechanism to validate and generate
a performance report for the current model against a
held-out test set.
Table 1. Summary of recommendations inferred from the user study for
improving the interface design.
subjective assessments of usability. The average SUS score
was 70.5 out of 100. Individual scores are provided in Ta-
ble 2.
Semi-structured interviews after the study
We classiﬁed the collected observations from the think-aloud
sessions and comments from the semi-structured interviews
into four categories: 1) Workﬂow: Comments and obser-
vations as the participants navigated through the documents
for review, 2) WordTree: While selecting search queries and
browsing the wordtree, 3) Feedback: While providing feed-
back to the learning system, and 4) Re-training: Upon seeing
changes after re-training. Some of these comments also in-
clude requests for new features by the participants which are
also summarized in Table 1.
• Workﬂow: Participants used the grid view to select doc-
uments of interest and the document view to navigate
through the text. They found this part of the workﬂow to be
tedious. Some participants requested a “Next” button that
could be used to quickly move to a new document, instead
of clicking on the cells in the grid. However, one of the
participants also provided a contrasting view, expressing
appreciation for the ﬂexibility offered by the tool in select-
ing the documents for labeling. They also made use of the
color shades representing the prediction probability num-
bers to prioritize documents for inspection. They requested
a sort feature in the grid view that could arrange the docu-
ments according to these probability scores as well.
#
Question
Strongly
Disagree
Disagree
Neither
Agree
Strongly
Agree
1.
I think that I’d like to use this system frequently
0
1†
0
3
1
2.
I found this system unnecessarily complex
0
3
2
0
0
3.
I thought the system was easy to use
0
0
0
5
0
4.
I think that I’d need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system
1
2
0
2
0
5.
I found the various functions in this system were well integrated
0
1
0
4
0
6.
I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system
3
1
1
0
0
7.
I’d imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly
0
0
1
3
1
8.
I found the system very cumbersome to use
1
4
0
0
0
9.
I felt very conﬁdent in using the system
0
0
1
3
1
10.
I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system
0
3
0
2
0
Table 2. Frequency of responses used for SUS score [3] calculation with 5 participants. Average SUS score was 70.5. a) We received poorer scores for
questions about the learnability of the tool (Q4, Q10) as we were only able to provide a limited walkthrough of the interface to our participants due to
time constraints. The participants acknowledged we could have done better if we were to spend more time on it. b) †When asked whether they would
use the system frequently, the participant remarked that he gave a low score because he did not see the methods being directly useful in his current
work.
• WordTree: Perceptions about the wordtree were mixed.
Some concerns regarding the wordtree appear to stem from
the tabbed display that makes the user choose between the
document view and the wordtree. While all participants
found the wordtree to be a faster way to provide feedback,
they felt that providing the feedback without being able to
see the full document text at the same time might be error-
prone. Although we were able to provide sentence long
phrases in the tree and to show links to the full text of the
relevant documents in the grid view, the participants were
in favor of having a quicker way to access the complete
reports. We have proposed a re-design to address this con-
cern for future work. Our proposed redesign includes a
provision for the user to make the WordTree view pop-out
from its tab so that it can be used with the document and
the grid views simultaneously.
Participants discovered an unexpected use case for this
view. In addition to giving feedback, the wordtree allowed
users to verify the quality of their models. This was a con-
sequence of the gradient colors in it, which showed how
the presence of individual keywords affect the classiﬁca-
tion of documents. By looking at how the gradient colors
changed for the different keywords, the user could under-
stand how well the model performed in predicting the val-
ues depending on the phrases contained in the document.
A common problem was that the users left the wordtree’s
search ﬁlter on even after they were done using it. The tool
would ﬁlter the documents in the grid as the users navi-
gated through the wordtree but would forget to clear it for
the next round of analysis.
• Feedback:
Physicians indicated that they were accus-
tomed to thinking in terms of rules suggesting a direct link
between the feature and classiﬁcation rather than the prob-
abilistic associations used in our tool. As a result they were
unsure at times about assigning a classiﬁcation for a text
span that serves as indicator in most but still not all of the
cases. We address this problem in tool’s design by encour-
aging models to be built iteratively. The user need not fo-
cus on building a completely accurate model at once but
has an option to reﬁne it for more speciﬁc cases in the fu-
ture iterations. From the user study, however, we could not
recommend any further design improvements that could
make the users more comfortable with this workﬂow.
One missing feature pointed out by the users was the abil-
ity to select a phrase and say that it didn’t contribute to-
wards the classiﬁcation of the documents, when it was be-
ing picked either as a true or a false feature by the learn-
ing system.
Otherwise the participants found the tool’s
features very usable for sending feedback to the machine
learning system.
• Re-Training: We had suggested that participants could
build as many models as they like, which led them to
have doubts about the optimal frequency of retraining. Fu-
ture work may use NLP metrics to automatically determine
when to retrain. The participants indicated that they were
pleased to see the grid show changes in predictions after
their feedback. Another suggestion was to provide a built-
in option to test their model against a held-out hand anno-
tated testing set.
Overall we received very encouraging responses from the par-
ticipants. Four out of ﬁve (including the pilot) expressed in-
terest in having the tool made available for their own work
right away. The remaining participant was not involved in any
research involving study clinical text. During the pre-study
interview, we asked participants about their ideas on such a
tool before showing our prototype. One of the participants
who is actively working on related colonoscopy research re-
quested features like a web-based interface for collaborating
with people who are at geographically separated locations,
ﬂexibility in selecting documents to annotate, and a feedback
mechanism for NLP. Our prototype tool was able to satisfy
his needs in all of these aspects.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The initial feedback from the usability study provided both
preliminary validation of the usability of the tool and guid-
ance for improving the design of the tool. While we have
not identiﬁed any major hurdle that would require a compre-
hensive re-design of any interface component, there are sev-
eral extensions to the current set of features we believe might
improve usability and will be promising in future work (Ta-
ble 1).
One of the aims of this project was to explore the feasibil-
ity of using interactive review as a means of lowering the
training requirements. We hypothesize that the manual re-
view supported by this tool will enable rapid convergence on
highly accurate models even by starting with smaller train-
ing sets. Testing this out in a statistically compelling manner
has been left for a future empirical evaluation study.
This
would involve observing efﬁciency measures such as overall
time spent and accuracy measures like F-Measure etc. un-
der different variations of the tool. We may control the tool’s
presentation capabilities, types of feedback allowed and the
number of training documents as the independent variables
during this study. Another promising future direction would
be to evaluate the use of the tool by several users in a collab-
orative work setting.
CONCLUSION
Despite the promising results shown by repeated studies in-
volving NLP on clinical records, the beneﬁts of NLP are
all too often inaccessible to the clinicians and practitioners.
Moreover, we have seen from previous studies that extracting
structured insights from clinical text is hard. Although NLP
techniques work well they have been put into limited use by
the researchers in the ﬁeld. In particular, without access to
usable tools for clinicians that can make it easier for them
to review and revise NLP ﬁndings, it is difﬁcult apply these
techniques.
We have built a candidate tool to help address these problems.
The interactive components of the tool along with novel vi-
sualization techniques support the entire interactive machine
learning cycle with review, feedback and retraining steps. We
conducted a user-study with prospective users as study par-
ticipants to validate our design rationales. We also identiﬁed
opportunities for improvement that will be addressed before
we move forward with an empirical evaluation of the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our user study participants. We would also like
to thank Dr. Ateev Mehrotra for providing the colonoscopy
reports dataset. This research was supported by NIH grant
5R01LM010964.
REFERENCES
1. Amershi, S., Lee, B., Kapoor, A., Mahajan, R., and Christian, B. Cuet:
Human-guided fast and accurate network alarm triage. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2011), 157–166.
2. Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V., and Heer, J. D3: Data-driven documents. IEEE
Trans. Visualization & Comp. Graphics (Proc. InfoVis) (2011).
3. Brooke, J. SUS: a quick and dirty usability scale. In Usability evaluation in
industry, P. W. Jordan, B. Weerdmeester, A. Thomas, and I. L. Mclelland, Eds.
Taylor and Francis, London, 1996.
4. Chapman, W. W., Nadkarni, P. M., Hirschman, L., D’Avolio, L. W., Savova,
G. K., and Uzuner, O. Overcoming barriers to NLP for clinical text: the role of
shared tasks and the need for additional creative solutions. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association 18, 5 (2011), 540–543.
5. Chau, D. H., Kittur, A., Hong, J. I., and Faloutsos, C. Apolo: Making sense of
large network data by combining rich user interaction and machine learning. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’11, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 167–176.
6. D’Avolio, L. W., Nguyen, T. M., Goryachev, S., and Fiore, L. D. Automated
concept-level information extraction to reduce the need for custom software and
rules development. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 18,
5 (2011), 607–613.
7. Dick, R. S., Steen, E. B., Detmer, D. E., and Institute of Medicine (U.S.).
Committee on Improving the Patient Record. The computer-based patient record:
an essential technology for health care. National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C, 1997.
8. Fails, J., and Olsen Jr, D. Interactive machine learning. In Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, ACM (2003), 39–45.
9. Fiebrink, R., Cook, P. R., and Trueman, D. Human model evaluation in interactive
supervised learning. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 147–156.
10. Harkema, H., Chapman, W. W., Saul, M., Dellon, E. S., Schoen, R. E., and
Mehrotra, A. Developing a natural language processing application for measuring
the quality of colonoscopy procedures. JAMIA 18, Supplement (2011), 150–156.
11. Heimerl, F., Koch, S., Bosch, H., and Ertl, T. Visual classiﬁer training for text
document retrieval. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on
18, 12 (2012), 2839–2848.
12. Iyer, S. V., Lependu, P., Harpaz, R., Bauer-Mehren, A., and Shah, N. H. Learning
signals of adverse drug-drug interactions from the unstructured text of electronic
health records. AMIA Summits Transl Sci Proc 2013 (2013), 83–87.
13. Melton, G. B., and Hripcsak, G. Automated Detection of Adverse Events Using
Natural Language Processing of Discharge Summaries. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 12, 4 (2005), 448–457.
14. Nadkarni, P. M., Ohno-Machado, L., and Chapman, W. W. Natural language
processing: an introduction. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association 18, 5 (2011), 544–551.
15. Nair, V., Kaduskar, M., Bhaskaran, P., Bhaumik, S., and Lee, H. Preserving
narratives in electronic health records. In Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
(BIBM), 2011 IEEE International Conference on (Nov 2011), 418–421.
16. Ogren, P. V. Knowtator: a prot´eg´e plug-in for annotated corpus construction. In
Proceedings of the 2006 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology,
Association for Computational Linguistics (Morristown, NJ, USA, 2006),
273–275.
17. Ramirez, E., Carcas, A. J., Borobia, A. M., Lei, S. H., Pinana, E., Fudio, S., and
Frias, J. A pharmacovigilance program from laboratory signals for the detection
and reporting of serious adverse drug reactions in hospitalized patients. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. 87, 1 (Jan 2010), 74–86.
18. Savova, G. K., Masanz, J. J., Ogren, P. V., Zheng, J., Sohn, S., Kipper-Schuler,
K. C., and Chute, C. G. Mayo clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction
System (cTAKES): architecture, component evaluation and applications. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association 17, 5 (2010), 507–513.
19. Shrikumar, A. A quick-and-dirty wordtree visualization in JS, HTML and SVG.
https://github.com/silverasm/wordtree, 2011.
20. Stasko, J., G¨org, C., and Liu, Z. Jigsaw: Supporting investigative analysis through
interactive visualization. Information Visualization 7, 2 (Apr. 2008), 118–132.
21. Wattenberg, M., and Viegas, F. B. The word tree, an interactive visual
concordance. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14, 6
(2008), 1221–1228.
22. Wei, F., Liu, S., Song, Y., Pan, S., Zhou, M. X., Qian, W., Shi, L., Tan, L., and
Zhang, Q. Tiara: A visual exploratory text analytic system. In Proceedings of the
16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, KDD ’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010), 153–162.
23. Ye, Y., Tsui, F. R., Wagner, M., Espino, J. U., and Li, Q. Inﬂuenza detection from
emergency department reports using natural language processing and bayesian
network classiﬁers. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
(2014).
