Title: Suggesting Relevant Questions for a Query Using Statistical Natural Language Processing Technique
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.12069v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
ICEI-2022 
1 
 
0000-0000 /00 $00.00+.00 
© 2022 xxx Publishers 
 
Suggesting Relevant Questions for a Query Using Statistical Natural 
Language Processing Technique 
Shriniwas Nayaka, Anuj Kanetkara, Hrushabh Hirudkara, Archana Ghotkara , Sheetal Sonawanea and 
Onkar Litakea 
a Computer Engineering, SCTR’s Pune Institute of Computer Technology, Pune, India 
 
Abstract: Background: Suggesting similar questions for a user query has many applications ranging 
from reducing search time of users on e-commerce websites, training of employees in companies to 
holistic learning for students. The use of Natural Language Processing techniques for suggesting similar 
questions is prevalent over the existing architecture. Mainly two approaches are studied for finding text 
similarity namely syntactic and semantic, however each has its draw-backs and fail to provide the 
desired outcome. In this article, a self-learning combined approach is proposed for determining textual 
similarity that introduces a robust weighted syntactic and semantic similarity index for determining 
similar questions from a predetermined database, this approach learns the optimal combination of the 
mentioned approaches for a database under consideration. Comprehensive analysis has been carried out 
to justify the efficiency and efficacy of the proposed approach over the existing literature. 
● 
Objective: This study tries to improve the selection and rejection ability for query recommendation 
system using a novel statistical method 
● 
Method: This paper proposes a novel method to suggest similar queries for a user input query, by 
optimally combining syntactic and semantic similarity techniques, by calculating weighted arithmetic 
mean. The weight is data dependent and is calculated by the system.   
● 
Results: Experimental results on 50K+ queries suggest that proposed novel method of combining 
syntactic and semantic systems is able to select similar queries as well as reject dissimilar ones, 
performing better than standalone syntactic or semantic systems.  
● 
Conclusion:  The comparison of syntactic and semantic approaches presented in the article helps to 
understand that both the methods suffer from drawbacks as discussed in the article, making the 
independent use of a single approach unsatisfactory. It can be learnt that a technique that combines 
both syntactic and semantic approaches performs better than the any standalone system. This 
Statistical method helps the user to interact with any machine in natural language with greater 
efficacy and ease. 
A R T I C L E  H I S T O R Y 
Received: 29 September 2021 
Revised: 11 November 2021 
Accepted: 3 Februrary 2022 
 
DOI:  
Keywords: Syntactic Similarity, Semantic Similarity, Information Retrieval, Weighted Mean, Natural Language 
Understanding, Doc2Vec Deep Learning Model
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
In today’s world where Artificial Intelligence is 
ubiquitous, NLP (Natural Language Processing) as a sub 
domain has been able to prove its importance and wide range 
of applicability. NLP helps humans to interact with machines 
and receive responses from the machine that create an illusion 
of interacting with a human. Almost every field today 
involves some form of interaction between humans and 
machine, if this interaction is carried out in natural language 
or day to day language then it leads to greater comfort, the 
usability of the system increases and leads to a better and 
efficient interaction. Following is the structure of the rest of 
the paper. Section 2 surveys the related work. Section 3 
indicates the different methods followed. Section 4 present the 
experimental setup. Section 5 explains our results. Section 6 
lists the applications. Section 7 presents the conclusion of the 
paper. 
1.1. Motivation 
Lot of tasks in NLP are based on similarity [1] of sentences. 
In applications like document classification [2], plagiarism 
[3], summarization [4], sentiment analysis [5], question 
answering [6] similarity plays an important role. Mainly two 
similarity approaches have been discussed over the existing 
literature, namely syntactic [7] and semantic [8]. The syntactic 
approach computes similarity on word level similarity, 
whereas semantic approach computes similarity based on 
meaning of words present in text. These approaches have 
certain draw-backs as discussed in the literature further which 
suggest that either cannot serve the purpose of suggesting 
similar questions when used independently.  
2    ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No. 0 
 
Nayak  et al. 
In today’s technologically advancing world, getting answers 
for questions, general or specific is very important to the 
development of the user and as a result, development of the 
overall community eventually. Thus, this article proposes to 
find the relevant questions to a query entered by the user using 
a combined syntactic and semantic approach that determines 
the optimal weight to be as-signed to an approach using a 
statistical rank-based technique. to solve doubts thereby 
enhancing knowledge of the user as compared to a standalone 
approach.  
2. RELATED WORK 
Textual Similarity approaches is broadly classified into two 
types Syntactic and Semantic Similarity. Syntactic Similarity 
deals with just the words of the sentences without going into 
its meaning for example Cosine Similarity and n-grams, 
whereas Semantic similarity takes the meaning of the words 
into consideration for example Knowledge Based Similarity 
[9]. Syntactical Similarity is understood by studying its 
methods such as n-grams syntactical similarity which 
computes the similarity between two sentences using Tree 
Edit Distance and Cosine similarity which computes the 
similarity using the cosine formula [10]. Semantic Similarity 
is studied in two parts. But first we need to understand what 
Semantic similarity is and why it is required. We then look at 
the basic Semantic Similarity approaches which are Corpus 
Based and Knowledge Based Similarity. Corpus Based and 
Knowledge Based Similarity are used for Semantic Similarity 
by using techniques such as Point wise Mutual Information 
and Latent Semantic Analysis [11] [12]. We then look at a 
Semantic similarity approach which uses a concept from 
Syntactic similarity. The method 
is Sparse Vector 
Densification method which uses Cosine Similarity by 
making some changes to its formula and changing the vectors 
in which data is stored [13]. We then look at a new and better 
way for Semantic Similarity which is a combination approach. 
The approach uses LSA with WordNet knowledge set to per-
form Semantic Similarity. It compares the words according to 
the eight defined rules which helps in similarity calculation 
using LSA. This provides a better and efficient way for 
Semantic Similarity which is shown by its results in English 
and Spanish language [14]. Till now we have discussed 
Syntactic and Semantic similarity separately. But there is also 
a combined approach for syntactic and semantic similarity 
that uses a tree kernel based approach for combining the two 
approaches [15]. A method that calculates a weighted mean of 
similarity scores calculated by using both the approaches has 
also been introduced. However, the mentioned articles present 
the results obtained with different combinations but no 
comment on selecting the best combination is made. The 
choice of the same is to be done manually, this process is 
tedious and lengthy. This article aims at bridging this gap by 
suggesting a method that self learns the optimal combination 
of syntactic and semantic methods [16]. 
3. METHODS 
This sections provides a detailed discussion on syntactic and 
semantic approaches and compares them. This section also 
introduces the methodology proposed for learning the optimal 
combination of syntactic and semantic approaches. 
3.1. Syntactic Similarity Approach 
Syntactic similarity approach is based on the word level 
similarity. Given a query or block of text to be compared with 
another, this approach finds the number of common words 
occurring in both and assign a similarity score based on the 
same. Cosine similarity approach has been used in this article. 
Given a query or block of text it is first preprocessed. 
Preprocessing includes removing punctuation, converting all 
words to lower case, removing stop words i.e. removing 
words which carry very less or no significance, example of 
such words are ”a”, ”the”, ”is” amongst others. After this basic 
preprocessing tokenization and stemming [17] is performed. 
This helps to represent the text as a vector. Both the given text 
from database and the user input text are represented as 
vectors. The cosine similarity formula is used to determine the 
similarity amongst these two vectors.  
 
( )



=
=
=
=
=
n
i
i
n
i
i
n
i
i
i
e
t
e
t
e
t
te
e
t
1
2
1
2
1
)
(
)
,
cos(
 
(1) 
The similarity score ranges from 0 which represents no 
similarity and such vectors are called as orthogonal vectors to 
1 which represents complete similarity and such vectors are 
known as perfectly aligned vectors.  
3.1.1. Time Complexity Analysis of Syntactic Approach: 
The time complexity analysis of syntactic approach includes 
the time required for preprocessing and the time required for 
computing the similarity using equation 1. The time 
complexity is calculated considering that there are n queries 
in the database and similarity is to be computed with respect 
to a single user input query. Time complexity required for 
each step namely punctuation removal, lower case 
conversion, tokenization and stop words removal is O(n), 
where n represents the number of queries in the database. The 
time complexity required for the process of stemming is O(K) 
[18]. Similarity score computation using cosine formula is 
done in constant time and time complexity can be represented 
as O(K1) This process id repeated for n queries in the data set. 
The overall time complexity for the syntactic similarity 
approach is represented in equation 2.  
TC(S1) = n ∗ (4 ∗ n + K + K1) = O(n2 ) 
(2) 
Where S1 stands for Syntactic System, n represents the 
number of queries in the database 
3.2. Semantic Similarity Approach 
Semantic similarity tries to find the similarity score based on 
the meaning of the words in the query or text. The model used 
for this purpose is Doc2Vec [19], the underlying model is 
Word2Vec [20]. Word2Vec is implemented using two main 
methods namely continuous bag of words and the the skip 
gram model [21], in this article the continuous bag of words 
model is used. The Doc2Vec model is an extension of the 
Word2Vec model wherein a vector contains numeric 
representation of the document. Distributed Memory version 
of Paragraph Vector (PV-DM) has been considered. This 
method tries to find out words which are missing from the 
context, it adds these words and then uses cosine similarity 
method to generate a similarity score. This method involves 
creating set of all words that appear in the document which is 
referred as list of unique words. This list helps the word2vec 
model to learn associations efficiently.  
3.2.1. Time Complexity Analysis of Semantic Approach: 
Suggesting Relevant Questions for a Query Using Statistical NLP Technique 
ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No.0   
The time complexity analysis of the semantic approach 
includes the time required for preprocessing and finding the 
semantic similarity score. The time complexity required for 
each step namely punctuation removal, lower case 
conversion, tokenization, and stop words removal is O(n), 
where n represents the number of queries in the database. The 
time required for calculating the similarity score can be 
represented as O(g(V))(V)) [22], where n represents the 
number of queries in the database and V represents the size of 
the word list created containing unique words. This process is 
repeated for every query in the database. The overall time 
complexity of the semantic approach is represented in 
equation 3. 
TC(S2) = n ∗ (n ∗ log(V) + 4 ∗ n) = O(n2 ∗ log(V)) 
(3) 
Where S2 stands for Semantic System, n represents the 
number of queries in the database and V represents the size of 
unique word list created. 
3.3. Comparison of Syntactic and Semantic Approach: 
Both the approaches discussed earlier suffer from certain 
drawbacks as discussed further. Both the approaches were 
implemented on a database with about thirty two thousand 
queries. Analysis regarding the distribution of frequency of 
queries with respect to the similarity percentage is presented. 
Figure 1 represents the distribution by using semantic 
approach and figure 2 represents the same using semantic 
approach. It can be learnt from the figures that syntactic 
approach represents majority of the vectors as near orthogonal 
vectors whereas semantic approach does not. It can be inferred 
that it is easier to decide a similarity threshold for syntactic 
approach as compared to semantic approach. 
 
Fig. (1). Similarity Score Bar Graph using Syntactic 
Approach 
 
Fig. (2). Similarity Score Bar Graph using Semantic 
Approach 
 
The summary of the comparative analysis of both the 
similarity approaches can be studied with respect to these 
points 
Performance: 
Syntactic 
system 
requires 
less 
computational power whereas semantic system may require a 
Graphics Processing Unit for interactive usage Drawbacks: 
Syntactic system represents a considerable majority of queries 
as orthogonal vectors which may result into deletion of 
semantically similar queries, for example” What is your age?” 
and” How old are you?” are represented as orthogonal vectors 
even though they mean the same. On the other hand, Semantic 
system has poor rejection ability, consider two sentences 
“How to read string in java” and “Syntax to read text in 
python”, in an application focusing on helping new learners to 
study only one programming these two sentences should be 
considered dissimilar. A semantic system would categorize 
them as almost co-linear vectors due to similar meaning, 
indicating that at times semantic system lacks ability to reject 
dissimilar sentences. Syntactic system has poor acceptance 
rate and Semantic system has poor rejection rate, proposed 
algorithm overcomes these drawbacks. Syntactic system is 
better suited for key word intensive queries and Semantic 
system will provide better performance on queries involving 
natural language. 
3.4. Self Learning Combination Approach: 
 
To overcome the drawbacks of both the approaches 
mentioned above and to use the benefits of both a combined 
approach can be used. Using both the approaches similarity 
score is calculated and to obtain the final similarity score 
weighted arithmetic mean of these scores is calculated. The 
proposed approach learns this optimal weights to be assigned 
to each of the methods using a rank based approach. This 
eliminates the need of manually selecting the best weight and 
helps to efficiently combine both the approaches. The 
combination of the approaches has been represented in 
equation 4. 
 
Combined_simalarity = λ ∗ S1 + (1 − λ) ∗ S2 
(4) 
4    ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No. 0 
 
Nayak  et al. 
 
Where S1 represents similarity score calculated using 
Syntactic approach and S2 represents similarity score 
computed using Semantic approach. 
 
The value of λ ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, as can be learnt from 
equation 4 when the value of λ is 0.0 the system behaves as 
completely semantic and when λ is equal to 1.0 the system is 
behaves as a standalone syntactic system. The optimal value 
of λ will differ for each database, it depends on the type of 
queries present in the database. If the queries are key word 
intensive then the value of λ will tend to shift towards 1.0 and 
if the queries present the use of natural language then λ will 
be close to 0.0. 
 
The proposed approach receives list of queries from the 
database with ranks provided to them by an admin with 
respect to one user input query. Ranks near to one indicate that 
the query is similar and system should accept it whereas ranks 
with higher value indicate that these queries are dissimilar and 
system should reject them. After receiving such a database i.e. 
some or all queries ranked according to a user input query, the 
system calculates both syntactic and semantic similarity 
scores. For different values of λ ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 in 
redefined steps, the final similarity score is calculated as per 
equation 4. The queries are sorted on the basis of this 
combined score, the query with maximum score is given a 
rank one and so forth. The square of difference of the rank 
assigned by the admin and the rank generated by the user for 
a particular value of λ is calculated, this value is calculated for 
all the queries assigned rank by admin. This value is called as 
SSRD (Sum of Squared Rank Difference). Multiple values 
generated using multiple values of λ are compared and the 
value of λ for which SSRD is minimum is selected as the 
optimum or best value. Figure 3 provides a representation of 
the self learning technique. 
 
 
Fig. (3). Similarity Score Bar Graph using Syntactic 
Approach 
 
The database 1 tagged in figure 3 can be considered as the 
parent database, using this database multiple files are created 
and ranks are assigned to some or all queries in the database. 
This file is referred as the ranked file, one user query and 
corresponding ranked file form a single set. Such multiple sets 
are mentioned in driver file. The detailed process for 
computing the optimal value of λ that is to determine the 
optimal weights to be assigned for syntactic and semantic 
approaches is explained in algorithm 1 
 
Algorithm 1: Find best weights for syntactic and semantic 
approach  
 
FIND_OPTIMAL_λ(DRIVER_FILE)  
1:     initialize step_size := 0.1  
2:     M := number of (query, ranked_file) sets in driver_file  
3:     while driver_file is not traversed do  
4:         read query, ranked_file from driver_file  
5:         S1 := Syntactic_Similarity(query, ranked_file)  
6:         S2 := Semantic_Similarity(query, ranked_file)  
7:         initialize λ := 0.0  
8:         while λ ≤ 1.0 do  
9:             while ranked_question is present in ranked_file do  
10:                 combined_similarity := λ ∗ S1 + (1 − λ) ∗ S2  
11:             sort list_of_questions, key : combined_similarity  
12:             assign rank, order : decreasing    
13:             initialize SSRD := 0  
14:             while ranked_question is present in ranked_file do  
15:                 SSRD:= SSRD + (predicted_rank-assigned_rank)2  
16:             store(λ, SSRD)  
17:             λ := λ+ step_size  
18:         bestλ_for_set := λ where SSRD is minimum  
19:         store(bestλ_for_set)  
20:     optimalλ := 
m
i
set
for
best
m
i
=1
]
[
_
_

 
21:     return optimalλ 
 
The driver file as mentioned in algorithm 1 contains multiple 
sets, wherein one set constitutes a user query and a name of 
file containing some or all questions ranked according to the 
query. This driver file is provided as input to algorithm 1, 
which learns best weights for one particular set. Average of 
these values is computed in order to obtain the final optimal 
weight referred as optimalλ. This value is applicable for the 
complete database. The learnt value of λ provides better 
results if learning is conducted using multiple sets, however 
the system can learn the optimal using a single set as well. 
 
 
3.4.1. Time Complexity for determining Optimal weights: 
Time complexity analysis of learning the optimal wights can 
be divided into three parts, namely syntactic similarity 
computation, semantic similarity computation and calculation 
the value of ssrd (sum of squared rank difference) for multiple 
values of λ. Time complexity for syntactic similarity can be 
obtained from equation 2 and for semantic similarity can be 
obtained from equation 3. The calculation of best lambda 
occurs in constant time and this process is repeated m times, 
where m represents the number of (query, Ranked File) sets 
provided in the driver file. The over all time complexity for 
learning the optimal weights is represented in equation 5. 
Suggesting Relevant Questions for a Query Using Statistical NLP Technique 
ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No.0   
 
TC(Learning_Optimalλ) = m ∗ (TC(S1) + TC(S2)) = O(m ∗ n2 
∗ log(V)) 
(5) 
 
In equation 5 S1 and S2 denote syntactic and semantic 
similarity as represented in equation 2 and 3, m represents the 
number of (query, Ranked File) sets in driver file, n represents 
the number of questions in the database and V holds the size 
of unique list of words created. The algorithm learns the 
optimal value with time complexity as per equation 5, this 
time complexity is required only while training the model, the 
time complexity of determining the similarity for a user query, 
once the model has been trained is represented in equation 6, 
which is same as time complexity required for a semantic 
system. Sλ represents the system using the proposed optimal 
lambda approach to determine similarity. 
 
TC(Sλ) = (TC(S1) + TC(S2)) = O(n 2 ∗ logV)   (6) 
 
3.4.2. Analysis of Lambda Parameter: 
The value of Lambda Parameter (λ) varies from 0.0 to 1.0 and 
is data dependent. Semantic similarity approach performs 
better on data sets containing wide usage of synonyms or 
similar phrases; for example, e-commerce portals. Syntactic 
similarity approach is better for data sets containing limited 
vocabulary, for example, teaching portals. Hence, the value of 
(λ) tends to be closer to 0.0 as per equation 5, indicating 
dominance of syntactic similarity score, in case of data sets 
with limited vocabulary; whereas value closer to 1.0 suggests 
that data set consists of rich vocabulary and semantic score is 
assigned higher weight. 
 
 
3.5. Self Learning Combination Approach: 
Data flow and processing methodology from a system 
architectural point of view are represented in figure 4. The end 
user interacts with the system by submitting an input query; 
this input query acts as the input for the processing back end, 
which using pre-computed value of lambda (value indicating 
learned weights for syntactic and semantic system) computes 
similarity for queries present in the database. 
 
Fig. (4). System Flow Architecture Diagram  
Queries from the database are ranked as per the similarity 
score, which is computed using the optimal value of lambda. 
Queries with higher similarity score are suggested to the 
decided by the value of a pre-determined threshold on the 
similarity score or on the number of queries to be displayed. 
The user input query is first pre-processed using known 
techniques like punctuation removal, changing all text data to 
lower case, removing stop words and stemming the words. 
This pre-processed query is vectorized and then fed to the 
similarity calculation process. This process reads the optimal 
value of lambda stored in the database. The learn lambda 
model learns the optimal value of lambda based on ranking 
provided by admin and stores intermediate as well as the final 
optimal value of lambda in the database. The model uses both 
syntactic and semantic similarity techniques to compute the 
optimal value of lambda as represented in Algorithm 1. 
4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATA SOURCES 
The analysis and experimentation mentioned in the article 
have been performed with Python 3.6.9. The implemented 
codes use Nltk (Natual Language Tool Kit) 3.4.5 [23] library 
for natural language processing tasks, Matplotlib 3.1.1 [24] 
library for creating graphs, and Pandas 0.25.1 [25] library for 
reading the data. All data sets used for analysis of the open-
source have the a of the presented approach have been 
obtained through open-source resources, the principle data set 
is available on Kaggle [26]. For the implementation of 
Word2Vec Model binary file made available by google [27] 
has been used. Data sets considered include text queries from 
a variety of fields; that include but are not limited to a, 
technical domain, e-commerce domain and general search 
engine-based queries. The data sets in total consist of queries 
over 100,000. 
The principle data set is available on Kaggle [27], con- 
sisting data points in excess of 25 thousand. Each data 
point represents question submitted on stackoverflow portal 
by anonymous users which contains title of the question, body 
of the question and timestamp representing date and time of 
posting. 
5. RESULTS 
The proposed methodology to learn optimum weightage has 
been implemented with multiple data sets with varied 
characteristics. The value of ssrd (sum of squared ranked 
difference) is used to asses the performance of a particular 
value of λ as suggested in equation 4. The value of ssrd should 
be as minimum as possible and ideally 0 because ssrd 
indicates the inability of the system to predict the rank 
provided by the admin. The plot of value of ssrd against the 
value of λ helps to understand the effect of different 
combinations of syntactic and semantic approaches. 
6    ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No. 0 
 
Nayak  et al. 
 
Fig. (5). Sum of Squared Rank Difference versus λ 
It can be observed from figure 6 that the value of ssrd is high 
at extremities of λ that is 0.0 and 1.0. The reason for this is 
that when value of λ is near 0.0 the system behaves as purely 
semantic and is unable to reject dissimilar sentences. On the 
other hand when value of λ is near 1.0 the system behaves as 
a standalone syntactic system, lacking the ability to accept 
semantically similar sentences. 
 
Fig. (6). Analysis of SSRD index 
Figure 6 represents the analysis of ssrd index in two particular 
cases. Algorithm 1 was implemented on data sets, where data 
set one had keyword intensive queries referred as syntactic 
approach targeted and the second consisted of natural 
language queries referred as semantic approach targeted 
queries. It can be observed from figure 6 the value of ssrd 
jumps at the extremities for both the data sets, this implies that 
the proposed approach can also identify data sets for which 
standalone systems using either of syntactic or semantic 
approach produce expected results. 
To assess the accuracy of three approaches namely syntactic, 
semantic and combined the ssrd score has been used. Firstly 
the ssrd score is calculated with system that suggests similar 
queries by making random choice, then ssrd scores are 
calculated for each method. The percentage reduction in ssrd 
score for a method indicates the effectiveness of that method, 
ideally the error reduction percentage should be 100. 
Data 
Set 
Type 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Optimal 
λ 
Mixed 
67.96 
70.65 
75.52 
0.2 
Syntactic 
77.42 
54.83 
77.42 
1.0 
Semantic 
55.17 
75.86 
75.86 
0.0 
 
In table I S1 indicates Syntactic Approach, S2 indicates 
Semantic Approach and Sλ represents combined approach. 
The value of λ has been computed using algorithm 1. 
It can be inferred form table I that, error reduction ability and 
hence the efficacy of optimal λ method is better as compared 
to syntactic and semantic approaches for databases containing 
queries with keywords as well as natural language. If a 
particular database has only syntactic i.e. keyword intensive 
queries or only semantic i.e. natural language queries, then the 
system’s performance is same as that of a standalone syntactic 
or semantic system respectively. This learnt value of λ is 
applicable to the complete database and may be required to be 
recomputed if there is significant alteration in the database. 
Domain expert or admin can run periodic tests for dynamic 
databases.  
Plots represented in figure 4 and 6 indicate that ssrd (sum of 
squared rank difference) changes with the value of λ 
significantly enough in order to determine the optimal value 
of λ. The results indicate that the proposed method 
successfully determines the optimal weights to be assigned to 
syntactic and semantic approach. 
The results indicate that the proposed method successfully 
determines the optimal weights to be assigned to syntactic and 
semantic approach. 
6. APPLICATIONS 
The methodology presented in this article can be used in any 
filed involving human and machine interaction. The proposed 
technique is generic and does not require any modification for 
implementation for a particular domain. Some prominent 
applications of this approach are discussed further. In 
healthcare domain predicting queries that may arise in near 
future depending on the present query helps to spread 
awareness and society at large will be better informed about 
dis-eases and epidemics, using optimal combination of 
syntactic and semantic approaches this can be achieved. Use 
of self-learning algorithm will ensure that only required 
queries are displayed to the user. For learning portals online 
courses and e-teaching methodologies are gaining importance 
at enormous rates. The proposed approach can be embedded 
with a chat bot that enables learners to ask questions as they 
would to an instructor. Use of the proposed methodology will 
help to explore new topics by suggesting related queries and 
lead to holistic development. In E-Commerce websites the 
presented approach will help to significantly reduce the search 
time for probable consumers on e-commerce websites. 
Consider a user requests for a particular commodity, the 
system under consideration will suggest similar products and 
help to resolve issues related to the commodity in natural 
language. For company training every company or firm hires 
new employees on a regular basis, a daunting task for the 
companies to train the freshers. The proposed system will help 
immensely by suggesting queries that the employee may 
Suggesting Relevant Questions for a Query Using Statistical NLP Technique 
ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No.0   
encounter in near future. This helps the new employee to get 
accustomed to the new workplace efficiently 
7. CONCLUSION 
The comparison of syntactic and semantic approaches 
presented in the article helps to understand that both the 
methods suffer from drawbacks as discussed in the article, 
making the independent use of a single approach 
unsatisfactory. It can be learnt that a technique that combines 
both syntactic and semantic approaches performs better than 
the any standalone system. The results prove that the proposed 
statistical method based on ssrd (sum of squared rank 
difference) index can self learn the optimal weightage to be 
used for each approach. This Statistical method helps the user 
to interact with any machine in natural language with greater 
efficacy and ease.  
Future scope of this methodology includes extending this 
approach of optimally combining rule-based approach, 
machine learning-based approach and deep learning-based 
approach optimally to improve the efficacy of other natural 
language processing tasks like text summarization, named 
entity recognition, sentiment analysis amongst others. The 
future scope also includes training the pro-posed model for 
languages other than English. 
It is worth noting that the proposed algorithm is generic in 
nature and does not require any modification for 
implementation in diverse fields. Using a combined approach 
with optimum weights assigned to each approach helps to 
incorporate the benefits of both the approaches. The proposed 
system has is able to select similar questions as well as reject 
dissimilar questions. The proposed algorithm learns the best 
weightage for combined similarity score computation 
eliminating the tedious manual procedure required to do so 
thereby improving the efficacy and efficiency of a combined 
system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Farouk, “Measuring sentences similarity: a survey,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03940, 2019.  
[2] C. C. Aggarwal and C. Zhai, “A survey of text 
classification algorithms,” in Mining text data, pp. 163–
222, Springer, 2012.  
[3] S. M. Alzahrani, N. Salim, and A. Abraham, 
“Understanding plagiarism linguistic patterns, textual 
features, and detection methods,” IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and 
Reviews), vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 133–149, 2011.  
[4] R. M. Aliguliyev, “A new sentence similarity measure 
and sentence based extractive technique for automatic text 
summarization,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 
36, no. 4, pp. 7764–7772, 2009. 
 [5] W. Medhat, A. Hassan, and H. Korashy, “Sentiment 
analysis algorithms and applications: A survey,” Ain 
Shams engineering journal, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1093–1113, 
2014.  
[6] M. De Boni and S. Manandhar, “The use of sentence 
similarity as a semantic relevance metric for question 
answering.,” in New Directions in Question Answering, 
pp. 138–144, 2003.  
[7] P. H. Matthews, P. Matthews, et al., “Syntactic 
relations: A critical survey,” 2007.  
[8] R. Guha, R. McCool, and E. Miller, “Semantic search. 
www’03: Proceedings of the 12th international conference 
on world wide web,” 2003.  
[9] W. H. Gomaa and A. A. Fahmy, “A survey of text 
similarity approaches,” International Journal of Computer 
Applications, vol. 68, no. 13, pp. 13– 18, 2013. 
[10] G. Sidorov, H. Gomez-Adorno, I. Markov, D. Pinto, 
and N. Loya, ´ “Computing text similarity using tree edit 
distance,” in 2015 Annual Conference of the North 
American 
Fuzzy 
Information 
Processing 
Society 
(NAFIPS) held jointly with 2015 5th World Conference on 
Soft Computing (WConSC), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2015.  
[11] R. Mihalcea, C. Corley, C. Strapparava, et al., 
“Corpus-based and knowledge-based measures of text 
semantic similarity,” in Aaai, vol. 6, pp. 775–780, 2006. 
[12] A. Islam and D. Inkpen, “Semantic text similarity 
using corpus-based word similarity and string similarity,” 
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 
(TKDD), vol. 2, no. 2, p. 10, 2008.  
[13] Y. Song and D. Roth, “Unsupervised sparse vector 
densification for short text similarity,” in Proceedings of 
the 2015 Conference of the North American Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies, pp. 1275–1280, 2015.  
[14] A. Kashyap, L. Han, R. Yus, J. Sleeman, T. 
Satyapanich, S. Gandhi, and T. Finin, “Robust semantic 
text similarity using lsa, machine learning, and linguistic 
resources,” Language Resources and Evaluation, vol. 50, 
no. 1, pp. 125–161, 2016.  
[15] S. Bloehdorn and A. Moschitti, “Combined syntactic 
and semantic kernels for text classification,” Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science Advances in Information Retrieval, 
vol. 4425, p. 307–318.  
[16] A. Abdi, N. Idris, R. M. Alguliev, and R. M. 
Aliguliyev, 
“Automatic 
summarization 
assessment 
through a combination of semantic and syntactic 
information 
for 
intelligent 
educational 
systems,” 
Information Processing Management, vol. 51, no. 4, p. 
340–358, 2015.  
[17] J. B. Lovins, “Development of a stemming 
algorithm.,” Mech. Transl. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 11, 
no. 1-2, pp. 22–31, 1968.  
[18] X. Wan, “A novel document similarity measure based 
on earth mover’s distance,” Information Sciences, vol. 177, 
no. 18, pp. 3718–3730, 2007.  
[19] J. H. Lau and T. Baldwin, “An empirical evaluation of 
doc2vec with practical insights into document embedding 
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05368, 2016.  
[20] K. W. Church, “Word2vec,” Natural Language 
Engineering, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 155–162, 2017.  
[21] 
Medium, 
“Introduction 
to 
doc2vec,” 
https://medium.com/wisio/a-gentleintroduction-to-
doc2vec-db3e8c0cce5e, 2017 (accessed January 20, 2020). 
[22] StackOverflow, “Word2vec time complexity,” 
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/54950481/word2vec-
timecomplexity, 2019 (accessed March 3, 2020).  
8    ICEI, 2022, Vol. 0, No. 0 
 
Nayak  et al. 
[23] E. Loper and S. Bird, “Nltk: The natural language 
toolkit,” arXiv preprint cs/0205028, 2002.  
[24] J. D. Hunter, “Matplotlib: A 2d graphics 
environment,” Computing in science & engineering, vol. 9, 
no. 03, pp. 90–95, 2007.  
[25] W. McKinney et al., “pandas: a foundational python 
library for data analysis and statistics,” Python for high 
performance and scientific computing, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 
1–9, 2011.  
[26] 
“Kaggle 
datasets,” 
https://www.kaggle.com/stackoverflow/stackoverflow, 
(accessed July 7, 2019).  
[27] 
“Google 
word2vec 
model,” 
https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/, 
July 
30, 
2013 (accessed July 7, 2019). 
 
