Title: Property-guided Inverse Design of Metal-Organic Frameworks Using Quantum Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11783v3
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
 
 
 
 
Property-Guided Inverse Design of Metal-Organic 
Frameworks Using Quantum Natural Language 
Processing 
Shinyoung Kang, Jihan Kim* 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea 
*E-mail: jihankim@kaist.ac.kr, Phone: +82-42-350-7311 (Corresponding author) 
 
Classification: Computer Science 
Keywords: Quantum Natural Language Processing, Metal-Organic Framework, Quantum 
Machine Learning, MOF Inverse Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
 
In this study, we explore the potential of using quantum natural language processing (QNLP) for 
property-guided inverse design of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) with targeted properties. Specifically, by 
analyzing 450 hypothetical MOF structures consisting of 3 topologies, 10 metal nodes and 15 organic ligands, 
we categorize these structures into four distinct classes for pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant values. We 
then compare various QNLP models (i.e. the bag-of-words, DisCoCat (Distributional Compositional 
Categorical), and sequence-based models) to identify the most effective approach to process the MOF dataset. 
Using a classical simulator provided by the IBM Qiskit, the bag-of-words model is identified to be the optimum 
model, achieving validation accuracies of 88.6% and 78.0% for binary classification tasks on pore volume and 
CO2 Henry’s constant, respectively. Further, we developed multi-class classification models tailored to the 
probabilistic nature of quantum circuits, with average test accuracies of 92% and 80% across different classes 
for pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. Finally, the performance of generating MOF with target 
properties showed accuracies of 97.75% for pore volume and 90% for CO2 Henry’s constant, respectively. 
Although our investigation covers only a fraction of the vast MOF search space, it marks a promising first step 
towards using quantum computing for materials design, offering a new perspective through which to explore the 
complex landscape of MOFs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
 
As the idea of quantum computers first arose in 1982 following Feynman’s proposal1, many 
theoretical and experimental works have explored the possibilities to accelerate scientific discovery using this 
technology. Recently, quantum machine-learning (QML) algorithms have surfaced as a promising alternative to 
their classical machine-learning approaches2 to develop materials based on the advantages of quantum 
computers3. This shift is attributed to the algorithmic speed-up of quantum computers based on quantum 
parallelism and the non-classical correlations arising from quantum entanglement3. At the core of QML lies the 
exploitation of quantum bits (qubits), which unlike classical bits, can exist in a superposition of states and be 
entangled with one another. This allows quantum algorithms to perform complex calculations more efficiently 
based on quantum parallelism to explore multiple possibilities simultaneously4. Current quantum computing 
technology is categorized as being at the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) stage, which refers to 
intermediate number of qubits (approximately 100 qubits), while lacking the capacity for large-scale error 
correction3. Consequently, the NISQ era poses significant challenges that prevent the demonstration of a clear 
quantum advantage over classical algorithms, due to the limited number of qubits and their susceptibility to 
errors5.  
As a result, the development of QML algorithms for NISQ devices largely focus on a hybrid quantum-
classical approach with shallow-circuit depth, which delegates a part of the computation to a classical processor 
to manage qubit noise effectively3, 6. To this end, many researchers have suggested methods to apply QML in 
solving complex problems in materials science and chemistry by focusing on compatible QML methodologies. 
Specifically, Kanno et al. demonstrated that the physicochemical properties of the periodic materials can be 
successfully calculated with this concept by adopting a restricted Boltzmann machine-based variational quantum 
eigensolver (RBM-based VQE) for the band structure calculation of graphene7. This approach was further 
developed by Sajjan et al. as conduction bands of monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, MoS2 and WS2, 
were simulated and filtered based on angular momentum symmetry2. Scientific endeavors to further extend the 
search space of materials with quantum computing led to the development of a QML algorithm for property 
prediction. Brown et al. introduced a quantum variational eigensolver-based circuit learning method to estimate 
the phases of high-entropy alloys (HEAs), with the model's performance nearing that of classical artificial neural 
network (ANN) models in classifying ternary and binary phases8. Naseri et al. explored the use of a supervised 
hybrid quantum-classical ML algorithm for the binary classification of ABO3 perovskite structures, showcasing 
4 
 
the applicability of QML in materials discovery9. Despite these advancements, previous studies have largely 
focused on relatively simple periodic systems such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and perovskite 
structures, with challenges arising in scaling to larger systems like metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) due to the 
difficulty of individually encoding atoms into a constrained qubit resource.  
To address this limitation, we adopted using quantum natural language processing (QNLP) as a novel 
approach for property-guided selection of MOF structures within a discrete design space efficiently. Before 
introducing the QNLP methodology in detail, it is important to emphasize that the quantum computing in the 
NISQ era should be regarded primarily as a conceptual and theoretical frontier, rather than a practical alternative 
that outperforms classical methods. As noted in the recent reviews, NISQ systems offer valuable opportunities to 
explore hybrid quantum-classical algorithms, but reliable demonstrations of quantum advantage remain limited 
due to noise and resource limitations10. The primary objective of this work is not to claim improvements in 
computational speedup or efficiency over classical machine learning techniques. Instead, we aim to establish a 
conceptual framework for applying QNLP to model the large molecular system, which go beyond the relatively 
simple periodic systems typically explored in previous quantum machine learning studies. 
QNLP is an emerging field that combines quantum computing with natural language processing 
(NLP), aimed to utilize the principles of quantum mechanics to process and analyze natural language data more 
efficiently than classical computing methods. This concept was first introduced by Coecke et al.11, 12 based on 
the idea that quantum computing is naturally suited to process high-dimensional tensor products and that NLP 
can utilize vector spaces to describe sentences13. In quantum computing, the state of a quantum system with 
multiple qubits is represented by a vector in a high-dimensional Hilbert space14. Since the operations or 
transformations applied to these qubits are represented by matrices, any quantum operations to the system of 
qubits are processed by performing tensor products of matrices to calculate the new state of the system4. This 
enables the representation of the complex, high-dimensional states and transformations fundamental to quantum 
computing. In the context of NLP, sentences can be represented in high-dimensional vector spaces, and the 
relationships between words involve complex transformations within these spaces. The potential of QNLP arises 
from its natural and efficient use of such calculations due to its inherent ability to operate in high-dimensional 
Hilbert spaces. As such, a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm based on QNLP was adopted from the previous 
studies for sentence generation15 and music composition16. For sentence generation, Karamlou et al. performed a 
comparative study on two types of datasets: binary classification for identifying different sentence topics and 
5 
 
multi-class classification for identifying news headlines. QNLP models were separately trained for these 
datasets, and these quantum models provided feedback to the classical model for sentence generation, resulting 
in 22 and 11 correct sentence generations out of 30 attempts for binary and multi-class classification models, 
respectively, in the classical simulator provided by the IBM Qiskit15. A similar quantum-classical framework 
was applied to music generation by Miranda et al16. The QNLP model was developed to identify types of music 
(between rhythmic and melodic), resulting in a test accuracy of 76% on real quantum hardware16. However, to 
the best of our knowledge, QNLP has yet to be applied to any molecular structures or materials.   
 
In this work for the first time, we explored the possibility of using QNLP to model metal-organic 
frameworks (MOFs), which are crystalline porous materials consisting of metal clusters and organic ligands17. 
The choice of MOF as our target material was based on its modular nature, which is akin to how words form 
sentences. Their structural and functional characteristics can be designed through the rational selection of 
topologies and constituent building blocks, including organic ligands and metal-containing units18-20. This 
characteristic resembles how sentences with various subjects are formed based on the choice of words. This 
versatile architecture allows MOFs to be widely used in many applications such as gas sensors21, drug 
delivery22, gas storage23, and separation24. However, the challenge in rationalizing component choices arises 
from the extensive search space required to select combinations of building blocks and topology. As the search 
space for MOFs continues to expand, addressing the curse of dimensionality becomes critical. This concern was 
previously emphasized by Brown et al. in the context of designing periodic materials with large degrees of 
freedom such as HEAs8.  
 
We adopted the hybrid quantum-classical method to construct a MOF generation framework with 
user-desired properties. Pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant were chosen as target properties of interest as 
they reflect the physical and chemical properties of MOF structures, respectively. The former reflects a direct 
result of the MOF’s structural characteristics, whereas the latter stems from the MOFs' ability to adsorb and 
interact with guest molecules, an attribute linked to the interplay of their geometrical and chemical properties25, 
which amplifies the challenge of the task. By representing MOFs in terms of their constituent building blocks 
and topology, we simplified their qubit representation, thereby making quantum resources more accessible for 
the study of complex materials. The overall workflow of this work is summarized in Fig. 1. Initially, we describe 
the construction of MOF datasets, featuring a simplified representation of 450 MOF structures. These are 
categorized by target property classes, such as low, moderately low, moderately high, and high pore volume or 
6 
 
CO2 Henry’s constant classes (Fig. 1a). Next, we rationalized our choice of the QNLP models based on the 
comparative study among four different approaches: the bag-of-words, DisCoCat (Distributional Compositional 
Categorical), and two sequence-based models (Fig. 1b). The multi-classification models were then developed, 
exploring ways to overcome the statistical limitations inherent to the QNLP model selected from the 
comparative study (Fig. 1c). These limitations stem from the probabilistic nature of the chosen QNLP model. As 
a result, QNLP models for categorizing target classes were developed with average test accuracies of 92% and 
80% for pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets, respectively. Finally, these models were integrated 
with the classical MOF generation process, which generates text-based MOF input by randomly selecting 
topology and building blocks in each component’s search space (Fig. 1d). The QNLP models functioned as 
answer sheets, providing feedback to the classical generation loop to navigate the search space of MOF topology 
and building blocks correctly. To test the performance of the overall process for generating MOF with target 
property, the model was tested on a classical Aer simulator by the IBM Qiskit26 to generate MOFs with low, 
moderately low, moderately high, and high pore volumes and CO2 Henry’s constants. The average generation 
accuracies for MOFs with desired pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant were 93.5% and 87%, respectively. In 
the last section, we discussed the extensibility of QNLP to other complex periodic materials based on ‘sequence’ 
as one of the promising parameters for representing chemical structures. Our study not only circumvents the 
qubit limitation but also opens new avenues for applying quantum machine learning in the exploration and 
design of advanced materials.   
 
7 
 
Figure 1. General overview of the study. Gray, blue, and yellow boxes indicate the classical computer-based, 
quantum computer-based, and hybrid quantum-classical computer-based processes, respectively. (a) MOF 
dataset construction from target property distributions encoded into four classes, and it is transformed into the 
text dataset consisting of the target class and its corresponding MOF name. (b) Comparative study among 
QNLP model candidates. Models A, B, C, and D refer to DisCoCat, bag-of-words (BoW), word-sequence, and 
stair models, respectively. (c) Multi-classification model development based on the choice of QNLP model from 
the QNLP model selection step. Four binary classification models by target property type (pore volume and CO2 
Henry’s constant) are combined to complete a multi-classification framework. (d) MOF generation framework 
to build MOF structure with the desired target property.  
8 
 
Results 
Building the MOF Dataset  
 
The MOF dataset in this work consists of 3 topologies, 10 types of metal clusters (labeled as nodes in 
this work), and 15 types of organic ligands (labeled as edges in this work), with the number being small 
considering the current limitations in quantum resource availability (Fig. S1). Chemical molecules and materials 
possess complex degrees of freedom that influence their mechanical and chemical properties. This complexity 
arises because the individual components of chemical compounds are directly linked to their properties. For 
instance, MOFs that share the same types of metal nodes and ligand edges but differ in their topology (i.e., 
polymorphism) result in significant differences in surface area, which applies to the case of MIL-10127, MIL-
8828, and MIL-5329. Furthermore, MOFs with identical topology and metal nodes but different organic ligands 
exhibit variations in chemical and mechanical properties, such as gas uptake and pore diameter30. This suggests 
that introducing a single type of topology or building block adds more than just a single degree of freedom, 
thereby complicating the selection of topology and building blocks given the manageable dataset size for the 
NISQ devices. Consequently, the dataset was restricted to include three topologies. This decision was based on 
the direct relationship between topology and our target properties, aiming to minimize the impact of variations 
in the building blocks, metal nodes, and organic ligands. 
 
A pcu topology, one of the most fundamental topologies, was selected for its straightforward pore 
structure and high symmetry owing to a cubic arrangement31. The choice of kag and lcy was based on their 
structural distinction while maintaining the same node connectivity as the pcu topology, ensuring that the same 
building blocks can be interchangeably used (Fig. S1a). The MOF building blocks were chosen based on 
structural similarity in the molecular framework to ensure a broad and consistent distribution of target properties 
of pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant. For the metal clusters, we considered structural analogs that form 
rod-like connections with the ligands. These clusters are composed of two metals covered by oxygen functional 
groups, represented by the formula, M2C6𝑂𝑂12𝑋𝑋6 (where M denotes the metal and X represents the connection 
point with the ligand, as shown in Fig. S1b). For the organic ligands, cyclic compounds with various lengths 
ranging from 3.56 to 16.12 Å were considered (Fig. S1c). The datasets were evenly divided into four classes 
with regard to the aforementioned target properties: (1) low, (2) moderately low, (3) moderately high, and (4) 
high, as shown in Fig. 2a and c. The decision to use multiple target property classes rather than a simple binary 
9 
 
classification (e.g. low and high) was made to enable the generation of MOFs within the more refined user-
desired target property class. The class boundary was determined to ensure an even distribution among the 
classes, with 113 samples each for the low and high classes and 112 samples each for the moderately low and 
moderately high classes in terms of pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant, thereby maintaining the uniformity 
of the dataset. Finally, low, moderately low, moderately high, and high classes were encoded into classical labels 
of 00, 01, 10, and 11, respectively, to directly compare with quantum models’ prediction, as depicted in Fig. 1a. 
The next section will provide a detailed explanation of how the outcomes of the quantum model are processed 
and compared with the true labels. The MOF datasets for QNLP model training were then prepared with the 
target property class and its corresponding MOF name listed by topology, node, and edge names. For example, 
the MOF named ‘pcu N248 E220’ with low pore volume, was mapped into the label ‘00 pcu N248 E220’ in our 
MOF dataset.  
Fig. 2b and d show the influence of the MOF components (topology and building blocks) on the 
classes of pore volumes and CO2 Henry’s constants by showing the number of occurrences per topology or 
building block in each class. The counts can be considered as the numerical contribution of the individual 
building blocks for each class. Considering that 150, 45, and 30 MOF structures can be created per topology, 
node and edge type, respectively, the individual MOF components that appeared more than about 50% of 
possible structures in a class were considered ‘class-significant’ topologies or building blocks. This indicates 
that the MOFs with the corresponding components (topology or building block) are highly likely to possess that 
class property. Therefore, the 60-count is considered the boundary for class-significance for topology type and 
the 20-count is considered the boundary for class-significance for node and edge type. A class-significant 
component shows a skewed distribution, meaning it appears predominantly in a specific class rather than being 
evenly distributed across all classes. This indicates a strong association between that component and the 
corresponding property class. For example, a particular edge that appears primarily in the “moderately high” 
(10) class is likely to contribute to that property. Based on this assumption, the impact of the organic ligands on 
the pore volume dataset was greater than that of topologies and metal clusters, exhibiting class-significant edges 
in every class with clear skewed distribution favoring specific classes. Topology was the second most 
contributing factor, as class 11 consisted of 67 kag topology-based MOFs, whereas the metal clusters 
contributed the least, showing no class-significant building blocks. Edge contribution was the highest for the 
CO2 Henry’s constant dataset, although its distribution was broader than that of pore volume dataset. Unlike the 
10 
 
pore volume dataset, the node distribution showed class-significance in classes 11 and 10, while no class-
significant topology was observed. Understanding the distribution of class-significant building blocks is crucial, 
as it directly affects the difficulty of model training. For instance, generating MOFs with high pore volume (the 
11-class) is considerably easier than generating MOFs with the moderately high pore volume (the 10-class) 
owing to the higher occurrence frequency of specific MOF components, such as E161, E229, and the kag 
topology in the pore volume dataset. Consequentially, there is a variation in the level of difficulty across the 
classes despite the even distribution of sample numbers, reflecting the continuous nature of MOF properties. 
The difference in class distribution between the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets arises from the 
fact that Henry’s constant primarily reflects adsorption strength, which is largely dictated by chemical 
interactions although pore geometry can have an indirect influence. This distinction is evident in their nonlinear 
correlation, as illustrated in Fig. S2.  
 
Figure 2. Distributions of 450 hypothetical MOFs based on (a) pore volumes and (c) the logarithm (base 10) of 
11 
 
CO2 Henry’s constants (The unit of CO2 Henry’s constants is mol/kg/Pa). The datasets were divided into four 
classes based on 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant values. Vertical 
dotted lines indicate corresponding class boundaries. Counts of classes per topology type, node (metal clusters) 
type, and edge (organic ligands) type based on (b) pore volumes and (d) CO2 Henry’s constants. Labels 00, 01, 
10, and 11 represent low, moderately low, moderately high, and high pore volumes and CO2 Henry’s constants, 
respectively. Vertical red dotted lines represent a count boundary of the class-significance. 
 
Mapping the MOF Dataset onto Different QNLP Models 
The selection of existing QNLP models is motivated by two key considerations. First, the modular 
structure of the MOF dataset used in this study exhibits a resemblance to the compositional nature of simple 
sentence datasets. Each MOF in our dataset is constructed from three discrete components, topology, node, and 
edge, similar to how basic sentences are composed of subjects, verbs, and objects. Since our dataset was 
intentionally limited in complexity to reduce variation in structural degrees of freedom, the property 
classification task resembles a semantic classification problem in natural language processing, where the 
presence of specific components rather than their sequence or grammatical relationship plays a dominant role. 
For instance, Lorenz et al. compared QNLP models such as bag-of-words, DisCoCat, and sequence-based 
models in classifying simple sentences with different subject matter and clause types. Their results indicated that 
bag-of-words performed best in tasks where classification depended mainly on word choice, rather than 
syntactic structure. Likewise, our MOF property labels correlate with the occurrence of specific edges and 
topologies, as shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d), suggesting that component-wise features are influential. Second, there 
is historical precedent in applying classical NLP models originally designed for human language to molecular 
and materials data. Examples include the use of SMILES string, MOFkey representations32, and other domain-
specific textual encodings to predict molecular properties, generate new molecules and learn structure-function 
relationships33. As summarized by Öztürk et al., these approaches treat chemical structures as “unstructured 
languages” in which the sequential or co-occurrence patterns of tokens encode chemically meaningful 
information34. Since our work is the first to apply quantum natural language processing (QNLP) to materials 
design, we believe that adopting well-established QNLP models is a scientifically grounded starting point. 
For quantum model training, the aforementioned MOF dataset needs to be transformed into quantum 
12 
 
circuits, which requires pre-processing of the dataset based on the choice of QNLP models. In order to 
implement a quantum model for the property classification, four QNLP models were explored: BoW model, 
DisCoCat model, and the two word-sequence models. The MOF representation of topology, node, and edge was 
mapped into a high-dimensional vector space where each dimension corresponds to a unique component of the 
MOF. The method by which these components are processed, akin to grammatical structure, can be 
mathematically depicted through tensor products, with these operations on the component vectors that vary 
distinctively across different QNLP model types. The graphical representations of these complex vector spaces 
and the mathematical functions connecting them are known as string diagrams35 as illustrated in Fig. 1b and Fig. 
3a. Based on these diagrams and the choice of ansatz, the quantum circuits can be constructed as MOF 
component vectors are mapped into individual qubits, and quantum gate operations implement the tensor 
products. The ansatz is a proposed structure of quantum circuit consisting of adjustable circuit parameters such 
as the number of qubits or unitary operations within a given vector space. The qubits are initially in the |0⟩ 
states and then evolve through a sequence of unitary operations (i.e. gates). Based on the choice of the IQP 
(Instantaneous Quantum Polynomial) ansatz, the unitary operations employed were Hadamard gate (H) and 
rotation gates of Rx(θ) and R𝑧𝑧(θ), which rotate a qubits state around the respective axis by an angle, θ. 
Readers might refer to the method section for further explanation about the choice of ansatz.  
In this paper, we will focus on the BoW model to specifically explain how the QNLP model 
transforms classical data into a quantum circuit and identify which components of the quantum circuits are 
optimized against the true labels. For information on other QNLP models, readers may refer to Note S1. The 
BoW model, based on a Frobenius algebra, transforms text into a sparse vector of word counts and represents 
the output as the component-wise multiplication of these vectors, 𝑠𝑠35. That is, each MOF component vector 
(topology, node, and edge) is mapped to the high-dimensional vector space obtained from the component-wise 
multiplication, independent of word order. In the associated string diagram, each component vector is 
represented as a separate box and the component-wise multiplication is represented as a ‘merge-dot’ as shown in 
Fig. 3a. The focus of this model would be on the presence or absence of specific component vectors over the 
explicit connections among them to indicate grammatical structure or sequence in other models such as 
DisCoCat and the word-sequence models (Note S1).  
The transformation into a quantum circuit involves mapping individual MOF component vectors onto 
separate qubits, with unitary operations then used to manipulate the overall quantum state of these qubits (Fig. 
13 
 
3b). The number of qubits per component vector varies depending on the task, and this will be discussed in the 
next section. Initially, all qubits representing corresponding MOF components are in a default state, |0⟩ (Fig. 
3b(i)). The quantum state of each qubit is then uniquely altered through a sequence of unitary operations (Fig. 
3b(ii)), and the rotational angles of these operations, θ𝑐𝑐.𝑛𝑛 (where c and 𝑛𝑛 represent MOF component and 
integer, respectively), are quantum circuit parameters optimized through quantum machine learning. The merge-
dot of the string diagram is encoded as the controlled-not (CNOT) gates (Fig. 3b(iii)), which naturally encode 
component-wise relationships between MOF components at the circuit level. These relationships refer to the 
logical conjunctions that determine whether particular combinations of topology, metal node, and organic edge 
co-occur in a MOF instance. The CNOT gate performs a conditional operation where the state of a target qubit 
flips only if the control qubit is in the |1⟩ state, thereby entangling qubits and capturing the joint presence of 
specific components. This reflects the Frobenius algebra operation in the classical BoW model, where the value 
of the output is influenced only when both contributing components are present. Through these entangling 
operations, the circuit encodes the combined influence of MOF components on the overall quantum state, 
allowing it to capture their interactions without the need for explicit tensor product expansions or matrix 
multiplications, which are typically required in classical NLP models36. These interactions are embedded in the 
evolved quantum state and can be statistically inferred from repeated measurements of the quantum circuit.  
Finally, the predicted class label is determined by measuring output qubit from the quantum circuit. This qubit, 
associated with the predicted class label and delivering the outcome of the circuit measurement, is referred to as 
an ‘open’ wire qubit, as it is represented by the wire coming out of the component in the quantum circuit35 (Fig. 
3b). For instance, in a binary classification task for pore volume as an example, ‘low’ and ‘high’ pore volume 
classes can be encoded as the states |0⟩ and |1⟩ of the open wire qubit, respectively. 
 
14 
 
Figure 3. (a) String diagrams of MOF representation based on BoW model, and (b) its corresponding quantum 
circuit with a single-qubit configuration for binary classification based on IQP ansatz. Dotted line boxes 
represent (i) initial quantum states, (ii) circuit parameters and (iii) controlled-not gates which indicating merge-
dot. Open-wire that carries predicted class label is highlighted as blue line. (c) An overall process of quantum 
machine learning. 
 
Once the quantum circuit is constructed based on the choice of QNLP model, the next step is to 
introduce a quantum machine learning algorithm to optimize the circuit parameters. This optimization ensures 
that the outcomes from circuit measurements converge to the desired results (i.e. true label, Fig. 3c). The output 
of the quantum circuit is obtained by repeatedly measuring the circuit a specific number of times, known as 
15 
 
shots. For instance, in binary classification of pore volume, the measurement outcome is either 0 or 1, where 0 
and 1 represent low and high pore volume classes, respectively. These outcomes can be represented as a 
probability distribution of 0s and 1s as the number of measurements (i.e. shots) accumulates. Initially, the circuit 
parameters are set at random angles of θ𝑐𝑐.𝑛𝑛∈[0, 1] resulting in the probability distribution that leads to 
random quantum states. These parameters are fixed based on the component type, although some parameters are 
shared between quantum circuits corresponding to different MOFs when identical components appear in 
multiple MOF structures. In total, 84 parameters are used (3 circuit parameters per MOF component which 
consists of 3 topologies, 10 nodes, and 15 edges) for this binary classification task example, and are uniquely 
combined to represent each MOF. For instance, the circuit parameters for a qubit representing the 'pcu' topology 
are the same across all MOF structures (e.g., pcu N173 E220, pcu N505 E229, etc.).  
This parameter-sharing scheme has both technical and chemical implications. From a technical 
perspective, it significantly reduces the number of trainable parameters and simplifies quantum circuits, making 
implementation feasible within current NISQ hardware constraints. All state-of-the-art QNLP models 
implemented via lambeq37, including those examined in this study (BoW, DisCoCat, and sequence models), 
employ this strategy due to the technical constraints and resource limitations inherent in current quantum 
computing platforms. However, such scheme makes an important chemical assumption that identical building 
blocks contribute consistently to MOF properties regardless of their local chemical environment. In reality, the 
same organic linker may exhibit different electrical properties38 or coordination modes39 when paired with 
different metal nodes or integrated into different topological frameworks. This parameter-sharing scheme 
therefore represents a trade-off between computational feasibility and chemical accuracy, where we prioritize 
demonstrating QNLP methodology over capturing the full complexity of structure-property relationships in 
reticular chemistry. While this limitation constrains the chemical realism of our current approach, it reflects the 
necessary simplification required for proof-of concept demonstrations within current quantum hardware 
capabilities rather than a fundamental limitation of QNLP approaches.  
The initial measurement outcome, based on random circuit parameters, often deviate from the desired 
results, such as 1, assuming the MOF has a high pore volume. Thus, these parameters of the QNLP model (i.e. 
model weights) are initially set and then iteratively adjusted during training based on stochastic approximation 
of the gradient derived from the loss function35 (Fig. 3c). This involves a vectorization of the circuit 
measurement outcomes to match the dimension of the true label, which is represented in one-hot encoding. For 
16 
 
instance, binary quantum states |0⟩ and |1⟩, occurring with 85 and 15 shots out of a total of 100 (i.e. 
probabilities of 85% and 15%), are transformed into the vector [0.85, 0.15], and based on which the loss is then 
calculated. The iterative process, which involves calculating the loss and updating the model's weights, is 
performed by a classical computer while the measurement of the predicted label is carried out by quantum 
computing method. Unlike classical NLP models, which require explicit probability normalization through 
activation functions like softmax, QNLP inherently generates probability distributions directly from quantum 
measurements. This eliminates additional computational overhead associated with feature aggregation and 
decision-making in classical models, offering a more streamlined and computationally efficient approach36. The 
difference in quantum machine learning over their classical counterpart is that the parameters being optimized, 
θ𝑐𝑐.𝑛𝑛, are circuit parameters that directly influence the transformation of quantum states, thereby manipulating 
the probability distribution of the measurement outcomes. 
 
Comparative Study on QNLP Models 
 
The comparative study was initially conducted to identify the most suitable compositional model for 
our MOF dataset. For this experiment, the dataset was prepared for the binary classification task (as opposed to 
multi-class classification task) due to the task complexity and higher computational cost required for the multi-
class classification. Therefore, the pore volume of 1.05 cm3/g and CO2 Henry’s constant of 1.819×10-5 
mol/kg/Pa were set as the class boundaries for categorizing MOFs with either low or high pore volumes and 
CO2 Henry’s constants, respectively. The target classes of low and high were encoded as labels 0 and 1, 
respectively, to be directly compared with the quantum states (i.e. predicted label) from the circuit 
measurements. The quantum circuits of MOF were constructed by pre-processing the MOF dataset based on 
each candidate QNLP models (corresponding to Fig. 3b, and S3d, e, f). These circuits were trained to associate 
MOF names accurately with their corresponding property labels. As mentioned in the previous section, this is 
achieved by iteratively refining their circuit parameters, which are associated with quantum states to minimize 
classification errors, as the quantum circuits initially result in random quantum states. For sequence-sensitive 
models (DisCoCat, word-sequence with Cups, and word-sequence with Stairs), optimal component orderings 
were determined by evaluating all possible permutations of MOF component sequences: topology (T), node (N), 
and edge (E). This generated six unique sequences, ENT, ETN, NET, NTE, TEN, and TNE. Readers are 
17 
 
encouraged to refer to the method section and Note S2 for detailed discussion of dataset preparation and the 
sequence optimization process.  
 
As illustrated in Fig. 4, all models exhibited a converging trend over the epochs characterized by 
decreasing loss, which was subsequently followed by a flattening pattern. For the pore volume dataset (Fig. 4a), 
both word-sequence models showed relatively inferior performance. The word-sequence with Cups model 
(Cups model) converged at accuracies of 0.693 and 0.69 and loss of 0.623 and 0.88, and the word-sequence with 
Stairs model (Stairs model) converged at accuracies of 0.86 and 0.88 and loss of 0.419 and 0.392 for training 
and validation dataset, respectively. The inferior training performance of sequence-based models was also 
observed in the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset (Fig. 4b). The performance gap between training and validation 
further increased as losses converged at 0.761 and 1.001 for the Cups model and 0.687 and 0.713 for the Stairs 
model. Surprisingly, the DisCoCat model showed relatively good convergence behavior, with loss minimized 
below 1 for both datasets. These outcomes aptly illustrate that MOFs are not sequence-dependent, but rather, 
they are the aggregate sum of each structural component. Although both DisCoCat and word-sequence models 
are syntax-sensitive approaches, the rule respecting text order is unsuited to MOF structures. This is because the 
criterion for completing a MOF structure depends on whether it constitutes a complete set of topology and 
building blocks rather than the order in which they are listed. This explains the discrepancy in performance 
between the DisCoCat model and the word-sequence models. The pregroup grammar of DisCoCat is rigidly 
governed by the syntactic arrangement of the words13, whereas the word-sequence models are solely driven by 
the left-to-right sequence, irrespective of the sentence's components35.  
 
The best-performing model for our MOF datasets was the bag-of-word model, which illustrates that 
the modular structure of the MOF dataset is well suited for component-wise multiplication of parsed MOF 
tensors rather than sequence-based data processing (Fig. 4, Note S2). A similar result was previously reported by 
Lorenz et al. as the DisCoCat and the BoW models showed comparable performance, while the word-sequence 
model showed inferior performance for a meaning classification task involving two distinct subjects35. Here, the 
BoW model converged at the highest accuracies among models as 0.925 and 0.93 for the pore volume training 
and validation dataset, with losses at 0.169 and 0.149. The training and validation accuracies for the CO2 
Henry’s constant dataset decreased to 0.807 and 0.78, with corresponding losses of 0.443 and 0.523. This lower 
performance can be attributed to the greater complexity of Henry’s constant compared to pore volume, as it is 
influenced by both chemical interactions and geometric factors, making it more challenging for the model to 
18 
 
learn and predict accurately (this was illustrated by the broader distribution of MOF components in Fig. 2d 
compared to Fig. 2b). Furthermore, the QNLP-based BoW model achieved comparable validation accuracy and 
even higher test accuracy than traditional machine learning models, including Random Forest and Support 
Vector Machine (SVM), despite relying on fewer trainable elements and a fundamentally different 
computational paradigm (Table S2). This indicates that QNLP offers strong generalization capabilities under the 
constraints of current quantum hardware. Readers are encouraged to refer Note S3 for further details. Therefore, 
the BoW model was chosen as the best candidate to develop the multi-class classification model for pore 
volumes and CO2 Henry’s constants. 
19 
 
Figure 4. Training dynamics and final accuracies and losses for four QNLP models (the bag-of-words (BoW), 
DisCoCat, word-sequence with Cups (Cups), and word-sequence model with stairs (Stairs) models) trained on 
(a) pore volume and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant dataset for binary classification task. The left-hand panels display 
the training losses and accuracies as a function of epochs, showing convergence behavior. The right-hand panels 
summarize the final training and validation looses (top) and accuracies (bottom) for each model. 
20 
 
 
Development of Multi-Class Classification Models based on the Probabilistic Nature of 
Quantum Machine Learning 
 
In the previous section, MOF structures were assigned 0 or 1 output values based on low/high pore 
volume/CO2 Henry’s constants. However, in practice, we want more refined categories for classifications (e.g. 
very high pore volume, high pore volume, average pore volume, low pore volume), especially for inverse design 
purposes. Thus, the transition from binary classification to multi-class classification is important for practical 
purposes. Accordingly, the MOF datasets divided into four classes (low/moderately low/moderately high/high) 
were transformed into quantum circuits for multi-classification applications based on the choice of data 
representation schemes, the BoW model from the previous section (Fig. 5a). The fundamental difference 
between the circuit construction for binary and multi-classification is the number of qubits required to represent 
the MOFs, which leads to a difference in the probability of obtaining meaningful outcomes. The output of the 
quantum circuit is delivered by a specific number of qubits. For example, a quantum circuit of MOF 
representation for binary classification requires a single output qubit to deliver the probability distribution of 
predicted labels of 0 and 1 while that for the multi-classification requires two output qubits to represent the 
probability distribution of predicted labels of 00, 01, 10, and 11. Thus, the QNLP model involves a post-
processing step known as post-selection, which retains only the measurement outcomes related to the predicted 
class label and filters out the remaining measurements based on a specific quantum state, 0-effect35. The term, 0-
effect, is used as it determines whether to keep or discard the measurement outcomes based on whether the state 
of the post-selected qubits matches the computational basis state, |0⟩. For instance, in a binary classification 
task implemented with a quantum circuit using three qubits to encode possible classes, post-selection is used to 
consider only those states where both second and third qubits are in the |0⟩ state, such as |000⟩ and |100⟩. 
This selective measurement filters out results where the post-selected qubits are |1⟩ (i.e., states |011⟩ or 
|110⟩), thus focusing the analysis on the relevant subset of the quantum state space. That is, the post-selection is 
to measure all quantum states but only interpret the state of the open-wire qubits for final classification, 
considering the states of the other qubits as ancillary information that supports the coherence of the quantum 
states but isn’t directly used for decision-making.  
 
In the MOF representation for binary classification, as discussed previously, each MOF is assigned a 
21 
 
binary label 0 (i.e. low) or 1 (i.e. high) depending on their pore volume or CO2 Henry’s constant properties. The 
assigned label becomes the true label compared with the predicted label as a result of the circuit measurement. 
This requires the post-selection on |0⟩ state of the two qubits to retain meaningful quantum states (|000⟩ and 
|100⟩) from the total probability distribution resulting from the circuit measurements. For example, the quantum 
circuit based on BoW model for binary classification allocates a single qubit for each MOF component vector 
(i.e., topology, node, and edge). This results in a total of 3 qubits, allowing 23 possible quantum states, from 000 
to 111 (Fig. 5b). Since the measurement outcome needs to be converged into single qubit states of 0 and 1, the 
measurement outcomes of 000 and 100 are interpreted as the probability distribution of predicted labels of 0 and 
1, respectively. Based on the post-selection criterion, the remaining measurement outcomes are discarded. This 
indicates that assuming all possible outcomes have a uniform distribution (e.g. all 23 quantum states are 
observed 125 shots each when measuring the circuit 1000 shots), only two in 23 shots would result in a 
meaningful outcome representing the probability distribution of predicted labels (Fig. 5b). The prediction 
accuracy (probability distribution) and loss are then calculated based on these post-selected outcomes. In this 
case, the measurement produces counts, 𝑐𝑐(𝑏𝑏2𝑏𝑏1𝑏𝑏0), with bj ∈{0, 1} across all three-bit outcomes. With S total 
circuit executions (i.e. shots), the kept shots after post-selection, 𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏, are  
𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏= 𝑐𝑐(000) + 𝑐𝑐(100)       (1) 
The post-selected class probabilities used for training and evaluation are then: 
𝑝𝑝0 = 𝑐𝑐(000)
𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏
,
𝑝𝑝1 = 𝑐𝑐(100)
𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏
          (2) 
where 𝑝𝑝0 + 𝑝𝑝1 = 1. Here, 𝑝𝑝0 and 𝑝𝑝1 are the predicted probabilities for class 0 and class 1, and 𝐾𝐾𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏/S is the 
empirical post-selection success rate. These probabilities are used to compute the binary cross-entropy loss, 
𝐿𝐿𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵, which trains the model by penalizing divergence from the ground-truth labels. With batch size 𝑁𝑁, the loss 
is: 
𝐿𝐿𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵= −1
𝑁𝑁෍[𝑦𝑦0
(𝑖𝑖) log൫𝑝𝑝0
(𝑖𝑖)൯+ 𝑦𝑦1
(𝑖𝑖) log൫𝑝𝑝1
(𝑖𝑖)൯]
𝑁𝑁
𝑖𝑖=1
         (3) 
Where y(𝑖𝑖) = [𝑦𝑦0
(𝑖𝑖), 𝑦𝑦1
(𝑖𝑖)] is the one-hot ground-trough label for sample 𝑖𝑖 and [𝑝𝑝0
(𝑖𝑖), 𝑝𝑝1
(𝑖𝑖)] is the corresponding 
predicted probability vector after the post-selection normalization. 
22 
 
 
The MOF representation for the multi-class classification, on the other hand, further increases the 
number of post-selections as it necessitates at least two open-wire qubits to represent the assigned label. Four 
classes of low, moderately low, moderately high, and high are encoded into two-qubit configurations of 00, 01, 
10, and 11, and then compared with the resulting probability distribution. As mentioned in the previous section, 
the output of the BoW model is represented as a n-dimensional single tensor, derived from the component-wise 
multiplication of n component vectors. For instance, n = 3 to represent a single MOF for binary classification, 
as it consists of three components of topology, node, and edge. This component-wise multiplication is encoded 
into the quantum circuit by entangling individual component qubits with an open wire qubit using controlled-not 
operations, representing the merge-dot of the string diagram (Fig. 3b(iii)). Thus, for the multi-classification task, 
two open wire qubits are required to deliver quaternary quantum states, necessitating the duplication of required 
qubits by n (Fig. 5a). This enables the comparison with true labels encoded as a two-qubit configuration but 
further increases statistical limitations by requiring the post-selecting of 4 qubits (Fig. 5c). Here, the 
measurement returns counts, 𝑐𝑐(𝑏𝑏5𝑏𝑏4𝑏𝑏3𝑏𝑏2𝑏𝑏1𝑏𝑏0), with bj ∈{0, 1} across all six-bit outcomes. Since the post-
selection retains only outcomes where the ancillary qubits are measured in the |0⟩ state, the kept shots after 
post-selection for multi classification, 𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚, are:  
𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚= 𝑐𝑐(000000) + 𝑐𝑐(010000) + 𝑐𝑐(100000) + 𝑐𝑐(110000)       (4) 
The post-selected class probabilities are then normalized as: 
𝑝𝑝00 = 𝑐𝑐(000000)
𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
,    𝑝𝑝01 = 𝑐𝑐(010000)
𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
,    𝑝𝑝10 = 𝑐𝑐(100000)
𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
,    𝑝𝑝11 = 𝑐𝑐(110000)
𝐾𝐾𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
          (5) 
where 𝑝𝑝00 + 𝑝𝑝01 + 𝑝𝑝10 + 𝑝𝑝11 = 1, ensuring proper probability normalization after post-selection. For multi-
class classification, the cross-entropy loss 𝐿𝐿𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is computed as: 
𝐿𝐿𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= −1
𝑁𝑁෍෍𝑦𝑦𝑗𝑗
(𝑖𝑖) log൫𝑝𝑝𝑗𝑗
(𝑖𝑖)൯
4
𝑗𝑗=1
𝑁𝑁
𝑖𝑖=1
         (6) 
Where 𝑗𝑗= {00, 01, 10, 11} represents the four classes, 𝑦𝑦𝑗𝑗
(𝑖𝑖) is the one-hot encoded ground-truth label for class 
𝑗𝑗 for sample 𝑖𝑖, and 𝑝𝑝𝑗𝑗
(𝑖𝑖) is the corresponding predicted probability after the post-selection normalization. That 
is, four in 26 shots would yield meaningful results, assuming the uniform distribution of total outcomes, and this 
notably reduces statistical significance by a factor of 4 compared to the binary classification situation. The 
23 
 
number of post-selections required grows exponentially as the number of classes increases. This indicates that 
the number of circuit measurements also needs to increase exponentially in accordance with the number of post-
selections to obtain meaningful statistics. To address this issue, the number of circuit executions for binary and 
multi-class classification models discussed in this section is set at 2048 and 8192 shots, respectively. One might 
also notice that the circuit designs for multi-class classification (Fig. 5a) involve fewer trainable parameters than 
those for binary classification (Fig. 3b). This difference arises from how the lambeq software internally handles 
circuit generation. Specifically, lambeq restricts the number of trainable gates in multi-qubit configurations to 
enforce well-defined entanglement patterns and avoid over-parameterization. We encourage readers to refer to 
the Methods section and Note S4 in the Supplementary Information for a detailed explanation for this constraint. 
 
Figure 5. (a) Quantum circuits of MOF named pcu N248 E70 with two-qubit configuration for multi-
classification tasks. Note that the blue lines represent open wires, and triangles pointing downward represent 
24 
 
qubits with a 0-effect. (b) A post-selection process assuming the quantum circuit measurement result in a 
uniform distribution for binary classification and (c) multi-classification tasks. The circuit measurement 
outcomes after the post-selection is vectorized to be matched with one-hot encoding form of the true labels. 
 
 
In addition to the difference in qubit requirements, the limited sample size per class makes model 
training for multi-class datasets difficult. Splitting the datasets with binary labels results in 225 samples per 
class, while the datasets with multi-class labels result in 112 or 113 samples per class out of a total of 450 
samples. Therefore, the task complexity of training models for datasets with multi-class labels is much higher 
than that with binary labels as illustrated in Fig. S5. One way to circumvent the limitation without increasing the 
overall dataset size or circuit depth is to transform the multi-class datasets into binary label-like datasets by 
separating them in a 20:80 ratio. For example, BoW model can be trained for binary classification based on the 
dataset divided into 113 samples of ‘low’ class with label 0 and the rest of the 337 samples labeled with 1. 
Similarly, 112 samples of ‘moderately low’ class would be labeled as 0, and the rest of the 338 samples would 
be labeled as 1; therefore, the trained BoW model becomes a 01-specialized model. Based on this strategy, the 
required qubits per MOF data point are maintained at three qubits; therefore, the number of circuit executions to 
obtain meaningful results for each class can be kept as 25 % of implementing the single multi-classification 
model. Fig. 6 illustrates training results of the four BoW models based on 00, 01, 10, and 11-specialized 
datasets. The training history showed good convergence behavior with smooth exponential decay, similar to that 
of the 50:50 binary dataset (Fig. 4), while the multi-class datasets showed large fluctuations over epochs (Fig. 
6a, b). The prediction accuracies showed consistent results with significant difference between multi-class and 
class-specialized datasets (Fig. 6c, d). The single multi-classification model showed inferior performance over 
individual binary classification models trained on each class-specialized dataset by showing the average 
differences of 40.6 % and 36.7% for the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant, respectively. Consequentially, 
these results reflected increased task complexity in the multi-class datasets, which were caused by changes in 
trainable sample size. 
 
Among BoW models for binary classification, a unique U-shaped trend was observed in the accuracy 
for both pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant as the values started at about 0.9 in 00, reached the minimum 
value in 01 or 10, and then recovered in 11-specialized datasets. This is mainly because the overall trend of the 
building block dependency is focused on the low and high-class datasets, and the moderately low-class datasets 
25 
 
have the least number of class-significant building blocks (Fig. 2b, d). Comprehensive evaluation metrics, 
validate this relationship that the Bi00 and Bi11 models achieve precision and recall above 0.74 with F1 scores 
reaching 0.77, while Bi01 and Bi10 models show reduced performance, consistent with their fewer distinguishing 
structure features (Table S3). Importantly, all class-specialized binary models substantially outperform the 
single-multiclass mode (Fig. 6c, b), which struggles with F1 scores of only 0.4 - 0.42 and exhibits systematic 
misclassification between adjacent classes (Fig. S10, Fig. S11). Despite the trade-off of training multiple 
models, the author believes this approach is a reasonable solution to maintaining dataset size and the complexity 
of the quantum model, considering the quantum resource in the NISQ device. Thus, this multi-QNLP model-
based architecture was adopted to further experiment with the MOF generation task. 
 
Figure 6. Training history of loss based on (a) pore volume and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant dataset. Accuracy bar 
graphs of (c) pore volume and (d) CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. Note that Multi, Bi00, Bi01, Bi10, and Bi11 
represent BoW models trained based on the multi-classification dataset, 00-specialized dataset (binary 
classification dataset divided into classes 00 and 01+10+11), 01, 10, and 11-specialized datasets, respectively. 
 
26 
 
Inverse Design of MOFs with Target Property  
 
As sentences are considered logically correct based on word choice and grammar, MOFs can be 
considered complete only when it satisfies the essential components and follows a consistent set of structural 
rules, referred to there as the MOF grammar. A valid MOF must include three core components, topology, metal 
node, and organic linker (edge). In this study, we devised a classical MOF text input generation loop that 
randomly samples MOF components and assembles them into syntactically valid text representations based on 
defined MOF grammar rules, which are then evaluated by QNLP classifiers trained on pore volume and CO2 
Henry’s constant datasets (Fig. 7a). The MOF grammar used in our framework consists of two key constraints. 
First, each MOF must follow a fixed component order, topology, followed by node, and then edge, which is 
consistent with the structure of the original dataset. Second, each MOF must include only one of each 
component type, meaning that mixed-metal or mixed-linker combinations (e.g. “pcu N123 N106 E70”) are not 
allowed. These rules ensure that all generated MOF inputs are interpretable by the QNLP classifiers and 
structurally coherent with the dataset.  
 
Once the text-based MOF input data is generated, it is transformed into the quantum circuit based on 
the BoW string diagram. Then, the quantum classification models discussed in the previous section evaluate the 
input MOF’s property based on the probability distribution obtained from the circuit measurements (Fig. 7b). A 
single MOF quantum circuit is used as an input for four distinct classification models: Model 00 (i.e. BoW 
models trained on datasets specialized for label '00'), Model 01, Model 10, and Model 11. The interpretation of 
total probability distributions from these four models is based on the relative probability distributions against a 
class label ‘0’, as each model is specialized to recognize a specific range of properties. Here, the label '0' 
represents specialized property classes (i.e., low, moderately low, moderately high, and high) which corresponds 
to quantum state ‘0’ from the classification models. For instance, if the ‘0’ state (i.e. specialized property class) 
of the MOF quantum circuit is measured with probabilities of 5%, 1%, 3% and 95% in the CO2 Henry’s 
constant models 00, 01, 10, and 11, respectively, the MOF is likely to have a high CO2 Henry’s constant with 
91.3% relative probability (Fig. 7b). Finally, the MOF is evaluated to determine if it possesses the desired 
property, based on whether the highest relative probability exceeds a set threshold. The threshold cutoffs for 
each target property were determined through comparative calculations, where various threshold values were 
tested to identify the optimal threshold value that maximizes the inverse design performance (Note S5, Table 
S4). Based on the calculation, the threshold was set to 85% for the pore volume dataset and 65% for the CO2 
27 
 
Henry’s constant dataset. The MOF that meets the threshold goes through the structure generation process, 
while those that do not are redirected back to the input generation stage. This cycle continues until a generated 
MOF satisfies the threshold condition. The structure generation process based on the MOF text input is done by 
classical computation based on our in-house software, PORMAKE40 (Fig. 7c). The MOF name's raw text 
generated in step 1 (e.g., pcu N123 E9) can be directly inputted, as it adheres to the naming convention of 
building blocks used in PORMAKE. 
 
 
28 
 
Figure 7. The overall workflow of the MOF generation process: (a) MOF input generation process based on 
random selection rule. (b) Property prediction based on relative probability distributions collected from four 
binary classification models. (c) MOF structure generation based on selected topology and building blocks. 
  
 
The performance of the inverse design framework was evaluated based on 100 independent generation 
29 
 
tasks for a given property class. To evaluate the inverse design performance more rigorously, the MOF search 
space for candidate generation was explicitly restricted to the test dataset only to ensure that none of the 
generated structures were seen during training. In this setup, the system was forced to generate candidate MOFs 
exclusively from previously unseen combinations. The resulting MOF generation framework showed good 
performance, with a total average accuracy of 93.88% (Table 1). The overall generation performance improved 
by 7.88% compared to the classification performance (Fig. 6). For both target properties, pore volume and CO2 
Henry’s constant, the inverse design framework significantly improved the performance of the least accurate 
classification models, while models that already performed well in classification resulted in relatively small 
improvement. For example, the moderately high CO2 Henry’s constant class showed improvement of 20% 
compared to just 5% for the low CO2 Henry’s constant class. This improvement can be attributed to the 
collaborative multi-model architecture of the framework, where the evaluation of each MOF candidate 
incorporates contributions from all specialized QNLP classifiers. That is, the relative probability of the least 
performing classifier benefits from the contributions of other QNLP classifiers while the best-performing 
classifier risks its accuracy by incorporating predictions from relatively less accurate model. Consequently, the 
proposed framework maintained outstanding and consistent performance across target properties, achieving 
average accuracies of 97.75% for pore volume and 90% for CO2 Henry’s constant, even under the restricted test 
setup where candidate MOFs were generated exclusively from unseen combinations. 
 
The average number of guesses until correct prediction can be interpreted as a metric that 
distinguishes between incorrect predictions and timeouts. A timeout occurs when the QNLP models' predictions 
reach 100 trials without achieving a prediction that satisfies the threshold probability. As the number of timeout 
trials increases, so does the average number of guesses, conveying a meaning slightly different from that of an 
incorrect prediction. An incorrect guess indicates the model’s failure to accurately predict a MOF’s property, 
while a timeout suggests that the model has not yet delivered its prediction, retaining the potential to eventually 
make correct predictions. This distinction allows for a comprehensive evaluation of the generation performance 
across target classes beyond merely assessing accuracy. Specifically, in the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset, the 
‘moderately low’ class achieved 81% accuracy with an average of 28.44 guesses, whereas the ‘high’ class 
reached 90% accuracy with an average of 7.33 guesses (Table 1). When solely evaluating performance based on 
accuracy, the generation performance of the ‘moderately low’ case might appear inferior to that of the 
‘moderately high’ case. However, the ‘moderately low’ case included 16 timeouts, while the ‘high’ case had 
30 
 
none, meaning all 10 trials not included in the accuracy calculation were incorrect predictions (Table S4). As a 
result, our MOF generation framework of the multi-model-based architecture showed outstanding performance 
across target properties with an average accuracy of 97.75% and 90% for pore volume and CO2 Henry’s 
constant, respectively. Representative MOF structures generated by the inverse design process are illustrated in 
Fig. S12. The full set of 450 generated MOF structures has been provided in Crystallographic Information 
Framework (.cif) format and made publicly available via our GitHub repository, 
https://github.com/shinyoung3/MOF_QNLP.  
 
Table 1. The test result of generating MOF with target property. The accuracy was calculated as the ratio of 
correct predictions over a total of 100 generation tasks (the number of correct, incorrect, and timeouts was 
considered). 
 
Pore Volume 
CO2 Henry's Constant 
Target Property 
Accuracy [%] 
Avg. Guess 
Accuracy [%] 
Avg. Guess 
Low 
100 
7.71 
87 
6.67 
Mod. Low 
100 
10.73 
81 
28.44 
Mod. High 
91 
9.98 
98 
25.13 
High 
100 
11.76 
90 
7.33 
 
Extensibility of QNLP to Complex Reticular Frameworks 
 
Although our simple MOF dataset of fixed set of topologies with a single building block combination 
resulted in a non-sequence and non-syntax-sensitive model as the optimum approach (i.e. BoW model), the 
authors want to highlight that this result doesn’t capture the complexity inherent in MOF structures. For 
example, two mixed-metal MOFs with identical chemical compositions but different arrangements of the guest 
metal clusters can be identified as different structures because the spatial arrangement of the components can 
affect their chemical properties41. In fact, the sequence is one of the key parameters often introduced to 
compositionally repeating structures for structural representation and analysis. That is, the sequence of the 
materials becomes the boundary of determining whether they are identical or not. For example, Phong et al. 
addressed the periodicity of the block copolymers as a factor causing a difference in mechanical and thermal 
31 
 
phase behavior42. They synthesized two types of dynamic block copolymers (DBCPs) with identical chemical 
compositions of PEG and PDMS oligomers but different sequences. Despite their identical chemical 
composition, well-ordered periodic DBCPs exhibited higher ionic conductivity and flow temperature than 
DBCPs with random sequences, which were attributed to the enhanced ion-transporting and thermal stability 
due to the formation of supramolecular nanofibers by stacking the hydrogen bonding units42. Another familiar 
example is DNA sequence. The sequence of DNA block copolymers was proved to play a crucial role in 
dictating the physical form and properties of the assembled structures as variations in the DNA sequences led to 
the formation of three distinctly different structures by Rizzuto et al43.  
 
As mentioned earlier, this concept is applicable to many other periodic crystalline materials, such as 
MOFs and covalent organic frameworks (COFs). Recently, Canossa et al. claimed the concept of sequence as 
one of the crucial indicators for defining structural identity and distinctive properties of multivariate crystals44. 
They defined this sequential property as unit cell information capacity (UCiC) to store tunable chemical or 
physical information of multivariate frameworks44. When a material has the number of 𝑛𝑛 tunable variables and 
𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖 is the multiplicity of 𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡ℎ variable, UCiC is defined as: 
UCiC = ෑ𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖
𝑛𝑛
𝑖𝑖=1
= m1 × 𝑚𝑚2 × … × 𝑚𝑚𝑛𝑛                  (7) 
 
The practical advantage of QNLP become particularly relevant when considering such complex 
multivariate frameworks based on its native tensor product operations and inherently probabilistic outputs. In 
our current study, each MOF is represented by a single topology, node, and edge combination, requiring only 
three qubits per structure. However, as structural complexity increases to accommodate multiple 𝑛𝑛 node and 𝑚𝑚 
edge sites simultaneously (e.g. 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡−node1 −𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒2 −⋯−𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑛𝑛−𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒1 −edge2 −⋯−𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑚), 
the distinction between QNLP and classical approaches becomes more pronounced. Classical methods would 
require explicit multiplication of weight matrices for each component by 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟=
 𝑤𝑤𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡× 𝑤𝑤𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒1 × … × 𝑤𝑤𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑒𝑛𝑛× 𝑤𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒1 … × 𝑤𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑚, whereas QNLP naturally encodes these relationships 
through quantum entanglement (e.g. CNOT gates) within a single state-preparation framework. The tensor 
product structure emerges naturally from quantum superposition by |𝜓𝜓𝑀𝑀𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂⟩= 𝑈𝑈𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔(|𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡⟩⊗|𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒1⟩⊗
… ⊗|𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑛𝑛⟩⊗|𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒1ൿ⊗… ⊗|𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑚ൿ), where |𝜓𝜓𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀⟩ is the quantum state that represents a single MOF 
after encoding, and 𝑈𝑈𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 is the quantum circuit (a sequence of gates, including entangling gates) that prepares 
32 
 
this state from the basis inputs (|𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡⟩, |𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑛𝑛⟩, |𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑚⟩). This allows the joint composition is carried out 
by state preparation and entangling operations rather than by an explicit chain of classical matrix 
multiplications. Additionally, quantum measurements inherently produce normalized probability distributions, 
eliminating the normalization steps required in classical models (e.g. softmax). 
 
The representational advantages of QNLP become increasingly relevant not only as structural 
complexity grows but also as representation richness increases. Our current simplified tokenization scheme 
(topology/node/edge + number), while convenient for proof-of-concept demonstration, is functionally close to 
one-hot encodings and does not capture deeper chemical meaning. The UCiC concept highlights how the 
multiplicity and chemical meaning of variables significantly impact material representation quality. Chemically 
meaningful tokens such as functional group descriptors (e.g. carboxylate, imidazole, sulfonate) or topology-
based chemical encodings (e.g. octahedral_node, trigonal_planar) would encode richer semantic relationships 
that QNLP could exploit through its natural language processing capabilities. Such representations could enable 
QNLP to capture chemical intuition and learn similarities between chemically related components rather than 
treating each as completely independent entities. However, a trade-off exists between semantic richness and 
quantum resource requirements, as more complex tokenization schemes may demand deeper circuits or more 
sophisticated encoding strategies.  
 
Our current focus on classification task provides a natural starting point for adapting QNLP circuits to 
material’s data within NISQ hardware, while demonstrating the methodological feasibility. However, for 
practical inverse design that require quantitative property predictions such as precise adsorption energies or 
electrical conductivities, regression capabilities remain essential. A practical path forward is a two-stage 
framework. First, the QNLP classifier could rapidly screen promising candidates within desired property ranges, 
followed by a regression step using classical (or quantum) models or physics-based simulations. Indeed, recent 
quantum machine learning studies have begun adopting such hybrid workflows to navigate materials large 
design spaces by utilizing the representational advantages of quantum algorithms45, 46.    
 
As UCiC is a highly flexible variable contingent upon the framework's defined variables and variants, 
the optimal model for material representation also greatly depends on the complexity of the periodic structures. 
Consequently, the four compositional models we studied for representing simple MOF structures necessitate 
careful selection and further refinement based on the target materials. Thus, the extensibility of QNLP to other 
complex materials would depend on how well the algorithm respects the structural identity of the materials 
33 
 
while addressing the statistical challenges from the increased requirement for qubits to process such 
complexities. While current NISQ hardware constrains demonstrations to relatively simple representations, the 
QNLP framework provides a foundation for extending to more complex multi-component systems as quantum 
resource scale.  
 
Discussion 
 
In this study, we experimented with the applicability of quantum natural language processing for the 
inverse design of the MOFs with the desired target properties of pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant. The 
target properties of pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant were calculated against 450 hypothetical MOF 
structures consisting of 3 topologies, 10 metal nodes, and 15 organic edges. To construct a multi-class 
classification model, these datasets were evenly separated into four classes: low, moderately low, moderately 
high, and high classes for pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant, respectively. A comparative study of pre-
existing QNLP models was conducted to find an optimum approach to process quantum circuits in our MOF 
dataset. The results showed the best performance in the following order: BoW, DisCoCat, and sequence-based 
models, with the top-performing model achieving validation accuracies of 88.6% and 78% for binary 
classification based on the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets, respectively. This performance is 
attributed to the non-sequence-dependent nature of our MOF datasets, meaning that completing a MOF structure 
relies on whether it includes a complete set of topology and building blocks rather than the order in which they 
are assembled. Based on the choice of the QNLP model, multi-class classification models were developed, 
considering the probabilistic nature of quantum circuit measurements. Four binary classification models were 
individually optimized to the specific target classes, and the models showed test accuracies of 92%, 92%, 86%, 
and 98% for low, moderately low, moderately high and high pore volume classes, respectively. Similarly, the 
test accuracies on the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset recorded 86%, 72%, 78%, and 84%. The performance of 
generating MOFs with desired properties showed improved accuracies by 7.88% on average owing to the 
requirements in the generation framework that the classification models exceed the confidence threshold.  
 
Importantly, the goal of this study is not to demonstrate quantum computational advantage over 
classical machine learning methods in terms of speed, scalability, or accuracy. Instead, our aim is to establish a 
conceptual foundation for applying quantum computing, particularly in the current NISQ era, to modeling large 
34 
 
molecular systems that go beyond the relatively simple periodic materials specifically explored in previous 
quantum machine learning studies. As discussed in the introduction, although NISQ devices offer potential for 
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms, clear demonstration of quantum advantage remain elusive due to qubit 
noise, small system sizes, and shallow circuit constraints5, 10. By exploring how QNLP encodes structural 
materials data such as MOFs, this study proposes a framework that can support future quantum-native strategies 
for materials design, particularly as quantum hardware continues to advance. While recent advance in de novo 
generative models for MOF inverse design, including diffusion47, variational autoencoders (VAEs)48, and 
transformers49 models, have demonstrated remarkable success in proposing new MOF structures and 
chemistries, our approach focuses on property-guided selection within well-defined component spaces using 
quantum computational principles. The strategy is necessitated by fundamental scalability constraints, as MOF 
unit cells containing hundred of atoms would require prohibitively large number of qubits for direct quantum 
generative modeling. Consequently, our QNLP classifier-based framework serves as an exploration of quantum 
computing in materials informatics rather than competing directly with established generative models. Despite 
these limitations, applying QNLP to MOF design with limited datasets represents a meaningful first step toward 
quantum algorithm-based inverse design frameworks. 
 
The extensibility of QNLP to other materials was further discussed based on the significance of 
sequence in effectively describing the complex nature inherent in the periodic materials. The comparative study 
presented in this paper was limited to the simple MOF structures, where the arrangement and sequence of 
components were considered less critical. However, this should not imply that all MOF data should be treated 
without regard to sequence. In fact, the complexity of many periodic materials necessitates careful design that 
considers sequence as a key factor in defining structural identity44. This leads us to believe that the effectiveness 
of QNLP in material science depends on its ability to deal with the detailed structures of the materials. Although 
our study only looked at a small part of the wide variety of MOF search spaces, we believe applying QNLP to 
design MOFs with a limited dataset is an exciting first step. Our approach, inspired by successful applications of 
QNLP in fields as diverse as sentence generation15 and music composition16, demonstrated the potential for 
classifying and generating large periodic materials with desired properties. This method could provide a novel 
perspective on efficiently navigating the vast search space of MOFs by bridging the gap between quantum 
algorithm and material design.  
 
35 
 
Methods 
 
Dataset Preparation 
 
The MOF structures for the quantum model training were generated using our in-house software, 
PORMAKE40. These 450 hypothetical MOF structures were optimized by applying a force field in BIOBIA 
Materials Studio 201950. The target geometrical property, pore volume, was calculated based on a channel and 
probe radius of 1.2 and the number of Monte Carlo samples per unit cell of 5000 using Zeo++51. The target 
chemical property, CO2 Henry’s constant, of 450 MOFs was calculated using Monte Carlo simulations in the 
RASPA package52. The simulations were performed at 298K using the Widom insertion method, which 
estimates Henry’s constant by inserting test molecules into the MOF structures at infinite dilution. UFF was 
used for MOF structures, applying Ewald summation for electrostatics with an Ewald precision of 10-6 and a 
cutoff distance of 12.8 Å. The Lorentz-Berthelot mixing rule was used to determine the interaction parameters 
between framework atoms and CO2 molecules. Each simulation ran for 50,000 Monte Carlo cycles, with 
Henry’s constant computed from the Widom insertion results. Then, boundaries for class labels were determined 
based on 25, 50, and 75 percentiles of target properties’ distributions (Fig.2). Train, validation, and test datasets 
were divided into 300, 100, and 50 samples.  
 
Quantum Model Training 
 
The MOF input data was processed for quantum computation using lambeq, an open-source Python 
library for QNLP37. The input data consisted of a class label and its corresponding MOF name in order of 
topology, node, and edge (Supplementary Information 2). The difference between NLP and QNLP starts from 
the input data processing, while their goal remains the same: translation between unstructured and structured 
language. To prepare the quantum circuits representing instructions of the gate operations to encode MOF 
information in qubits, the dataset was first tokenized and processed into the string diagrams based on the choice 
of the models: bag-of-word, DisCoCat, and word-sequence models. The four types of method were used to 
generate the string diagrams as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S3. The DisCoCat model-based approach necessitates 
the conversion of pregroup diagrams into string diagrams; accordingly, the dataset underwent processing based 
on rewriting rules35. The string diagrams, representing MOF data, were subsequently transformed into quantum 
36 
 
circuits employing the IQP (Instantaneous Quantum Polynomial) ansatz with the choice of two Rx gates and a 
single Rz gate. Although the specific selection of the ansatz should not be overly emphasized35, the IQP was 
chosen due to its well-reported accomplishments in prior research15, 16, 35, 53. The single IQP layer was used 
throughout the experiments to maintain the circuit depth small.  
 
Importantly, the circuit architecture differs between binary and multi-class classification tasks due to 
how the lambeq software internally handles single- and multi-qubit representations. For single qubit 
representation (as used in binary classification), lambeq allows multiple parameterized gates such as Rx-Rz-Rx 
arrangement per qubit, controlled by the n_single_qubit_params argument. This explicit multi-parameterization 
helps avoid degeneracy issues common in single-qubit circuits. However, when components are represented 
using multiple qubits (as in multi-class classification), lambeq internally applies a fixed entangled architecture 
with Hadamard and controlled gates, and systematically disables multiple single-qubit rotations (assigning only 
one trainable parameter per qubit). Degeneracy in this case is handled naturally via entablement. The number of 
parameters for multi-qubit representations, therefore, can be only controlled by replicating the circuit depth (Fig. 
S7). Since we adopted the single circuit layer approach throughout this study, this design decision affects the 
total number of circuit parameters and is further discussed in more detail in Note S4. 
 
All QNLP models studied in this paper were trained using simulated hardware based on Qiskit 
AerBackend26 with 8192 shots (2048 shots for binary models 00 to 11). In addition, all models were trained on a 
cross-entropy objective, and the quantum parameters were updated based on the Simultaneous Perturbation 
Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) optimization method54. The initial learning rate and initial parameter shift 
scaling factor were set as 0.05 and 0.06, respectively, while the stability constant of the classical optimizer were 
uniquely chosen for each model based on the comparative analysis test (Table S5). 
   
MOF Text Input Generation Algorithm 
 
The generation algorithm was implemented with context-free grammar (CFG) using the natural 
language toolkit55. The CFG for MOFs was designed to adhere to a random generation rule. Individual MOF 
building blocks were randomly selected from the search space for topology, nodes, and edges, respectively.  
 
37 
 
MOF Generation Test 
 
The MOF generation performance was measured based on 100 individual tests for each class. The 
accuracy of generating MOF with the target class was calculated based on the ratio of correct guesses against 
total guesses. Total guesses were defined as a sum of time-out, correct, and incorrect guesses (i.e. 100 runs). The 
time-out indicates a situation in which the QNLP model’s prediction exceeds 100 iterations to output a 
prediction satisfying a threshold probability of 85% for the pore volume dataset and 65% for the CO2 Henry’s 
constant dataset.  
 
 
Data availability 
Text datasets used for model training and testing, as well as MOF structure files (.cif), are available from 
https://github.com/shinyoung3/MOF_QNLP. 
 
Code availability 
Code for MOF QNLP model training and MOF generation is available from 
https://github.com/shinyoung3/MOF_QNLP 
Acknowledgements 
We thank National Research Foundation of Korea (Project Number RS-2024-00337004) for the financial 
support. 
 
Author Contributions 
S.K. performed the calculation, analysis and writing of the manuscript and J.K. supervised the project. All 
authors read and approved the manuscript. 
38 
 
 
Competing Interest 
The authors declare no competing financial interest. 
 
References 
(1) Feynman, R. P. Simulating Physics with Computers. International Journal of Theoretical Physics 
1982, 21, 467. 
(2) Sajjan, M.; Sureshbabu, S. H.; Kais, S. Quantum Machine-Learning for Eigenstate Filtration in Two-
Dimensional Materials. J Am Chem Soc 2021, 143 (44), 18426-18445. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c06246  
From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(3) Sajjan, M.; Li, J.; Selvarajan, R.; Sureshbabu, S. H.; Kale, S. S.; Gupta, R.; Singh, V.; Kais, S. Quantum 
machine learning for chemistry and physics. Chem Soc Rev 2022, 51 (15), 6475-6573. DOI: 
10.1039/d2cs00203e  From NLM Medline. 
(4) Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P.; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P.; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum machine learning. 
Nature 2017, 549 (7671), 195-202. DOI: 10.1038/nature23474. 
(5) Seeking a quantum advantage for machine learning. Nature Machine Intelligence 2023, 5 (8), 
813-813. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-023-00710-9. 
(6) Andersson, M. P.; Jones, M. N.; Mikkelsen, K. V.; You, F.; Mansouri, S. S. Quantum computing for 
chemical and biomolecular product design. Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 2022, 36. DOI: 
10.1016/j.coche.2021.100754. 
(7) Kanno, S.; Tada, T. Many-body calculations for periodic materials via restricted Boltzmann 
machine-based VQE. Quantum Science and Technology 2021, 6 (2). DOI: 10.1088/2058-9565/abe139. 
(8) Brown, P.; Zhuang, H. Quantum machine-learning phase prediction of high-entropy alloys. 
Materials Today 2023, 63, 18-31. DOI: 10.1016/j.mattod.2023.02.014. 
(9) Naseri, M.; Gusarov, S.; Salahub, D. R. Quantum Machine Learning in Materials Prediction: A Case 
Study on ABO(3) Perovskite Structures. J Phys Chem Lett 2023, 14 (31), 6940-6947. DOI: 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.3c01703  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(10) Wang, Y.; Liu, J. A comprehensive review of quantum machine learning: from NISQ to fault 
tolerance. Rep Prog Phys 2024, 87 (11). DOI: 10.1088/1361-6633/ad7f69  From NLM PubMed-not-
MEDLINE. 
(11) Mathematical Foundations for a Compositional Distributional Model of Meaning. ArXiv 2010. 
(12) Ruskanda, F. Z.; Abiwardani, M. R.; Syafalni, I.; Larasati, H. T.; Mulyawan, R. Simple Sentiment 
Analysis Ansatz for Sentiment Classification in Quantum Natural Language Processing. IEEE Access 
2023, 11, 120612-120627. DOI: 10.1109/access.2023.3327873. 
(13) Zeng, W.; Coecke, B. Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing. 
39 
 
Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science 2016, 221, 67-75. DOI: 10.4204/eptcs.221.8. 
(14) Cerezo, M.; Verdon, G.; Huang, H. Y.; Cincio, L.; Coles, P. J. Challenges and opportunities in 
quantum machine learning. Nat Comput Sci 2022, 2 (9), 567-576. DOI: 10.1038/s43588-022-00311-
3  From NLM Medline. 
(15) Amin Karamlou, M. P., James Wootton. Quantum Natural Language Generation on Near-Term 
Devices. arXiv 2022. DOI: arXiv:2211.00727v1  
(16) Eduardo Reck Miranda, R. Y., Anna Pearson, Konstantinos Meichanetzidis,  Bob Coecke. A 
Quantum Natural Language Processing Approach to Musical Intelligence. arXiv 2021. DOI: 
arXiv:2111.06741v2. 
(17) Furukawa, H.; Cordova, K. E.; O'Keeffe, M.; Yaghi, O. M. The chemistry and applications of metal-
organic frameworks. Science 2013, 341 (6149), 1230444. DOI: 10.1126/science.1230444. 
(18) Wang, M.; Dong, R.; Feng, X. Two-dimensional conjugated metal-organic frameworks (2D c-
MOFs): chemistry and function for MOFtronics. Chem Soc Rev 2021, 50 (4), 2764-2793. DOI: 
10.1039/d0cs01160f. 
(19) Feng, L.; Day, G. S.; Wang, K.-Y.; Yuan, S.; Zhou, H.-C. Strategies for Pore Engineering in Zirconium 
Metal-Organic Frameworks. Chem 2020, 6 (11), 2902-2923. DOI: 10.1016/j.chempr.2020.09.010. 
(20) Meng, S. S.; Xu, M.; Guan, H.; Chen, C.; Cai, P.; Dong, B.; Tan, W. S.; Gu, Y. H.; Tang, W. Q.; Xie, L. 
G.; et al. Anisotropic flexibility and rigidification in a TPE-based Zr-MOFs with scu topology. Nat 
Commun 2023, 14 (1), 5347. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-41055-6  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(21) Smith, M. K.; Jensen, K. E.; Pivak, P. A.; Mirica, K. A. Direct Self-Assembly of Conductive Nanorods 
of Metal–Organic Frameworks into Chemiresistive Devices on Shrinkable Polymer Films. Chemistry 
of Materials 2016, 28 (15), 5264-5268. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b02528. 
(22) Suresh, K.; Matzger, A. J. Enhanced Drug Delivery by Dissolution of Amorphous Drug 
Encapsulated in a Water Unstable Metal-Organic Framework (MOF). Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2019, 
58 (47), 16790-16794. DOI: 10.1002/anie.201907652  From NLM Medline. 
(23) Chen, Z.; Mian, M. R.; Lee, S. J.; Chen, H.; Zhang, X.; Kirlikovali, K. O.; Shulda, S.; Melix, P.; Rosen, 
A. S.; Parilla, P. A.; et al. Fine-Tuning a Robust Metal-Organic Framework toward Enhanced Clean 
Energy Gas Storage. J Am Chem Soc 2021, 143 (45), 18838-18843. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c08749  From 
NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(24) Rodenas, T.; Luz, I.; Prieto, G.; Seoane, B.; Miro, H.; Corma, A.; Kapteijn, F.; Llabres, I. X. F. X.; 
Gascon, J. Metal-organic framework nanosheets in polymer composite materials for gas separation. 
Nat Mater 2015, 14 (1), 48-55. DOI: 10.1038/nmat4113  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(25) Gonzalez, J.; Mukherjee, K.; Colón, Y. J. Understanding Structure–Property Relationships of MOFs 
for Gas Sensing through Henry’s Constants. Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data 2022, 68 (1), 
291-302. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jced.2c00443. 
(26) 
Qiskit: 
An 
Open-source 
Framework 
for 
Quantum 
Computing; 
IBM: 
2019. 
https://zenodo.org/records/2562111 (accessed. 
(27) Zorainy, M. Y.; Gar Alalm, M.; Kaliaguine, S.; Boffito, D. C. Revisiting the MIL-101 metal–organic 
framework: design, synthesis, modifications, advances, and recent applications. Journal of Materials 
40 
 
Chemistry A 2021, 9 (39), 22159-22217. DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06238g. 
(28) Ramsahye, N. A.; Trung, T. K.; Scott, L.; Nouar, F.; Devic, T.; Horcajada, P.; Magnier, E.; David, O.; 
Serre, C.; Trens, P. Impact of the Flexible Character of MIL-88 Iron(III) Dicarboxylates on the 
Adsorption of n-Alkanes. Chemistry of Materials 2013, 25 (3), 479-488. DOI: 10.1021/cm303830b. 
(29) Christian Serre, F. M., Christelle Thouvenot, Marc Nogue` s, Ge´rard Marsolier, Daniel Loue¨r,, 
Ge´rard Fe´rey. Very Large Breathing Effect in the First Nanoporous Chromium(III)-Based Solids: MIL-
53 or CrIII(OH)·{O2C−C6H4−CO2}·{HO2C−C6H4−CO2H}x·H2Oy. J Am Chem Soc 2002, 124 (45), 
13519-13526. 
(30) Mohamed Eddaoudi, J. K., Nathaniel Rosi, David Vodak,Joseph Wachter,Michael O’Keeffe, Omar 
M. Yaghi. Systematic Design of Pore Size and Functionality in Isoreticular MOFs and Their Application 
in Methane Storage. Science 2002, 295 (18), 469-472. 
(31) Li, L.-J.; Qin, C.; Wang, X.-L.; Shao, K.-Z.; Su, Z.-M.; Liu, P.-J. Synthesis and characterization of two 
self-catenated networks and one case of pcu topology based on the mixed ligands. CrystEngComm 
2012, 14 (12). DOI: 10.1039/c2ce06451k. 
(32) Jaeger, S.; Fulle, S.; Turk, S. Mol2vec: Unsupervised Machine Learning Approach with Chemical 
Intuition. J Chem Inf Model 2018, 58 (1), 27-35. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00616  From NLM Medline. 
(33) Ross, J.; Belgodere, B.; Chenthamarakshan, V.; Padhi, I.; Mroueh, Y.; Das, P. Large-scale chemical 
language representations capture molecular structure and properties. Nature Machine Intelligence 
2022, 4 (12), 1256-1264. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-022-00580-7. 
(34) Ozturk, H.; Ozgur, A.; Schwaller, P.; Laino, T.; Ozkirimli, E. Exploring chemical space using natural 
language processing methodologies for drug discovery. Drug Discov Today 2020, 25 (4), 689-705. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2020.01.020  From NLM Medline. 
(35) Robin Lorenz' Anna Pearson, K. M., Dimitri Kartsaklis, Bob Coecke. QNLP in Practice: Running 
Compositional Models of Meaning on a Quantum Computer. Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research 2023, 76 1305-1342. 
(36) Widdows, D.; Aboumrad, W.; Kim, D.; Ray, S.; Mei, J. Quantum Natural Language Processing. KI 
- Künstliche Intelligenz 2024, 38 (4), 293-310. DOI: 10.1007/s13218-024-00861-w. 
(37) Dimitri Kartsaklis, I. F., Richie Yeung, Anna Pearson, Robin Lorenz, Alexis Toumi, Giovanni de 
Felice,; Konstantinos Meichanetzidis, S. C., Bob Coecke. lambeq: An Efficient High-Level Python 
Library for Quantum NLP. arXiv 2021. DOI: arXiv:2110.04236v1  
(38) Xie, L. S.; Skorupskii, G.; Dinca, M. Electrically Conductive Metal-Organic Frameworks. Chem Rev 
2020, 120 (16), 8536-8580. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00766. 
(39) Bostrom, H. L. B.; Emmerling, S.; Heck, F.; Koschnick, C.; Jones, A. J.; Cliffe, M. J.; Al Natour, R.; 
Bonneau, M.; Guillerm, V.; Shekhah, O.; et al. How Reproducible is the Synthesis of Zr-Porphyrin 
Metal-Organic Frameworks? An Interlaboratory Study. Adv Mater 2024, 36 (15), e2304832. DOI: 
10.1002/adma.202304832  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(40) Lee, S.; Kim, B.; Cho, H.; Lee, H.; Lee, S. Y.; Cho, E. S.; Kim, J. Computational Screening of Trillions 
of Metal-Organic Frameworks for High-Performance Methane Storage. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
2021, 13 (20), 23647-23654. DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c02471  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
41 
 
(41) Liu, Q.; Cong, H.; Deng, H. Deciphering the Spatial Arrangement of Metals and Correlation to 
Reactivity in Multivariate Metal-Organic Frameworks. J Am Chem Soc 2016, 138 (42), 13822-13825. 
DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b08724  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(42) Phong, J. K.; Cooper, C. B.; Michalek, L.; Lin, Y.; Nishio, Y.; Shi, Y.; Gong, H.; Vigil, J. A.; Ilavsky, J.; 
Kuzmenko, I.; et al. Sequence-dependent self-assembly of supramolecular nanofibers in periodic 
dynamic block copolymers. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2024, 12 (2), 1145-1156. DOI: 
10.1039/d3ta06695a. 
(43) Rizzuto, F. J.; Dore, M. D.; Rafique, M. G.; Luo, X.; Sleiman, H. F. DNA Sequence and Length 
Dictate the Assembly of Nucleic Acid Block Copolymers. J Am Chem Soc 2022, 144 (27), 12272-
12279. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.2c03506  From NLM Medline. 
(44) Stefano Canossa, Z. J., Cornelius Gropp, Zichao Rong, Evelyn Ploetz, Stefan Wuttke, Omar M. 
Yaghi. System of sequences in multivariate reticular structures. Nature Reviews Materials 2023, 8. 
DOI: 10.1038/s41578-022-00482-5. 
(45) Jakob Günther, T. W., Moritz Bensberg, Freek Witteveen, Matthew S. Teynor, F. Emil Thomasen, 
Valentina Sora, William Bro-Jørgensen, Raphael T. Husistein, Mihael Erakovic, Marek Miller, Leah 
Weisburn, Minsik Cho, Marco Eckhoff, Aram W. Harrow, Anders Krogh, Troy Van Voorhis, Kresten 
Lindorff-Larsen, Gemma Solomon, Markus Reiher, Matthias Christandl. How to use quantum 
computers for biomolecular free energies. ArXiv 2025. DOI: arXiv:2506.20587. 
(46) Ghazi Vakili, M.; Gorgulla, C.; Snider, J.; Nigam, A.; Bezrukov, D.; Varoli, D.; Aliper, A.; Polykovsky, 
D.; Padmanabha Das, K. M.; Cox Iii, H.; et al. Quantum-computing-enhanced algorithm unveils 
potential KRAS inhibitors. Nat Biotechnol 2025. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-024-02526-3  From NLM 
Publisher. 
(47) Park, H.; Yan, X.; Zhu, R.; Huerta, E. A.; Chaudhuri, S.; Cooper, D.; Foster, I.; Tajkhorshid, E. A 
generative artificial intelligence framework based on a molecular diffusion model for the design of 
metal-organic frameworks for carbon capture. Commun Chem 2024, 7 (1), 21. DOI: 10.1038/s42004-
023-01090-2  From NLM PubMed-not-MEDLINE. 
(48) Yao, Z.; Sánchez-Lengeling, B.; Bobbitt, N. S.; Bucior, B. J.; Kumar, S. G. H.; Collins, S. P.; Burns, T.; 
Woo, T. K.; Farha, O. K.; Snurr, R. Q.; et al. Inverse design of nanoporous crystalline reticular materials 
with deep generative models. Nature Machine Intelligence 2021, 3 (1), 76-86. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-
020-00271-1. 
(49) Kang, Y.; Park, H.; Smit, B.; Kim, J. A multi-modal pre-training transformer for universal transfer 
learning in metal–organic frameworks. Nature Machine Intelligence 2023, 5 (3), 309-318. DOI: 
10.1038/s42256-023-00628-2. 
(50) Materials Studio 2019; Accelrys Inc.: 2019. (accessed. 
(51) Willems, T. F.; Rycroft, C. H.; Kazi, M.; Meza, J. C.; Haranczyk, M. Algorithms and tools for high-
throughput geometry-based analysis of crystalline porous materials. Microporous and Mesoporous 
Materials 2012, 149 (1), 134-141. DOI: 10.1016/j.micromeso.2011.08.020. 
(52) Dubbeldam, D.; Calero, S.; Ellis, D. E.; Snurr, R. Q. RASPA: molecular simulation software for 
adsorption and diffusion in flexible nanoporous materials. Molecular Simulation 2015, 42 (2), 81-
42 
 
101. DOI: 10.1080/08927022.2015.1010082. 
(53) Rajashekharaiah, K. M. M.; Chickerur, S.; Hegde, G.; Bhat, S. L.; Sali, S. A. Sentence Classification 
Using Quantum Natural Language Processing and Comparison of Optimization Methods. In 
Advanced Computing, Communications in Computer and Information Science, 2023; pp 85-98. 
(54) Spall, J. C. Implementation of the Simultaneous Perturbation Algorithm for Stochastic 
Optimization. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 1998, 34 (3), 817-823. 
(55) Bird, S., Edward Loper, Ewan Klein. Natural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly Media 
Inc. 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure Legends 
Figure 1. General overview of the study. Gray, blue, and yellow boxes indicate the classical computer-based, 
quantum computer-based, and hybrid quantum-classical computer-based processes, respectively. (a) MOF 
dataset construction from target property distributions encoded into four classes, and it is transformed into the 
text dataset consisting of the target class and its corresponding MOF name. (b) Comparative study among 
QNLP model candidates. Models A, B, C, and D refer to DisCoCat, bag-of-words (BoW), word-sequence, and 
stair models, respectively. (c) Multi-classification model development based on the choice of QNLP model from 
the QNLP model selection step. Four binary classification models by target property type (pore volume and CO2 
Henry’s constant) are combined to complete a multi-classification framework. (d) MOF generation framework 
to build MOF structure with the desired target property. 
Figure 2. Distributions of 450 hypothetical MOFs based on (a) pore volumes and (c) the logarithm (base 10) of 
CO2 Henry’s constants (The unit of CO2 Henry’s constants is mol/kg/Pa). The datasets were divided into four 
classes based on 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant values. Vertical 
43 
 
dotted lines indicate corresponding class boundaries. Counts of classes per topology type, node (metal clusters) 
type, and edge (organic ligands) type based on (b) pore volumes and (d) CO2 Henry’s constants. Labels 00, 01, 
10, and 11 represent low, moderately low, moderately high, and high pore volumes and CO2 Henry’s constants, 
respectively. Vertical red dotted lines represent a count boundary of the class-significance. 
Figure 3. (a) String diagrams of MOF representation based on BoW model, and (b) its corresponding quantum 
circuit with a single-qubit configuration for binary classification based on IQP ansatz. Dotted line boxes 
represent (i) initial quantum states, (ii) circuit parameters and (iii) controlled-not gates which indicating merge-
dot. Open-wire that carries predicted class label is highlighted as blue line. (c) An overall process of quantum 
machine learning. 
Figure 4. Training dynamics and final accuracies and losses for four QNLP models (the bag-of-words (BoW), 
DisCoCat, word-sequence with Cups (Cups), and word-sequence model with stairs (Stairs) models) trained on 
(a) pore volume and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant dataset for binary classification task. The left-hand panels display 
the training losses and accuracies as a function of epochs, showing convergence behavior. The right-hand panels 
summarize the final training and validation looses (top) and accuracies (bottom) for each model. 
Figure 5. (a) Quantum circuits of MOF named pcu N248 E70 with two-qubit configuration for multi-
classification tasks. Note that the blue lines represent open wires, and triangles pointing downward represent 
qubits with a 0-effect. (b) A post-selection process assuming the quantum circuit measurement result in a 
uniform distribution for binary classification and (c) multi-classification tasks. The circuit measurement 
outcomes after the post-selection is vectorized to be matched with one-hot encoding form of the true labels. 
Figure 6. Training history of loss based on (a) pore volume and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant dataset. Accuracy bar 
graphs of (c) pore volume and (d) CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. Note that Multi, Bi00, Bi01, Bi10, and Bi11 
represent BoW models trained based on the multi-classification dataset, 00-specialized dataset (binary 
classification dataset divided into classes 00 and 01+10+11), 01, 10, and 11-specialized datasets, respectively. 
Figure 7. The overall workflow of the MOF generation process: (a) MOF input generation process based on 
random selection rule. (b) Property prediction based on relative probability distributions collected from four 
binary classification models. (c) MOF structure generation based on selected topology and building blocks. 
 
44 
 
Author information 
Corresponding Author 
*Jihan Kim – Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology (KAIST), E-mail: jihankim@kaist.ac.kr 
Present Addresses 
Shinyoung Kang: Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea 
Jihan Kim: Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
Supporting Information: 
 
Property-Guided Inverse Design of Metal-Organic 
Frameworks Using Quantum Natural Language 
Processing 
 
Shinyoung Kang, Jihan Kim* 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea aAdvanced Institute of Science and Technology 
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Supplementary Figure S1. Topologies and building blocks of MOF dataset 
Supplementary Figure S2. Scatter plot showing a correlation between pore volume and MOF CO2 
Henry’s constant 
Supplementary Note S1. MOF Representation based on QNLP Models 
Supplementary Figure S3. String diagrams of MOF reprentation based on QNLP models and their 
corresponding quantum circuits. 
Supplementary Figure S4. String diagram of MOF ‘pcu N248 E70’ based on DisCoCat model after 
applying reduction rules 
Supplementary Note S2. Identification of Optimal MOF Dataset Sequence-Sensitive QNLP Models  
Supplementary Figure S5. The effects of input sequence on the training accuracy of different 
sequence-sensitive QNLP models  
Supplementary Table S1. Training and validation accuracies and losses for QNLP models 
Supplementary Figure S6. Quantum circuits for different MOF component sequences using 
DisCoCat, Cups and Stair models  
Supplementary Note S3. Comparative Benchmarking of QNLP and Conventional Classical Machine 
Learning Models for MOF property Prediction  
Supplementary Table S2. Comparison of classical machine learning models and the QNLP classifier 
on MOF binary property classification tasks 
Supplementary Figure S7. Training history of multi-class classification based on BoW model  
Supplementary Note S4. Influence of Circuit Depth in the Multi-Qubit Representations  
Supplementary Figure S8. Quantum circuits for BoW QNLP model with varying circuit depths 
Supplementary Figure S9. Comparison of training dynamics and classification accuracy between 1-
layer and 3-layer BoW circuits 
Supplementary Table S3. Comparison of evaluation metrics 
Supplementary Figure S10. Confusion matrix of binary QNLP models 
Supplementary Figure S11. Confusion matrix of multi-class classification QNLP model 
Supplementary Note S5. Optimization of Relative Probability Thresholds for Inverse Design 
Performance  
Supplementary Table S4. Inverse design performance for generating MOFs with target property 
classes using QNLP classifiers 
Supplementary Figure S12. MOF structures that have low, moderately low, moderately high, and 
high pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant values 
Supplementary Table S5. Results of varying the stability constant, A 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Topologies and building blocks of MOF dataset: (a) topology, (b) node, and (c) edge. X indicates the 
connection point with building blocks. 
48 
 
 
 
Figure S2. Scatter plot showing a correlation between pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant (The unit of CO2 
Henry’s constants is mol/kg/Pa). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
Note S1: MOF Representation based on QNLP Models 
 
Given that our MOF dataset is organized by its modular components (i.e. topology, node, and edge) 
similarly to how sentences are formed from a selection of words, it is well-suited for the direct application of 
various QNLP models to construct string diagrams, the quantum version of tensor networks. The DisCoCat 
model processes the data based on Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG)1, which is designed for linguistic 
parsing, and it focuses on the syntactic and semantic relationships between words in a sentence. In this context, 
a MOF can be viewed as a noun phrase atomic type, 𝑛𝑛, where the edge acts as a relative pronoun atomic type, 
𝑛𝑛, and the node and the topology function as a left adjoint (i.e., 𝑛𝑛. 𝑙𝑙) and a right adjoint (i.e., 𝑛𝑛. 𝑟𝑟), respectively 
(Fig. S3a). The pregroup grammar in DisCoCat has two reduction rules2: 
p ∙p𝑟𝑟→1               p𝑙𝑙∙p →1                   (1) 
where p denotes atomic type. Thus, the pregroup string diagram for MOF such as “pcu N248 E70” is 
represented by (𝑛𝑛∙(𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙∙𝑛𝑛) ∙𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟) ∙𝑛𝑛 and the derivation for single MOF is reduced to (𝑛𝑛∙(𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙∙𝑛𝑛) ∙𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟) ∙𝑛𝑛→𝑛𝑛∙
1 ∙𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟∙𝑛𝑛→(𝑛𝑛∙𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟) ∙𝑛𝑛→1 ∙𝑛𝑛→𝑛𝑛 based on aforementioned reduction rules. Although its pregroup grammar 
was not designed for chemical structures like MOFs, we decided to include this fully-syntax sensitive model for 
comparative purposes. The transition from these pregroups to vector space semantics is processed by mapping 
each type to a vector space (𝑛𝑛 to a vector space 𝑁𝑁) and composite types to corresponding tensor product spaces 
(𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟∙𝑛𝑛 to a tensor product space 𝑁𝑁⨂𝑁𝑁)3. As shown in Fig. S3a, boxes in the DisCoCat string diagram 
represent tensors, the order of which is determined by the number of their wires, and the cups (U-shape wire 
denoting 𝑛𝑛𝑙𝑙∙𝑛𝑛 or 𝑛𝑛∙𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑟) are the tensor contraction governed by the reduction rules. After applying reduction 
rules, the string diagram is further simplified as shown in Fig. S4. The transformation to the quantum circuit is 
achieved by the selection of ansatz and each MOF component vector being mapped into individual qubits (Fig. 
S3d). The specific arrangement of unitary operations in the circuit will not be discussed since this is beyond the 
scope of this paper, but it is basically based on the compositional and reduction rules from the DisCoCat model.  
 
Lastly, two types of word-sequence approaches were considered, and these models are the quantum 
version of a simple recurrent neural network (RNN). The word-sequence model captures the order of the MOF 
components. A tensor, 𝑠𝑠, represents each MOF component with the multiplication of the corresponding adjoint 
type, s.r, and the sequential multiplication of these tensors in the order becomes the MOF as the output vector. 
This process begins with the “start” token vector and the connectivity of each component with left-to-right 
sequence is represented as cups as demonstrated in Fig. S3b. Here, all component vectors, including the “start” 
50 
 
vector, are mapped into the individual qubits, and the unitary operations reflect the MOF structure as defined by 
the sequential multiplication of its components (Fig. S3e). Another word-sequence approach available in 
lambeq2 involves the use of a “stair” instance, which executes the tensor multiplication sequentially from left to 
right (Fig. S3c). In this case, the stair instance is encoded as a unitary operation within the quantum circuit. So 
this approach can be an economical option since it generates the output without the additional “start” token and 
the adjoint vectors (Fig. S3f). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
Figure S3. String diagrams of MOF representation based on (a) DisCoCat model, (b) word-sequence model, 
and (c) word-sequence model with a stairs-like recurrent manner. Their corresponding quantum circuits based 
on IQP ansatz were shown in (d), (e), and (f) for DisCoCat, word-sequence, and stair models, respectively. 
Open-wire that carries predicted class label is highlighted as blue line. 
 
52 
 
Figure S4. String diagram of MOF ‘pcu N248 E70’ based on DisCoCat model after applying reduction rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
Note S2: Identification of Optimal MOF Dataset Sequences for QNLP Models 
 
To determine the optimal input sequence for the sequence-sensitive QNLP models, we considered all 
possible permutations of the MOF components (topology (T), node (N), and edge (E)). This resulted in six unique 
sequences, ENT, ETN, NET, NTE, TEN, and TNE. Figure S5 illustrates how variations in the input sequence 
affected the performance of the Bag-of-Words (BoW) model, DisCoCat model, the word-sequence model with 
Cups (Cups model), and the word-sequence model with stairs (Stairs model) to input sequence variations across 
both the pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. For clarity, only training accuracies are presented in 
Figure S5, as the validation accuracies followed similar trends. Complete numerical results for both training and 
validation datasets are provided in Table S1.  
 
For the DisCoCat model, the ETN sequence achieved the highest training and validation accuracies 
(91.2% and 91%, respectively) with the lowest associated loss in the pore volume dataset. For the CO2 Henry’s 
constant dataset, the ENT sequence yielded the best performance, achieving 70% training accuracy and 69% 
validation accuracy, and the lowest loss. This indicates a notable sensitivity of the DisCoCat model to input 
sequence, possibly due to its syntax-aware structure, which reflects a dependence on input ordering. The stairs 
model exhibited a distinct behavior wherein datasets sharing the same initial component displayed identical 
performance metrics. For instance, ENT and ETN sequences produced the same accuracies and loss values. For 
the pore volume dataset, sequences starting with nodes (NET and NTE) showed superior performance. Conversely, 
sequences starting with topology (TEN and TNE) provided better results for the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset. 
This trend shows that the initial component significantly influences the performance of the Stairs model. The cups 
model consistently showed low performance among the sequence-based models, indicating that its specific tensor 
multiplication scheme, which relies on adjoint vectors and start tokens to represent the input sequence, might not 
efficiently capture MOF structural characteristics. Nonetheless, the optimal sequences identified for the Cups 
model were NTE for the pore volume dataset and TNE for the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset. As a result, the 
optimal input sequences were successfully identified for each QNLP model, enabling further comparative analysis 
of their performance.  
 
The observed sensitivity of QNLP models to the sequence of MOF components arises primarily from 
the way quantum circuits encode and process input information. In sequence-sensitive architectures such as 
DisCoCat, Cups, and Stairs, input qubits are processed through layers of fixed quantum gate operations. Each 
MOF component, topology, node, and edge, is assigned to a specific qubit, and the order in which they appear 
determines how quantum gates are applied to encode their interactions. Consequently, the same components 
placed in different positions within the sequence undergo different unitary transformations, which alters the 
resulting quantum state, and in turn, the models’ prediction. For example, in the DisCoCat model, the topology 
component “pcu” in the TNE sequence “pcu N248 E70” undergoes a sequence of three parameterized gates, Rx-
Rz-Rx gates (Fig. S6a), whereas the same “pcu” component, when placed in the middle position in NTE sequence 
“N248 pcu E70”, is only encoded by a single Rx gate (Fig. S6d). This difference in the number and type of applied 
gates leads to distinct quantum state representations, explaining why DisCoCat showed the largest variation in 
performance across different component sequences. In fact, DisCoCat exhibited a 26% gap in a mean accuracy 
between its best-performing (ETN) and worst-performing (NTE) sequences. Similar trends are observed in the 
54 
 
Stairs model, where changes in the component sequences also lead to different entanglement patterns (compare 
Figs S6c and S6f). The Stairs model showed a 20% difference in mean accuracies between the most and least 
favorable sequences. In contrast, the Cups model, which uses a more uniform gate application structure across 
qubits regardless of order (Figs. S6b and S6e), exhibited only a 5% mean difference in performance, suggesting 
that it is relatively more robust to sequence permutations. 
 
As expected, the BoW model demonstrated sequence independence for both datasets. For the pore 
volume datasets, all sequence permutations yielded identical training and validations accuracies at 0.925 and 0.93 
with losses of 0.169 and 0.149, respectively. Similarly, for the CO2 Henry’s constant dataset, all sequences 
produced identical training and validations accuracies at 0.807 and 0.78 with losses of 0.443 and 0.523, 
respectively. These results align with our theoretical expectations for the BoW model, which relies on component-
wise multiplication rather than sequential processing. Importantly, the BoW model’s consistent performance 
across all sequences was superior to the best-performing configurations of sequence-dependent models. Even 
when the sequence-dependent models were optimized with their best sequence orders (e.g. ETN for DisCoCat, 
NTE for Cups, and NET/NTE for Stairs in pore volume), the BoW model achieved higher accuracies. This 
performance advantage was maintained regardless of sequence ordering, supports our conclusion about the 
suitability of component-wise representation for MOF design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Figure S5. The effects of input sequence on the training accuracy of different QNLP models (Bag-of-Words 
(BoW), DisCoCat, sequence model with cups (Cups), and sequence model with stairs (Stairs)) for (a) pore volume 
dataset and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant dataset. Six different input sequences were tested by permuting the order 
of MOF components, edge (E), node (N), and topology (T), resulting in the combinations of ENT, ETN, NET, 
NTE, TEN, and TNE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
Table S1. Training and validation accuracies and losses for four QNLP models (Bag-of-Words (BoW), DisCoCat, 
Sequense with Cups (Cups), Sequence with Stairs (Stairs)) evaluated on pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant 
datasets with varying input sequence orders. Six unique sequences of MOF components (Edge (E), Node (N), 
Topology (T)) were assessed to identify the optimal order that yields the highest performance. 
Dataset 
Model 
Type 
Input 
Sequence 
Train 
Accuracy 
Validation 
Accuracy 
Train 
Loss 
Validation 
Loss 
Pore volume 
BoW 
ENT 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
BoW 
ETN 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
BoW 
NET 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
BoW 
NTE 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
BoW 
TEN 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
BoW 
TNE 
0.925 
0.930 
0.169 
0.149 
DisCoCat 
ENT 
0.830 
0.810 
0.427 
0.487 
DisCoCat 
ETN 
0.912 
0.910 
0.217 
0.299 
DisCoCat 
NET 
0.563 
0.555 
0.684 
0.694 
DisCoCat 
NTE 
0.528 
0.510 
0.683 
0.709 
DisCoCat 
TEN 
0.770 
0.660 
0.520 
0.675 
DisCoCat 
TNE 
0.833 
0.850 
0.435 
0.388 
Cups 
ENT 
0.585 
0.610 
0.743 
0.684 
Cups 
ETN 
0.553 
0.615 
0.687 
0.680 
Cups 
NET 
0.547 
0.625 
0.751 
0.687 
Cups 
NTE 
0.693 
0.690 
0.623 
0.880 
Cups 
TEN 
0.585 
0.590 
0.718 
0.670 
Cups 
TNE 
0.618 
0.629 
0.671 
0.609 
Stair 
ENT 
0.570 
0.530 
0.673 
0.718 
Stair 
ETN 
0.570 
0.530 
0.673 
0.718 
Stair 
NET 
0.860 
0.880 
0.419 
0.392 
Stair 
NTE 
0.860 
0.880 
0.419 
0.392 
Stair 
TEN 
0.558 
0.450 
0.726 
0.738 
Stair 
TNE 
0.565 
0.486 
0.694 
0.706 
CO2 Henry's 
Constant 
BoW 
ENT 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
BoW 
ETN 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
BoW 
NET 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
BoW 
NTE 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
BoW 
TEN 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
BoW 
TNE 
0.807 
0.780 
0.443 
0.523 
DisCoCat 
ENT 
0.700 
0.690 
0.586 
0.983 
DisCoCat 
ETN 
0.667 
0.630 
0.575 
0.795 
57 
 
DisCoCat 
NET 
0.582 
0.540 
0.667 
0.710 
DisCoCat 
NTE 
0.647 
0.685 
0.643 
0.631 
DisCoCat 
TEN 
0.642 
0.610 
0.669 
1.137 
DisCoCat 
TNE 
0.673 
0.615 
0.604 
0.909 
Cups 
ENT 
0.593 
0.515 
0.678 
0.705 
Cups 
ETN 
0.580 
0.555 
0.673 
0.678 
Cups 
NET 
0.593 
0.515 
0.678 
0.705 
Cups 
NTE 
0.587 
0.610 
0.657 
0.616 
Cups 
TEN 
0.510 
0.495 
1.049 
0.989 
Cups 
TNE 
0.603 
0.645 
0.761 
1.001 
Stair 
ENT 
0.553 
0.470 
0.682 
0.694 
Stair 
ETN 
0.553 
0.470 
0.682 
0.694 
Stair 
NET 
0.560 
0.440 
0.675 
0.715 
Stair 
NTE 
0.560 
0.440 
0.675 
0.715 
Stair 
TEN 
0.597 
0.485 
0.687 
0.713 
Stair 
TNE 
0.597 
0.485 
0.687 
0.713 
58 
 
 
Figure S6. Quantum circuits for different MOF component sequences using DisCoCat, Cups, and Stair models. 
Quantum circuits for the TNE sequence (“pcu N248 E70”) using (a) DisCoCat, (b) Cups, (c) Stairs models, 
respectively. Quantum circuits for the NTE seuquence (“N248 pcu E70”) using (d) DisCoCat, (e) Cups, (f) Stairs 
models, respectively 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
Note S3: Comparative Benchmarking of QNLP and Conventional Classical Machine Learning Models for 
MOF property Prediction 
 
In this study, our primary goal was to explore and validate the feasibility of applying QNLP techniques 
to MOF design tasks, particularly under the constraints of current NISQ hardware. As noted, the QNLP-based 
approach is not yet expected to surpass state-of-the-art classical models in raw predictive accuracy, particularly 
due to hardware limitations and the early stage of QNLP algorithmic development.  
 
However, we recognize that a baseline comparison with conventional ML approaches can provide useful 
context. Therefore, we have conducted an additional benchmarking experiment using two widely adopted classical 
ML models, Random Forest classifier and Support Vector Machine (SVM) with the RBF kernel. For the 
comparison, we used the same MOF datasets for binary classification of pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant, 
with identical train, validation, and test splits, and applied the same performance metrics as for the quantum ML 
(QML) model. MOF structures were converted into classical bag-of-words feature vectors using CountVectorizer 
from scikit-learn, and model hyperparameters were kept at their default settings. Since the quantum model does 
not support cross-validation, we instead varied the random_state parameter for the classical models over 10 
independent runs to estimate mean and standard deviation of validation and test accuracies.  
 
The result of this comparison, including validation/test accuracies and model complexity, is provided in 
Table S2. The classical models achieved higher validation accuracies, as expected, but the QNLP classifier 
performed competitively despite relying on significantly fewer trainable elements and a fundamentally different 
computational paradigm. Surprisingly, the QNLP classifier showed superior test accuracies for both pore volume 
and CO2 Henry’s constant properties, compared to conventional ML models, indicating strong generalization 
performance. The relatively higher standard deviation of QML model stems from the inherent probabilistic nature 
of quantum measurements. Unlike classical models that produce deterministic outputs from fixed weights and 
inputs, quantum models relay on the measurement of qubit states, which yield probabilistic outcomes governed 
by the underlying quantum circuit. This means that even when using the same trained circuit and input data, 
repeated executions (shots) of the quantum circuit can result in slight variations in output class probabilities. 
Despite this variability, the QNLP model consistently demonstrated competitive average accuracy across multiple 
runs, showing its potential as a viable modeling approach for MOF property prediction. 
 
We also emphasize that a direct comparison of accuracy can be somewhat misleading because classical 
and quantum approaches differ in representational principles. As discussed in the main manuscript, QNLP encodes 
compositional structure natively into the circuit using entangled qubit states, whereas classical models rely on 
engineered feature or embeddings, requiring extensive vector multiplications and additional post-processing steps. 
The QNLP circuits, in contrast, produce probabilistic predictions directly from quantum measurements, offering 
a more compact and interpretable representation of structural correlations within MOFs. While we acknowledge 
that QNLP is not yet a replacement for mature classical ML pipelines, we believe it provides a compelling novel 
architecture, particularly as quantum hardware continues to advance. 
 
 
60 
 
Table S2. Comparison of classical machine learning models (Random Forest and Support Vector Machine with 
RBF kernel) and the quantum natural language processing (QNLP) classifier on MOF property classification tasks. 
Metrics include average validation and test accuracy, standard deviation over 10 independent runs, and model 
complexity in terms of number of decision trees, support vectors, or quantum circuit parameters. 
Property 
Dataset 
Metric 
Random Forest 
SVM  
(RBF kernel) 
QNLP 
classifier 
Pore 
volume 
Validation 
Accuracy [%] 
94.3 
94 
90.86 
Standard Dev. [%] 
0.5 
0 
1.14 
Test 
Accuracy [%] 
88 
86 
90.33 
Standard Dev. [%] 
0 
0 
3.79 
Training 
Model 
Complexity 
Num. of trees: 100 
Total nodes: 20,004 
Num. of  
support vector: 246 
Num. of  
circuit 
parameters: 84 
CO2 
Henry's 
constant 
Validation 
Accuracy [%] 
81.9 
83 
77 
Standard Dev. [%] 
0.92 
0 
1.1 
Test 
Accuracy [%] 
71.8 
74 
77.8 
Standard Dev. [%] 
1.66 
0 
1.08 
Training 
Model 
Complexity 
Num. of trees: 100 
Total nodes: 20,004 
Num. of  
support vector: 246 
Num. of  
circuit 
parameters: 84 
 
61 
 
 
Figure S7. Training history of multi-class classification based on BoW model for (a) pore volume and (b) CO2 
Henry’s constant datasets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
Note S4: Influence of Circuit Depth in the Multi-Qubit Representations 
 
As discussed in the main manuscript, the construction of quantum circuits is differently handled based 
on the number of qubits representing each component. For the single-qubit representation per component (as in 
Figure 3b), the software allows multiple parameterized gates to be applied to each qubit. This is controlled via 
n_single_qubit_params argument, enabling users to specify number of parameters to represent each component 
using defined sequences of quantum gates such as Rx-Rz-Rx arrangement. This setting explicitly mitigates 
potential degeneracy issues (expressivity limitations) by enhancing each single-qubit’s parameterization. In 
contrast, when a component is represented by multiple qubits (as in Figure 5a and Figure S8), lambeq 
automatically constructs a predefined entangled circuit architecture using Hadamard and controlled gates. In this 
case, lambeq systematically disables multiple parameterized single-qubit rotations, assigning only one trainable 
gate per qubit. This approach prevents over-parameterization and ensures well-defined entanglement patterns 
across the qubits.  
 
To verify this behavior, we directly consulted Dr. Dimitri Kartsaklis, a co-developer of the lambeq 
package2 and author of foundational QNLP literature3, regarding this design choice 
(https://github.com/CQCL/lambeq/issues/131). He clarified that “The reason for this is that while any ansatz 
provides a way to combine two or more qubit into a meaningful circuit, it usually becomes degenerate in the 
single qubit case. This needs to be handled explicitly, which we do through the n_single_qubit_params 
argument.” In other words, for single-qubit representations, explicit multi-parameter configurations (e.g. Rx-Rz-
Rx) are necessary to avoid degeneracy, while for multi-qubit systems, degeneracy is naturally handled through 
circuit entanglement and fixed structure. 
 
Since the lambeq adopted fixed circuit structure for multi-qubit representation, the number of 
parameters must be controlled by explicitly replicating the circuit depth as shown in Fig. S8b. To further explore 
whether increased parameterization in the multi-classification setting could improve performance, we conducted 
additional experiments by increasing the circuit depth from 1 layer (24 parameters, Figure S8a) to 3 layers (84 
parameters, Figure S8b). The resulting training, validation, and test accuracies for both the pore volume and CO2 
Henry’s constant dataset are shown in Figure S8. While the deeper circuit successfully increased the number of 
trainable parameters, the results did not yield improved accuracy. In fact, the 1-layer circuit consistently 
outperformed the 3-layer circuit across both datasets, with faster convergence (Figure S9a,c) and better 
performance (Figure S9b,d). This suggests that deeper circuits, while theoretically more expressive, may 
63 
 
encounter optimization difficulties or overfitting when trained on limited-size datasets on NISQ-simulated 
environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
 
 
Figure S8. Quantum circuits for bog-of-words (BoW) QNLP model with varying circuit depths. (a) Circuit 
representation for 1-layer BoW model used in the original multi-classification task (as shown in Figure 5a), 
consisting of a single IQP layer with 24 trainable parameters (one controlled-Rz gate per qubit). (b) 3-layer circuit 
design with 84 trainable parameters, implemented to investigate the impact of circuit depth on model performance. 
 
65 
 
 
Figure S9. Comparison of training dynamics and classification accuracy between 1-layer and 3-layer BoW 
circuits. Evolution of training and validation losses for (a) the pore volume and (c) CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. 
Final classification accuracies for training, validation, and test sets using 1-layer and 3-layer circuits for (b) the 
pore volume and (d) CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
Table S3. Comparison of evaluation metrics of QNLP models. Note that Multi, Bi00, Bi01, Bi10, and Bi11 represent 
BoW models trained based on the multi-classification dataset, 00-specialized dataset (binary classification dataset 
divided into classes 00 and 01+10+11), 01, 10, and 11-specialized datasets, respectively. 
Property 
Model 
Accuracy 
Test 
Training 
Test 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 
Pore 
 Volume 
Bi00 
0.93 
0.92 
0.92 
0.89 
0.90 
Bi01 
0.87 
0.92 
0.88 
0.92 
0.90 
Bi10 
0.86 
0.86 
0.80 
0.78 
0.79 
Bi11 
0.96 
0.98 
0.97 
0.99 
0.98 
Multi 
0.50 
0.50 
0.39 
0.50 
0.40 
CO2 
 Henry's 
Constant 
Bi00 
0.87 
0.86 
0.80 
0.78 
0.79 
Bi01 
0.83 
0.72 
0.66 
0.63 
0.64 
Bi10 
0.80 
0.78 
0.69 
0.66 
0.67 
Bi11 
0.86 
0.84 
0.82 
0.74 
0.77 
Multi 
0.46 
0.44 
0.50 
0.44 
0.42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
Figure S10. Confusion matrix of QNLP models on (a) pore volume and (b) CO2 Henry’s constant test datasets. 
Bi00, Bi01, Bi10, and Bi11 represent QNLP BoW models trained based on the 00-specialized dataset (binary 
classification dataset divided into classes 00 and 01+10+11), 01, 10, and 11-specialized datasets, respectively. 
68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S11. Confusion matrix of QNLP models for multi-class classification task on (a) pore volume and (b) CO2 
Henry’s constant test datasets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
 
Note S5: Optimization of Relative Probability Thresholds for Inverse Design Performance 
 
The comparative calculations were performed by varying threshold cutoffs of the relative probability 
for each target property, pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constants, to identify the best relative probability threshold 
that optimizes the inverse design performance. Tested threshold values were differently applied to account for the 
differences in dataset complexity. Thus, the threshold was ranged from 0.9 to 0.8 for search pace of the pore 
volume while 0.7 to 0.6 for that of CO2 Henry’s constants. In this setup, the system was forced to generate 
candidate MOFs exclusively from previously unseen combinations.  
 
As summarized in Table S3, there was a significant difference in inverse design performance as the 
relative probability threshold changes. For the inverse design of MOFs targeting pore volume, a threshold of 0.85 
yielded the best overall inverse design performance as the performance of moderately high class achieved 91% 
accuracy. Lowering the threshold to 0.8 degraded the accuracy for this class as 73%, while performance for other 
class remained nearly perfect. This decline aligns with the classification performance of the Bi10 model, which 
had the lowest test accuracy of 86% among the binary classifiers as shown in Fig. 6b of the revised manuscript. 
This can be understood as the model is more likely to misclassify when the threshold drops below this classifier’s 
performance, causing the design loop to fail more frequently or converge to incorrect solutions. For CO2 Henry’s 
constant, a threshold of 0.65 was found to offer the best overall performance, achieving a balanced accuracy across 
all classes while minimizing incorrect predictions and timeouts. Specifically, it maximized the accuracy for the 
moderately low class as 81% compared to only 46% at a threshold of 0.6. As the threshold increased, the accuracy 
for high and low classes improved steadily, while the number of timeouts for the moderately low and moderately 
high classes increased, reflecting the models’ cautious behavior under stricter decision criteria. As discussed in 
the main manuscript, timeouts suggest the model withheld prediction due to insufficient confidence. Although the 
high number of timeouts at threshold 0.9 for the pore volume and 0.7 for CO2 Henry’s constant may preserve the 
possibility of eventual success, we concluded the optimal threshold for each target property as 0.85 and 0.65, 
considering the efficiency of the MOF generation process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
Table S4. Inverse design performance for generating MOFs with target property classes using QNLP classifiers. 
Each row summarizes the results of 100 independent generation tasks for a given property class, and relative 
probability threshold. The columns report the number of successful predictions (Correct), incorrect predictions 
(Incorrect), and instance where the model failed to produce a confident prediction within 100 iterations (Timeout). 
The Avg. guess column indicates the average number of attempts required to generate a successful MOF. The 
selected threshold values for this study were highlighted in gray color. 
Property 
Threshold 
Target Class 
Correct Incorrect Timeout 
Avg. guess 
Pore  
volume 
0.9 
low 
100 
0 
0 
13.71 
mod. low 
97 
0 
3 
26.23 
mod. high 
98 
1 
1 
27.15 
high 
87 
0 
13 
40.38 
0.85 
low 
100 
0 
0 
7.71 
mod. low 
100 
0 
0 
10.73 
mod. high 
91 
9 
0 
9.98 
high 
100 
0 
0 
11.76 
0.8 
low 
100 
0 
0 
4.84 
mod. low 
100 
0 
0 
9.14 
mod. high 
73 
27 
0 
7.24 
high 
100 
0 
0 
8.36 
CO2 
Henry's 
constant 
0.7 
low 
92 
8 
0 
7.44 
mod. low 
51 
1 
48 
71.92 
mod. high 
95 
0 
5 
33.66 
high 
98 
2 
0 
9.27 
0.65 
low 
91 
9 
0 
7.23 
mod. low 
81 
16 
3 
28.44 
mod. high 
98 
0 
2 
25.13 
high 
90 
10 
0 
7.33 
0.6 
low 
90 
10 
0 
6.37 
mod. low 
46 
54 
0 
11.18 
mod. high 
95 
5 
0 
18.02 
high 
83 
17 
0 
5.15 
71 
 
 
 
Figure S12. MOF structures that have (a) low, (b) moderately low, (c) moderately high, and (d) high pore volume 
and CO2 Henry’s constant (The unit of CO2 Henry’s constants is mol/kg/Pa).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
 
 
Table S5. Results of varying the stability constant, A, based on pore volume and CO2 Henry’s constant datasets. 
The selected parameter setup for the model was highlighted in gray color.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model 00 
Model 01 
Model 10 
Model 11 
  
A 
metric 
train 
validation 
train 
validation 
train 
validation 
train 
validation 
Pore  
volume 
20 
loss 
0.234 
0.149 
0.367 
0.396 
0.354 
0.34 
0.194 
0.213 
accuracy 
0.91 
0.97 
0.867 
0.88 
0.853 
0.85 
0.937 
0.91 
2 
loss 
0.209 
0.145 
0.369 
0.373 
0.358 
0.33 
0.184 
0.222 
accuracy 
0.907 
0.97 
0.842 
0.86 
0.835 
0.835 
0.907 
0.92 
0.2 
loss 
0.205 
0.133 
0.372 
0.391 
0.337 
0.349 
0.188 
0.226 
accuracy 
0.9 
0.96 
0.845 
0.895 
0.832 
0.85 
0.933 
0.89 
CO2 
Henry's  
constant 
20 
loss 
0.399 
0.446 
0.419 
0.403 
0.463 
0.442 
0.385 
0.33 
accuracy 
0.837 
0.81 
0.787 
0.75 
0.787 
0.78 
0.82 
0.85 
2 
loss 
0.348 
0.42 
0.437 
0.389 
0.496 
0.5 
0.39 
0.315 
accuracy 
0.823 
0.84 
0.818 
0.8 
0.808 
0.78 
0.823 
0.9 
0.2 
loss 
0.382 
0.398 
0.43 
0.43 
0.458 
0.4 
0.387 
0.304 
accuracy 
0.855 
0.82 
0.8 
0.75 
0.793 
0.81 
0.823 
0.85 
73 
 
References 
(1) Clark, S. Something Old, Something New: Grammar-based CCG Parsing with Transformer Models. arXiv 
2021. DOI: arXiv:2109.10044v2. 
(2) Dimitri Kartsaklis, I. F., Richie Yeung, Anna Pearson, Robin Lorenz, Alexis Toumi, Giovanni de Felice,; 
Konstantinos Meichanetzidis, S. C., Bob Coecke. lambeq: An Efficient High-Level Python Library for Quantum 
NLP. arXiv 2021. DOI: arXiv:2110.04236v1  
(3) Robin Lorenz' Anna Pearson, K. M., Dimitri Kartsaklis, Bob Coecke. QNLP in Practice: Running 
Compositional Models of Meaning on a Quantum Computer. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 2023, 76 
1305-1342. 
 
 
