Title: Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language Processing and Understanding in Space: A Methodological Framework and Four ESA Case Studies
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03640v2
--------------------------------------------------

Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Natural Language Processing
and Understanding in Space: A Methodological
Framework and Four ESA Case Studies
Jos´e Manuel G´omez-P´ereza, Andr´es Garc´ıa-Silvaa, Rosemarie Leoneb, Mirko
Albanic, Moritz Fontained, Charles Poncetb, Leopold Summererb,
Alessandro Donatie, Ilaria Romab, Stefano Scaglionie
aLanguage Technology Research Lab, Expert.ai, 3 Poeta Joan
Maragall, Madrid, 28020, Spain
bEuropean Space Research and Technology Centre (ESA-ESTEC), Keplerlaan
1, Noordwijk, 2201 AZ, The Netherlands
cEuropean Space Research Institute (ESA-ESRIN), Via Galileo Galilei,
1, Frascati, 00044, Italy
dEuropean Space Agency (ESA), 24 Rue du G´en´eral Bertrand CS
30798, Paris, 75345, France
eEuropean Space Operations Center (ESA-ESOC), Robert-Bosch-Str.
5, Darmstadt, 64293, Germany
Abstract
The European Space Agency is a powerful force for scientiﬁc discovery in
numerous areas of space. The amount and depth of the knowledge produced
throughout the diﬀerent missions carried out by ESA and their contribution
to scientiﬁc progress is enormous and involves large collections of documents
like feasibility studies, technical reports, scientiﬁc publications, and quality
management procedures, among many others. Handling such wealth of in-
formation, of which large part is unstructured text, is a colossal task that
goes beyond human capabilities, hence requiring automation. In this paper,
we present a methodological framework based on artiﬁcial intelligence and
natural language processing to automatically extract information and enable
machine understanding of space documents. We illustrate such framework
through several case studies implemented across diﬀerent functional areas of
ESA, including Mission Design, Quality Assurance, Long-Term Data Preser-
vation and the Open Space Innovation Platform, and demonstrate the value
of our approach by solving complex information extraction and language
understanding challenges that had not been addressed in space until now.
Preprint submitted to Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence October 25, 2022
arXiv:2210.03640v2  [cs.CL]  24 Oct 2022
Keywords:
Space Science and Engineering, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Natural
Language Processing and Understanding, Information Management
1. Introduction
The European Space Agency (ESA) is Europe’s gateway to space, with
the mission to shape the development of Europe’s space capability and ensure
that investment in space continues to deliver beneﬁts to the citizens of Europe
and the world. ESA consistently helps to answer the biggest scientiﬁc ques-
tions of our time, such as the mysteries of the Universe, the understanding of
our Solar System, and the quest for life outside our home planet. Its space
mission programs are a powerful force for scientiﬁc discovery, both looking
outward to the conﬁnes of our galaxy and beyond to understand the origin
of the Universe, as well as inwards, observing Earth through constellations
of satellites orbiting our planet to study Earth’s climate and deﬁne climate
change mitigation, adaptation and development pathways.
The amount, depth and scope of the data, information and knowledge
generated and managed during such missions is enormous and their contri-
bution to scientiﬁc progress is invaluable. From the announcement of op-
portunity and feasibility study to space and ground segments design, de-
velopment, operation, mission decommissioning, and long-term preservation,
large collections of heterogeneous information are produced. Some examples
include: ideas to develop innovative solutions to technical and operational
challenges, space project design and implementation documents, technical
reports, operational procedures, quality management instructions, and space
records about missions spanning over more than 40 years, like climate data
records, exploitation reports, and scientiﬁc publications. Managing, mining,
and exploiting such wealth of information, of which a large part is free text,
is a colossal task that goes beyond human capabilities.
In this paper, we present a methodological framework based on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (AI) and Natural Language Processing and Understanding
(NLP/U1) to automatically extract information from text documents related
to space missions and enable machine understanding during diﬀerent mis-
sion stages, contributing to create a virtuous circle of knowledge acquisition,
management, and transfer at ESA, as well as scientiﬁc discovery and innova-
1Henceforth, we will use NLP indistinctly for both NLP and NLP/U.
2
tion worldwide. We demonstrate the added value of this approach through
actual NLP solutions implemented at ESA, with potential impact across a
wide range of space areas. The goals of such systems range e.g. from as-
sisting the evaluation of the innovation potential of ideas submitted to ESA
through the Open Space Innovation Platform (OSIP) to facilitating access
to space mission design information, contributing to the adoption of quality
assurance and training procedures, and helping to preserve heritage space
mission and operation records for long-term archival and exploitation.
This work contributes to unroll the vision of ESA’s 2025 Agenda2 in
”adopting fast-learning/higher-risk approach for future technology matura-
tion such as AI” through the implementation of intelligent systems able to
support ESA’s workforce in several tasks, like eﬀortlessly searching and rec-
ommending space information within ESA’s repositories, automatically de-
termining how innovative an idea can be, answering questions about space-
craft design or generating training materials to master space operation proce-
dures. The accomplishments described in the paper represent a step forward
in increasingly intelligent AI focused on NLP and its applications for infor-
mation management in space, from assistants able to structure and facilitate
access to information to intelligent systems capable to understand and reason
with it. We envision a future where AI systems augment human capabili-
ties and engage with human peers in solving challenging technical problems,
joining forces in producing major scientiﬁc discoveries that could eventually
be worthy of a Nobel Prize (Kitano, 2016).
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides an account of
the diﬀerent types of applications of AI and NLP in the scientiﬁc enterprise
and their relation to space. Next, in section 3 we propose our methodolog-
ical framework for the application of NLP technologies in space. Section 4
summarizes the guidelines proposed in section 3 and makes special emphasis
on the aspects to consider in order to decide whether to adopt a machine
learning-based approach to NLP, a symbolic approach or a combination of
them depending on the results of the analysis of the use cases and NLP tasks
to be addressed. Sections 5 to 8 illustrate the application of our framework to
speciﬁc NLP projects recently developed at ESA. Based on such experiences,
section 9 provides a series of recommendations for the successful development
of NLP capabilities in space. Finally, section 10 concludes the paper.
2https://www.esa.int/About_Us/ESA_Publications/Agenda_2025
3
Figure 1: Foreseen progression of the role of AI systems in the scientiﬁc enterprise.
2. Antecedents and related work
In her presidential address at the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, Gil (2022) pondered whether AI will write scientiﬁc papers in the
future. Both her and many others including us believe that we can be hope-
ful that the answer will be yes and that it may happen sooner than we might
expect. Our capabilities to do scientiﬁc and technical breakthroughs need
to be augmented as scientiﬁc questions become signiﬁcantly more complex.
Compare for instance the challenges of formulating Kepler’s laws of plane-
tary motion with demonstrating the existence of binary stellar-mass black
hole systems (Abbott et al., 2016). While the former was achieved by one
scientist, the latter required a large and interdisciplinary team involving the
collaboration of hundreds of scientists from diﬀerent ﬁelds to work together
during years to produce results.
Space science and engineering is no exception. The challenges that need
to be addressed are extremely complex and involve increasingly large and in-
terdisciplinary teams. AI and speciﬁcally NLP become imperative to manage
the large volumes of information that need to be processed during the lifecycle
of space missions. Some examples of scenarios in space where such capabil-
ities are required include the analysis of documents involving e.g. mission
objectives deﬁnition, mission feasibility and concept analysis, ground seg-
4
ment, space segment and launch segment requirements deﬁnition, design and
development, satellite platform operations or payload space records acquisi-
tion and processing, among many others. In those and other related areas,
NLP technologies are starting to prove their value. In some occasions, to ex-
tract information from large collections of scientiﬁc documents (Gomez-Perez
et al., 2017; Murdaca et al., 2018; Garcia-Silva et al., 2019; Berquand et al.,
2020, 2021b), producing semantic metadata (see section 7) that enables the
development of sophisticated information retrieval applications (Rico et al.,
2017), making research more accessible in accordance to the principles of
FAIR research data (Wilkinson et al., 2016), and contributing to long-term
data preservation. Other increasingly representative scenarios of application
of NLP technologies include systems that address needs related to language
understanding of space mission technical documents, like ESA’s Concurrent
Design Facility (CDF) reports or Quality Management procedures, automat-
ically answering and even formulating questions about space (Garcia-Silva
et al., 2022a,b) (sections 5 and 6).
Like Gil, we foresee a future scenario (see ﬁgure 1) where AI systems will
not only assist but also become an eﬀective part of the scientiﬁc and engi-
neering space ecosystem, collaborating, independently pursuing substantial
aspects of space mission development, operation, and space data records anal-
ysis, and contributing their own discoveries to the space community. Today,
we are already witnessing AI systems that address language understanding
challenges involving scientiﬁc and technical documents. As originally put
by Reddy (1988), ”Reading a chapter in a college freshman text and an-
swering the questions at the end of the chapter is a hard (AI) problem that
requires advances in vision, language, problem-solving, and learning theory.”.
Although this is one of the grand challenges in AI yet to be tackled, recent
AI systems like ARISTO (Clark et al., 2019) and ISAAQ (Gomez-Perez and
Ortega, 2020) are already capable to read a scientiﬁc text and answer ques-
tions related to its content at a level similar to humans.
However, none
of such systems have focused on space yet, probably because they rely on
key components of modern NLP like transformer language models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) that until very recently have not been trained on space data.
Such limitation has started to be addressed with the advent of new language
models speciﬁc for space (Berquand et al., 2021a), which on the other hand
still need to prove real-life added value over general-purpose counterparts.
In this paper, we focus on the ﬁrst two of the three steps of the timeline
shown in ﬁgure 1, which represents the evolution of the possible roles to be
5
adopted by AI in the scientiﬁc ecosystem, from the perspective of NLP and
its applications in space. Therefore, we will delve into two main scenarios.
On the one hand, assisting space scientists, engineers and other stakeholders
to extract information from text documents. On the other hand, the applica-
tion of state-of-the-art language technologies to develop AI systems that are
able to understand scientiﬁc language in the space domain, solving problems
involving text comprehension by machines.
NLP is concerned with the interaction between computers and human
(natural) languages, and, in particular, with programming computers to
fruitfully process text corpora. Challenges in NLP frequently involve natu-
ral language understanding with the ultimate goal to connect language with
machine perception in tasks such as entity recognition, relation extraction,
text classiﬁcation, and sentiment analysis, as well as others like machine
reading comprehension, text generation, conversation, summarization, and
translation, to name but a few.
Many applications of NLP focus on text analytics, an interdisciplinary
ﬁeld that also involves computer science techniques from machine learning
and information retrieval. The goal of text analytics is to discover novel and
interesting information from document collections that is useful for further
analysis or strategic decision making. Text analytics tools can extract struc-
tured data from unstructured text, classify documents in one or more classes,
label documents with categories from taxonomies, and assign a sentiment or
emotion to text excerpts, among other functionalities. Such structured in-
formation is then used to fuel analytic tools and ﬁnd patterns, trends, and
insights to improve tasks such as search, recommendation, knowledge man-
agement and, in general, supporting through automation the accomplishment
of any task involving text processing.
Recent breakthroughs in deep learning have made impressive progress in
NLP. Neural language models and particularly transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), to
name some of the most widely-used, are able to infer linguistic and world
knowledge from large collections of text that can be then transferred to deal
eﬀectively with NLP tasks without requiring too much additional eﬀort. The
popularity of machine and deep learning has caused a shift from human-
engineered methods to data-driven architectures in text processing, boosted
by new and powerful players in the ﬁeld (Wolf et al., 2020). However, despite
such popularity, there are still gaps that need to be addressed.
Particularly relevant is the fact that data-driven approaches require large
6
amounts of data to be trained. Neural language models have lessened the
requirement of labeled data to address downstream NLP tasks, yet the need
for such data has not disappeared. Beyond general-purpose datasets, labeled
data is scarce, labor intensive and expensive to generate, and therefore one
of the main burdens to leverage data-driven approaches to NLP in busi-
ness applications. Other issues faced by language models and data-driven
approaches to NLP in general include ethical challenges, like gender and
racial bias learnt from bias present in the data the models are trained on,
as well as a lack of transparency that makes it diﬃcult to explain model
predictions and build trust between human users and such models, particu-
larly in domains where regulation demands systems to justify every decision.
Furthermore, there is a strong discussion in the NLP community regarding
whether data-driven approaches actually have a true understanding of real-
world pragmatics and semantics (Bender and Koller, 2020). It is common for
generative language models like GPT-3 to produce text that is realistic but
also hallucinatory or nonsensical.3 In space, as well as in any scientiﬁc dis-
cipline, we need models that do not just look thoughtful and able to reason
with scientiﬁc text, but models that are indeed scientiﬁc.
The improvements in standard benchmark4 and leaderboard performance
in NLP tasks have also come at the cost of increased model complexity and
ever-growing amount of computational resources required for training and
using current state-of-the-art models. This in turn results into higher entry
barriers for organizations that may not have access to large infrastructures,
leaving the ﬁeld to large industrial players, as well as a fast-increasing envi-
ronmental impact in terms of CO2 emissions. According to a recent survey
conducted by Michael et al. (2022), these are some of the topics that cur-
rently raise more concerns amongst researchers in the NLP community. In
response to such concerns, several initiatives5 in the community promote
more sustainable NLP research and practices, with two main objectives: to
3GPT-3 Bloviator: OpenAI’s language generator has no idea what it’s talking about.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/22/1007539/
gpt3-openai-language-generator-artificial-intelligence-ai-opinion
4For example, the General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) bench-
mark (https://gluebenchmark.com) and its updated, more diﬃcult version SuperGLUE
(https://super.gluebenchmark.com)
5SustaiNLP: Workshop on Simple and Eﬃcient Natural Language Processing
https://sites.google.com/view/sustainlp2022
7
encourage the development of more eﬃcient NLP models and to provide
simpler architectures and empirical justiﬁcation of model complexity.
On the other hand, symbolic, knowledge-based approaches to NLP are
generally considered more logically interpretable, explainable, and grounded
on semantics and pragmatics. However, they can also suﬀer from the so-called
knowledge acquisition bottleneck. This term, coined by Feigenbaum (1984),
refers to the diﬃculty in acquiring knowledge from experts or resources like
unstructured text corpora and represent such knowledge in a format that
is useful to build intelligent systems. This can occasionally lead to brittle
representations of a domain, systems that are sensitive to corner cases as the
amount of data increases, and time-consuming manual modeling activities.
In NLP, the knowledge acquisition bottleneck is usually associated with the
problem of labeling text corpora at a large scale and in diﬀerent languages,
as reported by Pasini (2020) in the context of multilingual word-sense disam-
biguation, hindering the creation of both multilingual knowledge bases and
manually-curated training sets.
3. A text analytics and NLP methodological framework for space
The limited availability of annotated datasets for the space domain hin-
ders the application of classical regimes for model training as well as modern
NLP pipelines based on pre-train, ﬁne-tune, and predict6 recently brought
about by the advent of neural language models. At the same time, space is
a mission-critical business, where errors can result in large economic draw-
backs and even the loss of human lives.7 Therefore, it is key for space AI
systems in general and NLP applications in particular to be not only data-
eﬃcient, but also explainable (Adadi and Berrada, 2018). As illustrated by
the commitment of ESA with the ﬁght against climate change,8 sustainable,
energy-eﬃcient NLP models are also of increasing importance.
Figure 2 shows a representation of our proposed methodological frame-
work, where we identify three main phases for an NLP project in space:
6Generative language models like GPT-3 propose a new pipeline known as pre-train,
prompt, predict, where a prompt is a piece of text inserted in the input examples so that
the task that needs to be solved can be formulated as a language modeling problem in a
zero-shot or few-shot training regime.
7Consider for example the tragedy of the Challenger space shuttle in 1986 or the ex-
plosion of the ﬁrst Ariane 5 ﬂight in 1996.
8ESA Climate Change Initiative https://climate.esa.int
8
analysis, design and development, and operations.
The activities in our
framework may appear to be common to modern NLP projects across many
domains. However, the idiosyncrasies of NLP projects in space, including
those mentioned above (frequent lack of labeled data, limited availability of
key NLP components such as domain-speciﬁc pre-trained language models,
emphasis on explainability, and sustainability), inform the framework itself
as well as, in return, its application to address language processing chal-
lenges. As a consequence, our framework is particularly aware when it comes
to decide whether to adopt a machine-learning based approach, a symbolic
approach or a combination of both to develop NLP applications in space.
Many (Sheth et al., 2017; Shoham, 2015; Domingos, 2012) argue that
symbolic approaches can enhance both expressivity and reasoning power in
machine learning architectures and advocate for a hybrid approach that lever-
ages the best of both worlds. For example, in situations where there may be a
lack of labeled data, such datasets can be augmented using a knowledge graph
to expand the available corpus based on hypernymy, synonymy and other se-
mantic relations represented explicitly in the graph. In (G´omez-P´erez et al.,
2020), we explored the combination of machine learning-based and symbolic
approaches in NLP and motivated the application of such paradigm through
several success stories in diﬀerent domains. In this paper, we base on those
principles to inform the development of NLP applications in space. However,
rather than advocating for a particular approach, we aim at providing the
means to make an informed decision in each particular case.
Next, we present the diﬀerent phases considered by our framework.
3.1. Analysis
The analysis phase consists of four main steps focused on the deﬁnition
of the space-related use cases for NLP technologies, the identiﬁcation of the
NLP tasks that are needed to solve the associated language processing chal-
lenges, and the availability of resources to model such tasks. The availabil-
ity of resources (task-speciﬁc annotated datasets, hardware infrastructure,
pre-trained models, APIs, structured knowledge) is the most critical step to-
wards discriminating the main approach to address the identiﬁed NLP tasks.
From a pragmatic point of view, the main principle is usually reusability
and cost-beneﬁt ratio. If there are annotated datasets suitable to ﬁne-tune
a existing model for the required task in space, probably it is advisable to
adopt a machine-learning-based approach. Otherwise, a symbolic approach
9
Figure 2: Text analytics and NLP application development workﬂow in space.
may be more suitable, e.g., by extending and adapting a pre-existing knowl-
edge graph with terminology extracted from domain text corpora.
Next,
we describe the steps the analysis phases comprises. Table 1 illustrates the
outcome of the analysis phase on several example use cases relevant for ESA.
Deﬁning the use case. We start with the deﬁnition of the problem
that is sought to be addressed through the application of language technolo-
gies. Factors to consider include the objectives to be achieved, the type of
documents to process, the expected outputs, and how the user is expected
to interact with the system. This information can be summarized as a use
case name and a description (ﬁrst two columns in table 1).
Mapping the use case against known NLP tasks. As part of the
assessment of the use case, determining its technical feasibility includes the
mapping of the use case with the speciﬁc set of NLP tasks required to address
it. Based on our experience, we identify two main categories of NLP tasks
of relevance for space. The ﬁrst category is related to information extrac-
tion, understood as the task of automatically extracting pre-speciﬁed types
of facts from unstructured documents, producing structured metadata (Ji,
2009). Such metadata may include diﬀerent types of information, like the
main topics or domains related to the text under analysis, the entities that are
mentioned in it (people, organizations, locations, time references, quantities,
identiﬁers, etc.), lexical information (surface forms, lemmas), and grammat-
ical information (key phrases, part of speech). The output of information
extraction tasks is usually connected to information retrieval use cases where
the objective is to exploit such metadata to enhance systems like search and
recommendation engines, making such systems more expressive and ﬂexible
and increasing their coverage. Often, the ultimate goal is to assist users like
space scientists and engineers to have easier and more accurate access to
10
Table 1: Example use cases of language technologies at ESA, with the analysis of their
corresponding NLP task and necessary resources. WSD = Word-Sense Disambiguation,
STS = Semantic Textual Similarity, NER = Named Entity Recognition
Use case
Description
NLP tasks
General
resources
Domain-speciﬁc
resources
Document
analytics
Extracting key informa-
tion
from
space
docu-
ments like scientiﬁc liter-
ature or CDF reports, in-
cluding topics, main con-
cepts, and entities
WSD
expert.ai
NLP API
KG
extended
with
space
terminology
Tax.
cate-
gorization
Extended
KG,
ad-hoc
tax-
onomies
NER
CoNLL-
2003
NER
Extended KG
Change
Propagation
When
a
change
occurs
in a document, identify
passages in related docu-
ments (requirement ﬁles,
analysis
reports,
proce-
dures).
Similar passages
are likely to be aﬀected by
this change
STS
STS-B
Corpus of space
sentences
la-
beled
with
similarity
score
0-5
WSD
Expert.ai
NLP API
Space document
corpus
NER
CoNLL-
2003
NER
Space document
corpus with an-
notated entities
Report
Quality
Checking
Check that CDF reports
contain
the
major
ele-
ments
and
set
of
pre-
deﬁned parameters
NER
CoNLL-
2003
NER
Corpus of CDF
reports with an-
notated param-
eter types
Automatic
Quiz Gener-
ation
Given a document, gener-
ate the list of the most rel-
evant questions that can
be answered with it
Question
Generation
(NLG)
SQuAD
A
corpus
of
space-related
questions
and
answers marked
in the text
Information
Retrieval
Retrieve the actual answer
to a query from a collec-
tion of long documents.
Supported queries should
include factual questions
Open-
Domain
Question
Answering
SQuAD
A
corpus
of
space-related
questions
and
answers marked
in the text
relevant information for their daily work.
The other category of NLP tasks in space that we are interested in is
11
related to comprehension. Following (Chen, 2018), we focus on enabling
machines to read some text, process it, and understand its meaning in order
to solve tasks like machine reading comprehension, where the system proves
its understanding of the text by answering questions about it (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2018; Koˇcisk´y et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 2019). In
general, we understand as comprehension tasks all those NLP tasks that seek
to extract meaning from text in order to solve some language understanding
problem. Examples of comprehension tasks would therefore also include: i)
summarization, where a system needs to identify the main sentences that
provide the most informative summary of a text (Nallapati et al., 2017) or to
generate a new, shorter sequence of text that synthesizes the original docu-
ment (Lin and Ng, 2019); ii) question generation, where given a document the
system needs to assimilate its content in order to generate plausible questions
that can be answered by another system or by a human after reading such
text; iii) semantic textual similarity (Agirre et al., 2013), where the goal is
to compare the meaning of two text sequences to determine their relatedness
or similarity even if the words and grammatical constructions used for each
of them are diﬀerent; and iv) word-sense disambiguation (Raganato et al.,
2017), which seeks to identify the correct meaning of a polysemic word, e.g.
bank, pen or payload, based on its context.
Assessing resource availability. Once the NLP tasks relevant for the
use case have been identiﬁed, the next step involves taking inventory of the
language technology resources necessary to address such tasks. Particularly
valuable resources include annotated datasets, like SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2018), that have been labeled and made available by the NLP community to
train NLP models in a supervised way to solve downstream tasks like question
answering generally, without a speciﬁc domain in mind. Other resources cen-
tral to modern machine learning-based NLP are pre-trained language models
like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) that were trained in a self-supervised way
(no labeling required) on a large collection of general-purpose web docu-
ments. Resources useful for NLP tasks also include general-purpose knowl-
edge graphs, e.g. DBpedia (Bizer et al., 2009) and Wikidata (Vrandeˇci´c and
Kr¨otzsch, 2014), lexico-semantic databases like WordNet (Miller, 1995), and
domain-speciﬁc document corpora, databases, taxonomies, and thesauri. Ex-
amples of such resources in space include the Nebula9 library, which contains
9Nebula, the knowledge bank of ESA’s R&D programmes https://nebula.esa.int
12
a large amount of information in text format about ESA’s programmes and
studies, the ESA technology tree10 or ARTS, ESA’s anomaly report tracking
system.11 Another type of resources that also needs to be considered but
is frequently overseen relates to hardware infrastructure. Machine-learning-
based model training and execution need speciﬁc GPU infrastructure to work
optimally. Also, as mentioned above, training large models on large datasets
usually implies a larger carbon footprint compared to a symbolic approach.
Therefore, the availability of such resources and whether the project has spe-
ciﬁc environmental sustainability goals have an impact on the choice of the
most appropriate approach to tackle a given NLP problem.
Determining the need for additional resources, e.g. for model ﬁne-
tuning on domain-speciﬁc data. As shown in the previous point, most of the
available resources required to solve language tasks are general-purpose and
not specialized in the particular domain of interest. Even more so in space,
where the availability of domain-speciﬁc language resources and particularly
annotated datasets for supervised training is scarce. At the same time, the
terminology and in general the language used in space is complex, full of
technicalities, and very speciﬁc, which hinders the eﬀectiveness of reusing
general-purpose datasets. Therefore, it is often necessary to create domain-
speciﬁc resources.
Among them, we would highlight: i) labeled datasets
used to ﬁne-tune a particular machine learning model, usually a pre-trained
language model, in order to solve a particular language task in space and ii)
the extraction of domain-speciﬁc terminologies from a document corpus that
can be used to extend the coverage of the domain provided by a general-
purpose knowledge graph, if we are opting for a knowledge-based approach.
The trade-oﬀbetween the quality of the predictions obtained and the cost
required to create such valuable, domain-speciﬁc language resources needs to
be taken into account in order to optimize results.
Use case feasibility analysis is possible now that we know the in-
volved NLP tasks, the resources we count with, the resources we need, and
the project resources, budget and schedule. If the use case involves an NLP
task for which there are not available supporting resources, e.g., domain-
speciﬁc annotated datasets or GPUs to train deep learning models, then the
10ESA technology treehttps://www.esa.int/About_Us/ESA_Publications/STM-277_
ESA_Technology_Tree
11https://artsops.esa.int
13
generation, development and provision of such resources must be considered
within the scopes of the project resources, budget and schedule. If provi-
sioning such resources is out of budget due to e.g. personnel, software or
hardware cost, the project lacks the necessary skills, e.g., domain experts or
knowledge engineers, or time constraints make it impossible to obtain the
resources on time, the use case should be discarded. On the other hand, if
there are resources supporting the NLP tasks or the generation and provision
is feasible we should proceed with the design and development phase.
3.2. Design and Development
The design and development phase aims to deﬁne the general architecture
and software components that make up the solution proposed for the use
case, as well as the development of such components. In addition to the
traditional software design and development we include activities to generate
the required language technology resources, and their evaluation. We also
sketch the general components in a high level architecture for NLP-based
projects.
Design and Architecture. As in any software project the goal of the
design process is to generate a speciﬁcation of software components to fulﬁll
the use case or project requirements. Since a general discussion about soft-
ware design and architecture is out of the scope of this work, we focus on the
most prominent components of software project involving NLP components
in space. Following a layered architecture pattern (Richards, 2015), we deﬁne
the next layers (bottom-up):
• Data storage layer, where text, metadata, and dense representations
are stored for eﬃcient retrieval and similarity comparison in an inverted
index12, an embedding index13 or other document-oriented database.
• Data access layer, including the components to extract data and text
from external sources such as databases, ﬁle systems, FTP, web ser-
vices, and web pages, and components to manage and query the data in
the storage layer. Examples of the latter are traditional search engines
like Elasticsearch, and neural retrievers such as ColBERT (Khattab
12https://lucene.apache.org/
13https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss
14
and Zaharia, 2020) or DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020). In the data ac-
cess layer, data preprocessing is done including cleaning and formatting
text, e.g. text from PDF documents, particularly prevalent in ESA, or
web scraping, or generating dense representations for text documents
using language models (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019).
• Domain logic layer is where software components, including the ones
supporting NLP tasks, are orchestrated according to the logic of the
diﬀerent functionalities required for the use case. NLP components in-
clude language models ﬁne-tuned for speciﬁc task, available NLP APIs
or statistical models. An example of an orchestrating component is one
that generates questions using a language model, e.g., T5 (Raﬀel et al.,
2020), and then attempts to answer the question using a RoBERTa
model (Liu et al., 2019).
• Presentation layer includes the user interface components necessary
for the use case. For example, Kibana dashboards14 are very useful
to visualize the results of information extraction tasks on large doc-
ument collections while enabling search and exploration capabilities.
Popular frameworks for rapid app prototyping and demonstration in-
clude Streamlit15 and Dash16. In addition, we strongly suggest to in-
clude feedback gathering mechanism in the user interface. The feedback
gathered from users during interaction with the system is a valuable
resource to improve the NLP tools and models used in the project,
as well as an additional source of supervision for subsequent model
training following an active learning approach (Settles, 2009). In inte-
gration projects where the visualization of results is in a third party
software the presentation layer might contain components exposing the
functionalities as web services or API.
Provisioning of resources identiﬁed in the analysis phase and neces-
sary for the NLP components included in the design. As mentioned above,
resources vary widely and include data, corpora, annotation datasets, soft-
ware, and hardware. From our experience in NLP projects at ESA, it is good
practice to invest in the development of at least a testing set to evaluate the
14https://www.elastic.co/kibana/kibana-dashboard
15https://streamlit.io
16https://dash.plotly.com
15
performance of the resulting models in the target NLP tasks. In addition,
whenever a machine-learning-based approach is adopted, we advocate for
the generation of domain-speciﬁc annotated datasets for training. To this
purpose, we propose to conduct annotation campaigns involving teams that
involve experts in space and AI experts in order to guide the former in the
text annotation process. We support the annotators with labeling tools like
Labelstudio17 to ease the annotation process. In addition, pre-trained lan-
guage models are also important resources to be reused in NLP projects, as
well as the provision of GPUs to train, ﬁne-tune or run the models.
Resource evaluation. Training NLP models on poorly annotated datasets
leads too underperforming models. Metrics for inter-annotator agreement,
like Cohen’s (Cohen, 1960) or Fleiss (Fleiss et al., 1971) kappa, are often
used to asses the quality of the datasets generated through human annota-
tion. Metrics For NLP models and tools vary depending on the particular
NLP task. Common evaluation metrics in NLP include Precision, Recall, F1,
Accuracy, BLEU, and ROUGE, to name a few.
Development and testing. With the speciﬁcation produced in the de-
sign activity, the architecture and the selected resources the software devel-
opment phase can start. As in any other software project, testing is crucial to
guarantee the quality of the end product. Agile software development (Shore
and Warden, 2021) has proven useful to deliver software in a timely manner
and quickly integrate user feedback in the development process.
3.3. Operations
The ﬁnal phase is to deploy the software and monitor its performance,
actively collecting feedback while providing service to the users.
To this
purpose, we advocate for modern practices like Dev Ops (Ebert et al., 2016)
and its adaptation to machine learning ML Ops (Sweenor et al., 2020) to
enable continuous integration and delivery of the NLP models, bridging the
gap between the development, testing, and deployment phases.
Deployment of the software makes it available for end users. As with any
other software, depending on the requirements, we can deploy on-premise, in
the cloud, or in the local infrastructure of the technology provider.
Monitoring the deployed components is important to understand if soft-
ware is meeting user expectations and use case requirements. Moreover, if
17https://labelstud.io
16
feedback mechanisms were included in the user interface, such information
needs to be gathered and presented to the development team so that they
can use it to improve the NLP models. Furthermore, if the collected data is
in the form of annotated data it can be automatically leveraged to re-train
the NLP models, following an active learning approach (Settles, 2009).
4. Pick your poison: Data hunger vs. the knowledge bottleneck
Once the availability of resources has been evaluated, we consider other
aspects in addition to performance to choose a machine-learning based ap-
proach, a symbolic approach or a combination of them. A priori, resource
suﬃciency, specially of (annotated) data and GPU infrastructure, tends to
advise for a machine learning-based approach. On the other hand, strong
requirements in terms of factors like explainability, freedom from bias, and
carbon footprint may advise to follow the symbolic route. Nevertheless, re-
cent work in explainable machine learning (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg and
Lee, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2020) is pushing the envelope to make such mod-
els more transparent to humans and therefore easier to explain and inspect.
Finally, we may also opt for a hybrid approach, e.g. to inject structured
knowledge about entities and the relations between them from a pre-existing
knowledge base into a pre-trained language model (Peters et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2021b), enabling domain adaptation at a limited cost. However, the
latter still needs further research for its systematic application in a produc-
tion environment.
Many NLP tasks can be solved equally well by using a machine learning-
based approach or a symbolic approach. The decision needs to be informed
with diﬀerent criteria according to our framework. First, we look for existing
tools or models in the state of the art for each NLP task. If more than one
tool or model exists, then some evaluation needs to be carried out to choose
between the diﬀerent options. This is often the case for information extrac-
tion tasks of common key information like keywords, phrases, and entities.
Nevertheless, when information extraction is performed on ad-hoc informa-
tion, e.g. speciﬁc entity types corresponding to spacecraft instruments or
satellite launchers, it is unlikely to ﬁnd tools or datasets available for reuse.
In this case, it is advisable to either extend a pre-existing knowledge base,
e.g. a knowledge graph, with domain terminology and write rules following
the symbolic approach, or to annotate domain-speciﬁc text with labels cor-
responding to the types of information we need to extract and then train a
17
machine learning model to do the extraction.
Either way, gathering a representative document corpus of relevant text
is often necessary.
In the former case the text is analyzed by knowledge
engineers with the help of domain experts to elicit the domain terminology
to be included into the knowledge graph and write inference rules. Alterna-
tively, in the latter scenario domain experts shall label enough text so that a
data scientist can train and evaluate a machine learning model from scratch
or (preferably) ﬁne-tune a pre-trained model on the resulting dataset. In
general, and also in space (G´omez-P´erez, 2021), both options may involve
considerable eﬀort and have their pros and cons.
When the project requires other capabilities rather than information ex-
traction, involving e.g.
comprehension tasks such as closed-book (Wang
et al., 2021a) and open domain (Yang et al., 2019) question answering or
text generation (Radford et al., 2019), the knowledge-based approach might
be less appealing due to the potentially large size and complexity of the
rule base and knowledge representation that would be required to address
the task. This is an instance of the knowledge acquisition bottleneck where,
due to the cognitive limitations that a knowledge engineer may experience
to identify, formulate in their mind, and explicitly represent the potentially
vast number of possible cases to be covered, the resulting model may have
diﬃculties to generalize and suﬀer from low recall. In this case, machine
learning-based or hybrid approaches tend to be more promising. Machine
learning models and more speciﬁcally neural networks pre-trained for lan-
guage modeling, have shown good results in such tasks. However, note that
even though nowadays we can ﬁnd generalist resources for comprehension
tasks like machine reading comprehension (SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2018),
Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017)),
such datasets might not be optimal for space. The mismatch between the
datasets and the use case could be not only at the terminology level, but
also in the type of questions and expected answers. For example, several
datasets only support factoid questions where answers are short facts. If the
use case requires answer types other than facts, such as explanations, com-
parisons, list of items or process descriptions, existing datasets are of little
help. Something similar occurs in summarization, where available datasets
like CNN/Daily Mail (Nallapati et al., 2016), Gigaword (Rush et al., 2015),
and X-Sum (Narayan et al., 2018) are mostly centered on news. In such case,
it is necessary to create an annotated dataset,
Machine learning aims to construct algorithms that are able to learn to
18
predict a certain target output. To achieve this, the learning algorithm is
presented some training examples that demonstrate the intended relation of
input and output values. Then the learner is supposed to approximate the
correct output, even for examples that have not been shown during train-
ing. Such inductive bias (Mitchell, 1980) is created by adding statistically
signiﬁcant amounts of examples during model training. Therefore, when ma-
chine learning models provide erroneous predictions, the alternatives to ﬁx
such errors are usually limited to training or ﬁne-tuning the model in a new
setup, i.e. with new hyperparameters, loss function or a slight modiﬁcation
in the architecture, or to provide more annotated data in the hope that the
error will be ﬁxed once the model is re-trained. To generate more annotated
data we advocate for providing a dedicated GUI that enables gathering feed-
back from users in the form of additional supervision, e.g. by verifying or
refuting the predictions made by the model, or directly providing the cor-
rect prediction. However, neither training in a new setup nor using more
annotated data is a guarantee to solve erroneous predictions. In such case,
a possible solution is to use post-processing rules on the model output and
ﬁx the recurrent errors.
In the following sections we illustrate the application of our methodolog-
ical framework to four case studies in space. We will show how we addressed
the language processing needs that such case studies entail and the decisions
we made to successfully accomplish them. Table 2 characterizes the diﬀerent
case studies in terms of a selection of the key aspects discussed in this section
that are particularly relevant for them.
5. Answering questions about the design of space missions and
spacecraft concepts
The deﬁnition and assessment of future space missions or spacecraft con-
cepts at ESA is undertaken by a multidisciplinary group of experts at the
Concurrent Design Facility (CDF), where concurrent engineering principles
are applied to speed up design while ensuring consistent and high quality
results Bandecchi et al. (1999). The CDF produces studies that establish
the technical, programmatic, and economic feasibility of ESA’s endeavours
ahead of industrial development. Since its inception in 1998, the CDF has
performed more than 250 studies with their associated reports. Typically, a
19
Table 2: Use cases vs. decision criteria. IE = Information Extraction, Comp = Compre-
hension, XAI = Explainable, Ann. data = labeled data availability, ML/KB = chosen
approach. ✓* = annotated datasets exist but not for the domain of interest.
Use case
IE
Comp.
XAI
Ann. data
ML
KB
Answering questions about the
design of space missions and
spacecraft concepts
x
✓
✓
✓*
✓
x
Generating quizzes to support
training on quality management
and assurance in space science
and engineering
x
✓
✓
✓*
✓
x
Information extraction for Long-
Term Data Preservation in space
✓
x
x
x
x
✓
Assisted evaluation of the inno-
vation potential of OSIP ideas
✓
✓
✓
x
x
✓
CDF report18 is a long (200 to 300 pages) document in English that covers a
large variety of technical topics related to the mission itself, the systems em-
bedded in it, their conﬁguration, payload, service module, ground segment
and operations, and technical risk assessment, to name some of the most
common ones. Finding speciﬁc pieces of information in such long and com-
plex documents using traditional search engines is a cumbersome and prone-
to-error task. In it, a keyword-based query is typically issued to retrieve
documents where the information being sought may be contained. Since the
exact location of the answer is unknown, then such documents need to be
manually inspected.
To address these shortcomings, we formulate the problem of retrieving
answers to space questions from CDF reports as an open-domain question
answering (QA) task Prager (2006), which aims to answer a natural lan-
guage question against a collection of large text documents. Open-domain
QA has been a longstanding problem in NLP, information retrieval (IR) and
related ﬁelds (Chen and Yih, 2020; Voorhees, 1999; Moldovan et al., 2000;
Brill et al., 2002; Ferrucci et al., 2010). However, based on recent advances in
neural reading comprehension, open-domain QA systems have experimented
18Public CDF reports available at: https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Space_
Engineering_Technology/CDF/CDF_Reports
20
Figure 3: High-level architecture and main components of SpaceQA.
an accelerated evolution. Complex pipelines involving many diﬀerent com-
ponents such as question processing, document and passage retrieval, and
answer processing, have been replaced with modern approaches that com-
bine IR and neural reading comprehension (Chen et al., 2017; Yang et al.,
2019; Min et al., 2019).
This case study falls in the category of comprehension-related problems
introduced in section 3. As summarized in table 2, some ability to justify
why a particular answer is proposed for a given question is required. As
we will see, this is addressed by providing the user with a combination of
the conﬁdence score about a particular answer produced by the question an-
swering model and the visualization of the actual document context where
the answer appears, contributing to the plausibility of the answer. In this
case, we do count with a labeled dataset for the question answering task.
However, such dataset is not domain-speciﬁc. Similarly, the state of the art
in NLP also provides us with (general-purpose) pre-trained language models
that can be ﬁne-tuned over such data. Finally, to model this problem follow-
ing a knowledge-based approach, e.g. as a rule-based production system, we
would need to anticipate all the questions that a potential user could pose to
the system, which is not feasible. Given the combination of all these factors,
we opt for a machine learning-based approach with transformer language
models at its core.
SpaceQA (Garcia-Silva et al., 2022a), the main result of this activity,
is the ﬁrst implementation of an open-domain QA system for space mission
design. As the ﬁrst system of its kind, SpaceQA needs to face important chal-
lenges and limitations. We are aware that space documents and especially
CDF reports use complex and domain-speciﬁc terminology (Berquand et al.,
2020). However, the most limiting factor for the development of SpaceQA
21
is the scarcity of domain-speciﬁc resources that can be used in combina-
tion with state-of-the-art NLP architectures. In spite of promising recent
work in transformer-based language models for space science and engineer-
ing (Berquand et al., 2021a), the absolute lack of annotated data for open-
domain QA in space prevents a strategy based on ﬁne-tuning. Therefore, a
transfer learning approach was adopted that leverages pre-trained language
models ﬁne-tuned on available general-purpose datasets for similar tasks.
5.1. Approach
The goal of SpaceQA is to ﬁnd the answer to a factual question about
space mission design as a text span from a collection of CDF reports. Since
answers need to be extracted from passages from a set of documents, we can
catalogue SpaceQA in the category of extractive (Rajpurkar et al., 2018) and
open-domain (Yang et al., 2019) QA systems.
As shown in ﬁgure 3, SpaceQA follows a two-stage retriever-reader archi-
tecture consisting of: i) a passage retriever component that ﬁnds the passages
that may contain an answer to the question from a collection of CDF reports
and ii) a neural reader component that extracts the answer from some of such
candidate passages. For the retriever we evaluate diﬀerent methods including
traditional sparse vector space methods based on TF-IDF, BM25 or cosine
similarity, as well as dense representations using bi-encoders, like Dense
Passage Retrieval (DPR) Karpukhin et al. (2020), ColBERT Khattab
and Zaharia (2020), and CoCondenser Gao and Callan (2021). The reader
is based on state-of-the-art reading comprehension models built on modern
transformer architectures. Once a reduced set of the top-k potential passages
have been identiﬁed by the retriever, the reader attempts to spot the answer
to the question as text spans from any of the passages, assigning a score
to each of the extracted candidate spans, ranking the set of potential an-
swers. Due to the lack of a question answering dataset for space to train the
reader, we resort to the widely used Stanford Question Answering dataset
(SQuAD2.0) proposed by Rajpurkar et al. (2018). Our ﬁrst candidate reader
model is based on a RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) language model ﬁne-tuned
on SQuAD2.0. Since RoBERTa was pre-trained on a general-purpose cor-
pus, there could be vocabulary mismatch between the set of questions about
space mission design in our evaluation dataset and the knowledge encoded in
the language model that could aﬀect performance. To bridge that potential
gap, we also evaluate SpaceRoBERTa (Berquand et al., 2021a), a version
of RoBERTa pre-trained on documents from space science and engineering.
22
SpaceRoBERTa model started from a RoBERTa base model that was further
trained on a 14.3 GB corpus of publications abstracts, books, and Wikipedia
pages related to space systems.
5.2. Evaluation
We use a manually crafted dataset of factual questions produced by ESA,
with answers and paragraphs extracted from CDF reports where the answer
to the question has been annotated by an expert. Such test set contains 60
questions, answers, and corresponding paragraphs. While small, this dataset
is still useful to evaluate the reading comprehension model by testing whether
the right answer is extracted for a question. However, this dataset is partic-
ularly limited when it comes to evaluate the passage retrieval module since
potentially more than one paragraph can contain the answer for a given ques-
tion. Thus, we manually search for additional paragraphs containing the an-
swer to the question and extend the dataset with up to 5 more paragraphs
for each question.
Table 3: Evaluation of the candidate retriever components.
Retriever
R@10
MRR@10
Accuracy
TF-IDF
0.252
0.395
0.483
BM25
0.326
0.254
0.55
DPR
0.218
0.170
0.35
ColBERT
0.4898
0.560
0.717
CoCondenser
0.354
0.404
0.583
Table 4: Evaluation of the reader candidates.
Model
Precision
Recall
F-Score
RoBERTa base
0.774
0,751
0.762
RoBERTa large
0.629
0.664
0.646
SpaceRoBERTa
0.816
0.671
0.737
Since the area of open-domain QA in space mission design is largely
unexplored, and hence there is a lack of systems to compare against, we focus
our evaluation on acquiring an understanding of the current limitations of
SpaceQA. To this purpose, rather than overall end-to-end performance we are
23
particularly interested in each of the steps involved in SpaceQA individually.
Table 3 shows the evaluation results of the retrievers using recall and mean
reciprocal rank (MRR) at 10. We also measure the accuracy of the retrievers
to ﬁnd within the top-10 at least one passage containing the answer. The
results obtained in our test set seem to be consistent with those reported
in the original papers (except DPR), supporting in this case our decision to
adopt a transfer learning approach for passage retrieval. In all three metrics,
ColBERT was the best retriever, followed by CoCondenser. Training on MS
MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016) seems to be key when reusing such retrievers.
Trained on Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), DPR performs last
in our test set.
Regarding the readers, it has been reported that for natural language
questions there is often a number of acceptable answers as well as a genuine
ambiguity in whether an answer is acceptable Kwiatkowski et al. (2019). For
example, for the question why is the rover top part larger than the bottom
part?
an acceptable answer is to support the solar panels but to support
the solar panels stack namely 910mm by 500mm is acceptable, too. A span
exact match evaluation could result on low and discouraging results, which
would not reﬂect the actual performance of the reader. Thus, we opt for a
token-based evaluation of the reader where we compare the tokens in the span
extracted by the reader against the lists of tokens in the ground truth answer.
Evaluation results are presented in table 4. Unlike for the retrievers, these
results illustrate the performance impact of the lack of domain-speciﬁc data
for ﬁne-tuning, suggesting a considerable room for improvement in that di-
rection. As a reference, the current SotA in extractive QA over SQuAD2.0,19
is currently above 93.2 F1.
Interestingly, the reader resulting from ﬁne-
tuning RoBERTa base on SQuAD produced the best results, followed by a
model based on the domain-speciﬁc SpaceRoBERTa also trained on SQuAD.
The precision obtained by the SpaceRoBERTa model is higher than with
RoBERTa base. However, its recall is lower.
5.3. The SpaceQA system
We build an open-domain QA system using the retriever and reader that
performed best in our evaluation: ColBERT as retriever and RoBERTa-base
ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD2.0 as reader. We index the text from the passages ex-
19https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer
24
tracted from the CDF reports in Elasticsearch. Then, we use FAISS (Johnson
et al., 2021), an eﬃcient library for similarity search and clustering of dense
vectors, to index the passage encodings generated with ColBERT.
When an user asks a question through the system’s frontend, SpaceQA
uses ColBERT to encode the question and retrieve from FAISS the 10 most
relevant passage ids. Then the passage ids are used to retrieve from Elas-
ticSearch the text of the passages. Next, the question and relevant passages
pairs are processed by the reader and the extracted answers are returned
along with a conﬁdence score. However, only answers with a score above an
empirically deﬁned threshold of 0.5 are shown directly to the user. To see
answers with a lower score, the user is prompted ﬁrst with a warning message
about the low certainty of the answers to be displayed.
We deployed the system in a machine with 32BG RAM, 1TB SSD, intel
i7 CPU, and NVIDIA GeForce 1080Ti GPU. Both the reader and FAISS run
on the GPU while the rest of the components use the CPU. Figure 4 shows a
screenshot of the SpaceQA web application. When the user makes a question,
the system displays the answer with the highest score and the passage it was
extracted from. To support the plausibility of the answer produced by the
model, we highlight the text span corresponding to it in the passage where it
was extracted from, providing the user with its context. We also display and
link the source document of the passage and the answer score, obtained by
multiplying the probabilities of the span start and end tokens generated by
the reader. If SpaceQA identiﬁes other possible answers, they are displayed
ranked by score under the option ”other possible answers”. When the answer
score is below 0.5, the user is required to actively click on the option to see
it. If the reader does not ﬁnd any answer, we also inform the user.
Since most of the users are used to keyword-based queries in traditional
search engines, we also provide a list of predeﬁned questions so that they can
experiment with the system features and see examples of the type of questions
the system handles. This helps addressing the blank-page syndrome.20 We
also provide the option to focus the question on a speciﬁc CDF report. This
is particular important for questions that lack enough details and return
valid answers from diﬀerent reports. For example, asking a question about a
20The blank page syndrome usually refers to writer’s block, which describes the creative
blocks and avoidant thought patterns that many writers suﬀer from at some point. Here
we associate it with potential diﬃculties to formulate relevant questions.
25
Figure 4: The SpaceQA web application. A screenshot of the user interface.
vehicle or instrument that can be part of diﬀerent missions can bring potential
irrelevant results. Finally, SpaceQA also provides users with text snippets
randomly extracted from CDF reports to stimulate question asking.
In table 5 we show some example questions and the answers to those
questions produced by SpaceQA. The system deals eﬀectively with diﬀer-
ent types of wh-questions (what, which, where, when, why, and how), and
provides appropriate answers in the form of instruments like rockets, units
of measure, descriptions, locations, things, and time periods. Nevertheless,
there are questions for which the system does not provide an answer, or the
answer is wrong. While some of these are poorly speciﬁed questions21 lack-
ing details that can help to increase the conﬁdence of the reader, others are
just not properly answered. Recall that in our system we use models that
21For example, the question Why can the sample material not be exposed to daylight?
does not add any information about what sample material they are referring to.
26
Table 5: Example questions and the answers to them proposed by SpaceQA
1. Which launcher will athena use?
Ariane 5
2. What wavelengths can be observed by NG-CryoIRTel?
20-200µm
3. What is the purpose of the tunable laser spectrometer?
detect trace concentration of water and volatiles
4. How is the ATHENA mirror structure manufactured?
3D-printing
5. Where will NG-CryoIRTel be launched from?
Tanegashima Space Centre
6. Where is the panoramic camera mounted?
a deployable mast
7. When can dust storms occur during the MarsFAST mission?
at any time
8. How long will the NG-CryoIRTel mission last?
at least 5 years
were pre-trained on general purpose corpora and ﬁne-tuned on MS MARCO
and SQUAD2.0, none of them rich in space. Therefore, a natural next step
to improve the SpaceQA system is to generate a QA dataset for the space
domain to ﬁne-tuned the reader.
6. Generating quizzes to support training on quality management
and assurance in space science and engineering
Quality management is a critical requirement to guarantee the success of
space missions due to the complexity, cost, and risk, in occasions even for hu-
man lives, that they entail. Also to consistently produce space missions that
meet the stakeholders expectations, ensuring that methods, processes, parts
and materials are adequate and changes do not compromise results. ESA
makes a continuous eﬀort to train their staﬀin quality procedures and stan-
dards. Trainees are evaluated to determine the eﬀectiveness of the training
sessions, with quizzes as one of the main tools used in such evaluations.
27
Figure 5: High-level architecture and main components of SpaceQQuiz.
In this case study, we focus on SpaceQQuiz22 (Garcia-Silva et al., 2022b),
a natural language generation system designed to help trainers to generate
quizzes from documents describing quality procedures. Quality procedure
documents cover topics like Anomaly and Problem Identiﬁcation, Reporting
and Resolution or Conﬁguration Management, and include stakeholder re-
sponsibilities, activities, performance indicators and outputs, among others.
Focused on text generation, like the previous one, this case study also falls
mainly in the category of comprehension-intensive NLP projects described in
section 3 and complements the open-domain question answering case study.
It also leverages the same annotated dataset (SQuAD). However, in this case
in addition to BERT-style transformer language models (used here to validate
the quality of the generated questions) it relies on pre-trained generative
language models for question generation.
6.1. The SpaceQQuiz system
Figure 5 shows the high-level architecture of SpaceQQuiz. A question
generation model is run on each passage extracted from the document. The
generated questions and the corresponding passages are fed to a question
answering model that extracts the answer from the passage. Only questions
with answers are included in the candidate list that is then reﬁned by the
trainer to generate the quiz.
The process starts when the trainer uploads a quality procedure docu-
ment. SpaceQQuiz extracts the text from the PDF document using Apache
PDFBox23 and uses regular expressions to identify sections, subsections and
paragraphs while removing non relevant text such as headers and footers or
22SpaceQQuiz stands for Space Quality Quiz.
23Apache PDFBox https://pdfbox.apache.org
28
the table of content. The trainer is presented with a list of candidate sections
so that she can choose the most interesting ones for the quiz.
6.1.1. Question generation
We use state-of-the-art models based on transformers for question gen-
eration and question answering. Since we could not ﬁnd specialized models
for the space or quality management domains, we reused models already pre-
trained on general-purpose document corpora and ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD.
To generate the questions we use a T5 model (Raﬀel et al., 2020) and a
BART model (Lewis et al., 2020) ﬁne-tuned for question generation24. We use
two models in order to increase the number and variety of questions for each
text passage. Both T5 and BART have excelled in sequence generation tasks,
such as abstractive summarization and abstractive question answering. The
models were ﬁne-tuned using SQuAD1.1, which consists of 100K questions
created from Wikipedia articles where answers are segments in text passages.
T5 is ﬁne-tuned using an answer-aware approach where the model is pre-
sented with the answer and a passage to generate the question. T5 is trained
on a multitask objective to i) extract answers, ii) generate questions for an-
swers using passages as context, and iii) extract answers for the generated
questions. Finally the answer for the generated question is compared with
the answer used to generate the questions. BART is ﬁne-tuned following an
answer-agnostic approach where the model is trained to generate questions
from passages without information about the answers.
During generation, we use beam search as decoding method, with 5 as
number of beams. Beam search keeps the most likely sequence of words at
each time step and chooses the ﬁnal sequence that has the overall highest
probability. To avoid duplicity of questions in the ﬁnal list, we compare them
using cosine similarity between the question encoding generated through sen-
tence transformers (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019).
We discard questions
similar to a previous one above an empirically deﬁned threshold set at 0.8.
6.1.2. Question answering
Once the questions have been generated we use a RoBERTa language
model (Liu et al., 2019) ﬁne-tuned for question answering on SQuAD2.0 to
extract answers from the passages.
SQuAD2.0 adds 50,000 unanswerable
24Models reused from https://github.com/patil-suraj/question_generation
29
questions to SQuAD1.1. Thus, the ﬁne-tuned RoBERTa is able to generate
answers or not depending on the question. If RoBERTa fails to generate
an answer for a generated question we remove it from the candidate list of
questions presented to the trainer.
6.1.3. Quiz generation
The trainer can select speciﬁc questions to include in the quiz by selecting
them from the list of generated questions, answers, and passages displayed by
the SpaceQQuiz user interface. Finally the system generates the quiz with a
section containing only the questions to be handed to the trainee and another
section reserved for the trainer with questions, answers and passages.
Table 6: Examples of questions generated by SpaceQQuiz.
What is the ﬁrst source for raising a spacecraft Anomaly Report?
the spacecraft log is the ﬁrst source for raising ...
What does the ARB have to do in case of an anomaly detected in a shared
infrastructure?
notify the relevant infrastructure team
Who can issue a supplier waiver?
OPS Project Manager or Service Manager
What does the leader of the operator’s team do with the raised Anomaly
Reports?
performs a preliminary review
Who chairs the Software Review Board?
the owner of the software,
What is mandatory for the closure of a Problem Report?
Root cause identiﬁcation
What are minor non-conformances?
by deﬁnition, cannot be classiﬁed as major.
6.2. Evaluation
To evaluate SpaceQQuiz, we generate a quiz with 50 question-answer
pairs from a quality procedure document titled OPS Procedure for Conﬁg-
uration Management.
Then, a quality management expert evaluates the
generated questions using relevance and correctness as evaluation criteria.
Table 7 reports the results of this manual evaluation.
In total 66% generated questions are considered relevant and grammat-
ically correct and 60% of the answers are also regarded as correct by the
30
evaluator. If we focus only on the answers of relevant and correct questions
then the percentage of accurate answers improves to 81.8%. The level of ac-
curacy for the question generation still requires to keep an human in the loop
in order to guarantee the quality of the questions in the quiz. Ultimately,
it is the responsibility of the domain expert to decide upon the selection of
questions to be included in the quiz.
By analysing incorrect question and answer pairs, we realize that despite
being grammatically correct and relevant, some questions are just not pos-
sible to answer from the context used to generate them (see for example
questions 1 and 2 in table 8). This is consequence of a failure in the ques-
tion answering module that produces an answer for such questions. Another
example of wrong functioning of the question answering module is shown in
question 3 in table 8, where the answer to the given question is extracted
from the example in round brackets. A possible solution for this case could
be to discard examples in the text before feeding the question generation and
the question answering modules. Note that the question answering model we
are using is only able to extract possible answers from text, not to generate
new text that may answer the question.
A generative question answering model informed by the question gener-
ation model by jointly training both models could be a better way to ad-
dress this type of errors. Similar approaches, like (Wan and Bansal, 2022),
have been followed to prevent hallucination in abstractive text summariza-
tion tasks, for example.
Table 7: Evaluation of the question generation and question answering modules by a
quality assurance expert. * Indicates that only answers with a valid question are evaluated.
Accuracy
Generated questions
0.660
Extracted Answers
0.600
Extracted Answers*
0.818
For some correct and relevant questions, see, e.g., question 4 in table 8,
the question answering module just returns partial answers. In this case the
word also means that the answer in this context complements the answer
already provided in another text excerpt. This a limitation of the extractive
question answering module since it only extracts consecutive sequence of
tokens from text passages as answers.
31
Table 8: Example questions evaluated as incorrect. In bold, the answers extracted by the
question answering module.
1
Context
In the process of conﬁguration identiﬁcation the team
shall be aware on what is needed to be put under conﬁguration
control.
Question What shall the team know on what is needed to be put under
conﬁguration control?
2
Context
In a continuous service there is the concept of living base-
line over a dynamic scope.
Question What is the concept of living baseline over a dynamic scope?
3
Context
Item conﬁguration, in terms of implemented functions (e.g.
software version 2.0)
Question What is item conﬁguration in terms of implemented func-
tions?
4
Context
The system under conﬁguration includes also the items re-
ceived as Customer Furnished Item.
Question What does the system under conﬁguration include?
Finally the domain expert evaluator reported that in some cases the prob-
lem is related to the source text used to generate the question, which may not
be clear enough to formulate appropriate questions. Thus, wrong questions
might indicate text excerpts that need to be reviewed by the authors of the
quality management document to convey their message more clearly.
7. Information extraction for Long-Term Data Preservation in space
The large amount of new space missions in areas like Earth Observation
planned for the next years will lead to a major increase of space data that
adds up to the data legacy of current and past missions.
Together with
the growing demands from the user community, this marks a challenge for
satellite operators, space agencies and data providers regarding the coher-
ent preservation and optimum availability and accessibility of the diﬀerent
data products. Among the main goals of the European EO Long Term Data
Preservation Framework,25 the need to ensure and facilitate data accessibil-
25LTDP
Introduction
and
Objectives
(https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/
activities/gscb-and-ltdp/ltdp-introduction-and-objectives)
32
ity and usability is a key one. To achieve this goal it is necessary to enhance
the ability of machines to automatically ﬁnd and use scientiﬁc information
from related disciplines in addition to supporting reuse by individuals. Text
analytics systems can contribute to such vision by automatically extracting
information from relevant sources like scholarly communications, technical
reports, mission feasibility studies, design documents or mission reports, ex-
posing such information as machine-readable metadata that facilitates dis-
covery through automated means. Once available, such metadata is instru-
mental for the development of information retrieval systems, such as search
and recommendation engines, facilitating access.
As shown in table 2, this case study focuses on information extraction
and follows a knowledge-based approach to text analytics. We present the
methodology followed to extract domain-speciﬁc terminology and its inte-
gration in a pre-existing, general-purpose knowledge graph, extending and
customizing it for Earth and Environmental sciences,26 and supporting the
development of domain-speciﬁc text analytics services for information ex-
traction. We also illustrate how the metadata extracted by such services
can be leveraged by powerful search and recommendation engines. We use
expert.ai technology27 for natural language processing and understanding,
which relies on a general-purpose lexico-semantic knowledge graph with ap-
proximately 400K lemmas, 300K concepts, and 80 diﬀerent types of relations,
rendering 3 million links between concepts.
7.1. Text resources for terminology extraction and model training
A domain-speciﬁc text corpus is necessary to adapt existing text min-
ing tools to the vocabulary used by the target users.
First, we worked
with documental sources facilitated by ESA, including proceedings of ESA-
sponsored conferences like Big Data from Space28 and the PV conference
series29 about ensuring long-term preservation and adding value to scientiﬁc
and technical data, as well as the ESA corporate taxonomy, the glossary of
26Both relevant for Earth Observation, the main strategic area of interest for this study.
27Expert.ai core technology: https://www.expert.ai/products/technology
28BIDS (https://www.bigdatafromspace2021.org/)
29https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/activities/gscb-and-ltdp/
pv-conferences
33
long-term preservation of earth observation space data30, and the ESA Tech-
nology Tree.31 We extract and process the text from such documents using
expert.ai and the pre-existing version of its knowledge graph. By compar-
ing the information thus extracted, e.g. keywords, multi-word expressions,
concepts, lemmas, entities, with the terms captured by the expert.ai knowl-
edge graph we were able to identify a vocabulary gap (see section 7.3 for a
detailed description of the terminology analysis). This resulted in the exten-
sion of the knowledge graph with 579 new acronyms and their deﬁnitions, 77
departments in the ESA corporate organization, over 100 new lemmas and
multi-word expressions, 83 space missions, 16 organizations, over 200 proper
nouns (prominent public ﬁgures, such as authors and scientists), and 186
other terms, as well as the explicit relations between them and the corre-
sponding concepts in the knowledge graph.
In a second stage we continued extending the knowledge graph with pub-
licly available information from additional scientiﬁc publications and set to
collect a public documental corpus. We focused on Springer Nature’s Sci-
Graph,32. Other sources considered include open access publications in Earth
and Environmental sciences from OpenAire33 and Scopus.34. SciGraph is a
knowledge graph of scholarly communications covering funding agencies, re-
search projects, conferences, aﬃliations, and publications. The main source
of information for SciGraph is the Springer Nature editorial group, which
ensures high quality data from trusted and reliable sources. Publications
include journals, articles, books, and book chapters from the last 200 years.
SciGraph uses the schema:about35 property to relate publications to the
Fields of Research classiﬁcation36 (FOR). FOR includes major ﬁelds and
related sub-ﬁelds of research and emerging areas of study investigated by
businesses, universities, national research institutions and other organiza-
tions. FOR is a taxonomy with three levels: divisions (2 digits), groups (4
30https://ceos.org/document_management/Working_Groups/WGISS/Interest_
Groups/Data_Stewardship/White_Papers/EO-DataStewardshipGlossary.pdf
31https://www.esa.int/About_Us/ESA_Publications/STM-277_ESA_Technology_
Tree
32https://www.springernature.com/gp/researchers/scigraph
33https://www.openaire.eu
34https://www.scopus.com/
35http://schema.org/about
36https://www.arc.gov.au/grants/grant-application/
classification-codes-rfcd-seo-and-anzsic-codes
34
digits) and ﬁelds (6 digits). Each division is based on a broad discipline.
Groups within each division are those which share the same broad method-
ology, techniques and/or perspective as others in the division. Each group
is a collection of related ﬁelds of research. Groups and ﬁelds of research are
categorized to the divisions sharing the same methodology rather than the
division they support. An example of division, group and ﬁeld of research
hierarchy is: 09 Engineering (division), 0901 Aerospace Engineering (group),
090101 Aerodynamics (ﬁeld). The FOR taxonomy totals 22 divisions.
Focusing on the domain-speciﬁc vocabulary relevant for Earth and Envi-
ronmental sciences, we conducted a survey within a group of 12 vulcanolo-
gists, sea observation scientists and climatologists to determine: i) the most
relevant ﬁelds of research for their work and ii) the journals and venues where
them and their peers publish their scientiﬁc contributions. We generated a
spreadsheet with the FOR taxonomy and asked our scientists to mark the
most relevant ﬁelds for their work, following these guidelines: First, select
the most relevant division associated with your research; then determine the
most relevant group within that division; and ﬁnally identify the most rele-
vant ﬁeld within that group. We also advised them to prioritize research ﬁelds
that overlap most with their research, e.g. Vulcanology, over research ﬁelds
related to speciﬁc techniques used in their work, e.g. Analytical Chemistry.
The groups and ﬁelds of research corresponding to the Earth Sciences
division selected by our team of experts was the following:
• Atmospheric sciences: Atmospheric Aerosols, Atmospheric Dynam-
ics, Atmospheric Radiation, Climate Change Processes, Climatology
(excl. Climate Change Processes), Cloud Physics, Meteorology, Tropo-
spheric and Stratospheric Physics.
• Geochemistry: Exploration Geochemistry, Inorganic Geochemistry,
Isotope Geochemistry, Organic Geochemistry.
• Geology: Basin Analysis, Extraterrestrial Geology, Geochronology,
Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology, Marine Geoscience, Mineralogy
and Crystallography, Ore Deposit Petrology, Paleontology (incl. Pa-
lynology), Petroleum and Coal Geology, Sedimentology, Stratigraphy
(incl. Biostratigraphy and Sequence Stratigraphy), Structural Geology,
Tectonics, Volcanology.
• Geophysics: Electrical and Electromagnetic Methods in Geophysics,
35
Geodynamics, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, Geothermics and Radio-
metrics, Gravimetrics, Magnetism and Paleomagnetism, Seismology
and Seismic Exploration.
• Oceanography: Biological Oceanography, Chemical Oceanography,
Physical Oceanography.
• Physical Geography and Environmental Geoscience: Geomor-
phology and Regolith and Landscape Evolution, Glaciology, Hydroge-
ology, Natural Hazards, Palaeoclimatology, Quaternary Environments,
Surface Processes, Surfacewater Hydrology.
Similarly, for Environmental Sciences:
• Ecological applications: Ecological Impacts of Climate Change, Ecosys-
tem Function, Invasive Species Ecology, Landscape Ecology.
• Environmental Science and Management: Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Environmental Knowledge, Conservation and Biodiver-
sity, Environmental Education and Extension, Environmental Impact
Assessment, Environmental Management, Environmental Monitoring,
Environmental Rehabilitation (excl. Bioremediation), Maori Environ-
mental Knowledge, Natural Resource Management, Paciﬁc Peoples En-
vironmental Knowledge, Wildlife and Habitat Management.
• Soil sciences: Carbon Sequestration Science, Land Capability and
Soil Degradation, Soil Biology, Soil Chemistry (excl. Carbon Seques-
tration Science), Soil Physics.
7.2. Corpus generation
We generate our corpus by applying two ﬁlters to the SciGraph Articles
Dump: i) Publication Date and ii) Fields of Research. From the SciGraph
articles dump, a compressed ﬁle with 10,653 JSON ﬁles with all the articles,
we focus on a subset containing those published since 2016 that belong to
the Earth Sciences or Environmental Sciences ﬁelds of research, and produce
a single JSON ﬁle with the title and abstract of such articles. The JSON ﬁle
contains 49.693 articles, with 13M tokens, among which 271K are unique.
61% of them (30.190 articles) are labeled as Earth Sciences papers, while the
rest (19.503 articles) belong to the Environmental Sciences ﬁeld. The main
subcategories in Earth sciences (36%) are Geology and Physical Geography
36
(25%), while the remaining subcategories are uniformly distributed over the
rest of the sample. For Environmental sciences, Environmental Science Man-
agement (55%) and Soil sciences (43%) are dominant.37
7.3. Terminology analysis
The analysis of the corpus is useful to assess and extend terminology
coverage in the domains of interest. To analyze the corpus we use a pre-
existing version of the text mining and enrichment services based on expert.ai
technology to detect concepts that are not already encoded in our knowledge
graph. Such concepts, along with multi-word expression also detected by the
text analytics engine, are used to enrich the knowledge graph. In addition,
named entities like people, organization and places are manually inspected
to detect errors and improve the accuracy of the named-entity recognition
(NER) module. Finally, we carry out a weirdness index analysis to detect
words that are speciﬁc of the target scientiﬁc domains.
The expert.ai knowledge graph is a semantic network that represents
knowledge as a graph of concepts and relationships between them.
The
nodes of this knowledge graph are called syncons, and they are linked to
each other through semantic and linguistic relationships in a hierarchical
structure. Each syncon has a main lemma, which is a canonical represen-
tations of words and collocations without conjugation, number or gender.
The complete meaning of a word or expression in the text comes as a com-
bination of its main elements after disambiguation (grammar type, syncon,
deﬁnition/gloss, domain, and frequency relations), as well as the diﬀerent
types of connections, e.g. hypernymy, hyponymy, it may have with other
syncons. This explicit representation results in a greater ability to under-
stand language, which can be adapted to a speciﬁc domain by adding new
concepts and relations that enrich the metadata extraction and improve text
comprehension. In our case, we extend a general-purpose version of the graph
with new terms from the corpus, selecting those that are more representative
of the vocabulary used by our target communities
One of the advantages of this approach is that the knowledge graph can
be used to disambiguate the meaning of a word by recognizing its context.
This disambiguation process comprises several phases of analysis including a
37The corpus, along with the metadata extracted from it, is available in Zenodo https:
//zenodo.org/record/4721343/files/scigraph_corpus_zenodo.json.
37
lexico-grammatical analysis, which identiﬁes e.g. nouns, proper nouns, and
verbs, a syntactical analysis that identiﬁes word groups at diﬀerent levels
e.g. noun phrases and verb phrases, and a semantic analysis, which ﬁnally
determines the meaning of each document token according to the knowledge
graph. Additionally, named-entity recognition allows spotting names refer-
enced within the text, such as proper nouns, organizations, and locations.
We process the corpus and extract metadata from the documents by
feeding the text mining services with the title and abstract of each paper.
We generate the following metadata:
• Domain: Field(s) of knowledge, based on main concepts.
• Organizations: Organization names or aliases.
• People: Person names or aliases.
• Places: Places names or aliases.
• Known Concepts: Concepts found in the text and present in the
knowledge graph.
• Concepts: Concepts in the document that are not in the graph.
• Main Syncons: Most relevant concepts mentioned in the text that
are represented in the graph.
• Main Groups: Most relevant noun phrases and multi-word expres-
sions in the text.
• Main Lemmas: Most frequent lemmas found in the text.
• Main Sentences: Most relevant sentences found in the text.
To identify the corpus terminology that was not covered yet by the knowl-
edge graph, we focused on the lemmas of words and multi-word expressions
(noun phrases) that the text mining service was not able to associate with a
concept in the knowledge graph. Table 9 shows the top 10 most frequent of
such lemmas. As shown in the table, most of the unknown terms are chem-
ical compounds and measures, which is not surprising since the knowledge
grtaph was not originally conceived to cover Chemistry.
Another source of potential concepts to integrate in the knowledge graph
are the main Groups or multi-word expressions detected by the software.
38
Table 9: Top 10 lemmas without a concept
in the knowledge graph
Lemma
Count
ha-1
543
kg-1
444
R2
426
NO3
414
18O
387
sea surface temperature
373
Mw
343
SiO2
318
CMIP5
305
m-2
263
Table 10: Top 10 multi-word expressions in
the Corpus
Main group
Count
soil sample
641
species richness
316
soil moisture
296
climate model
272
groundwater sample
266
soil property
264
land use
263
ecosystem service
233
climate variability
214
soil fertility
200
Main groups in table 10, contain phrases of nouns, verbs and prepositions.
Similar to lemmas, after identifying candidate expressions to be included in
the graph, a knowledge engineer needs to determine whether a phrase can be
represented as a concept and the exact location of the graph and form in of
such representation. This will depend on diﬀerent factors, including the pos-
sibility of explicitly linking the new concept with existing concepts through
relations or the existence of previous related concepts in the hierarchy.
Table 11 shows the top 10 most frequent named entities found in the
corpus. Since these are the most frequent entities, there is little chance of
error. However, proper nouns like Forest could be further investigated to see
if it actually refers to a person or not. Among the organizations, sea surface
temperature is clearly an error that needs to be addressed. The reason for
such error is that sea surface temperature is not explicitly encoded as part
of the knowledge graph and hence the entity type needs to be inferred. In
this type of situations, the knowledge engineer needs to decide, based on the
relevance of the entity, whether to include it explicitly in the graph.
Table 12 shows the number of words per metadata type shown by our
analysis to be previously known or unknown in the knowledge graph Note
that not all terms need to be included. For example, only named entities
classiﬁed under the wrong entity type need to be integrated in the graph
so that the disambiguation process has more information about them when
determining the correct entity type. The rest of unknown entities correctly
39
Table 11: Top 10 named entities in the corpus per frequency
Person
Count
Place
Count
Organization
Count
Salvatore
Pinto
315
China
4,292
European Community
280
Shannon
135
India
2,074
European Union
247
Ma
53
United States
of America
1,366
Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change
152
Biochar
50
Iran
972
Cd
144
Linnaeus
50
Europe
838
International Union for
Conservation of Nature
136
Anne
48
Japan
757
soil organic carbon
129
April
46
Brazil
710
ECMWF
115
Pb
38
Atlantic
Ocean
687
World Health Organiza-
tion
106
Forest
35
Mediterranean
Sea
624
O2 plc
98
Rossby
30
Italy
614
sea surface temperature
82
classiﬁed does not need to be added. Similarly, only unknown lemmas and
groups that are ambiguous need to be integrated in the graph so that they
can be disambiguated properly.
Since there is a considerable number of
unknown lemmas, groups and entities, we apply the Pareto principle and
focus on the 20% most frequent words for each metadata type. This subset
of words is handed to a team of knowledge engineers and linguists in charge
of their integration in the expert.ai knowledge graph. In total, the knowledge
engineers need to analyze and process 5,070 words, with an estimated total
eﬀort of 2.5 person months.
Table 12: Number of known vs. unknown corpus terms
Known
Unknown
20% Most frequent unknown
Total
Lemmas
22,978
26,974
556
49,952
Groups
735
171,047
3,121
171,782
Persons
1,463
6,520
341
7,983
Places
6,371
20,853
542
27,224
Organizations
1,730
21,755
510
23,485
40
One way to streamline the integration of new terminology in the knowl-
edge graph is to prioritize those terms that are more speciﬁc of the refer-
ence corpus over those that are more generalistic. To this purpose, similarly
to (Berquand et al., 2020), we apply Weirdness Index (Ahmad and Gillam,
2005) ﬁltering to rank the candidate terms. The Weirdness Index allows com-
paring the use of a word, based on its frequency, between a domain-speciﬁc
corpus and a large corpus representing general-purpose language. In this
case, we use the British National Corpus38 (BNC) as our general corpus. We
calculate the Weirdness Index as shown in equation 1, where fS is the fre-
quency of the word in the specialized corpus, fG its frequency in the general
corpus, and NS and NG are the number of tokens in the specialized and in
the general corpus, respectively. Table 13 shows some of the terms with the
highest and lowest Weirdness Index in our corpus.
W =
NGfS
(1 + fG)NS
(1)
Table 13: Top 10 terms with the highest and lowest weirdness index in the corpus
Highest WI
Weirdness index
Lowest WI
Weirdness index
ENSO
17,250.2
Win
0.0043
N2O
9,480.3
Money
0.0042
CMIP5
7,443.28
Studio
0.0039
Modelling
5,665.83
Pupil
0.0039
WRF
4,847.59
Terry
0.0037
NDVI
4,598.33
Worry
0.0033
7.4. Exploiting the extracted metadata
Once the knowledge graph has been extended and adapted to the speciﬁc
domain, any collection of documents can be processed to extract metadata39
from them, which can then be used to improve access to such information.
This type of application is illustrated in ﬁgure 6, which shows part of an
38http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk
39A live demo illustrating the semantic metadata presented in this paper that can be
extracted from Earth and Environmental sciences documents can be found at: https:
//reliance.expertcustomers.ai/enrichment
41
example dashboard40 built with Kibana41 to visualize and explore a document
collection based on the distribution of the information extracted from it as
semantic metadata.
The services described in this section are also available at the European
Open Science Cloud (EOSC)42 and are currently used among others by RO-
Hub,43 an online platform that aims at managing, preserving, and providing
access to research work, including scientiﬁc data, code, and literature, in
order to extract information from research objects in a variety of scientiﬁc
communities, which currently include among others Astrophysics and Bioin-
formatics, as well as Earth and Environmental sciences.
The resulting metadata can also be used to enhance search and recom-
mendation engines, alleviating some of the limitations of keyword-based ap-
proaches, including query ambiguity and lack of semantics. Keyword-based
search engines may miss documents that contain synonyms of query keywords
and morphological variations such as verb conjugations or even plurals, with
an impact on recall.
By leveraging semantic metadata generated as pro-
posed above, where each concept identiﬁes uniquely a word as well as other
semantically related terms like synonyms and hyponyms, search and recom-
mendation engines can be better equipped to deal eﬀectively with ambigu-
ity. Examples of this type of systems include the Collaboration Spheres,44
a search-by-example system whose evaluation (Rico et al., 2017) showed the
beneﬁts of this approach to explore large collection of scientiﬁc documents,
reducing the cognitive load associated to this task.
8. Assisted evaluation of the innovation potential of OSIP ideas
In the previous section we showed how to apply the NLP framework pre-
sented in section 3 to extract information in the form of semantic metadata
from documents in scientiﬁc areas that are relevant for space operations, like
Earth and Environmental Sciences, contributing to long-term data preserva-
tion in space. In this section, we focus on a particular application of such
40The interactive dashboard is available at: https://reliance.expertcustomers.ai/
dashboard/app/r/s/HRk3f user/pass: guest/relish2022!
41https://www.elastic.co/kibana
42https://marketplace.eosc-portal.eu/services/enrichment-api/information
43https://reliance.rohub.org
44https://reliance.expertcustomers.ai/spheres
42
Figure 6: Fragment of dashboard with the distribution of metadata over the corpus.
metadata to produce, based on the semantic similarity of new ideas submit-
ted to the OSIP45 platform with previously funded ideas, studies or projects,
a score that quantiﬁes how innovative such idea can be.
As shown in table 2, this case study also focuses on information extrac-
tion, However, the main goal is to perform comprehension tasks related to un-
derstanding and comparing ideas with other ideas and previous work. Since
the innovation score needs to be justiﬁable, the explainability aspect is also
important. We did not have access to annotated datasets for model train-
ing, which in addition to the previous factors advised for a knowledge-based
approach to address the language understanding challenges in this case study.
This initiative had a twofold objective. First, to support the evaluation
of ideas received by the OSIP platform through an AI system based on NLP,
enabling internal collaboration within ESA and with ESA Member State del-
egates, the space industry, universities, and other organizations. And second,
to deploy the service in production, minimizing operational costs by reusing
pre-existing infrastructure and services. To achieve such objectives, the fol-
lowing capabilities were deployed at ESA: i) the ingestion of documents and
their enrichment with metadata extracted from their content. The type of
documents supported included ideas and campaigns hosted at the HYPE
45The Open Space Innovation platform (https://ideas.esa.int)
43
database of the OSIP platform, General Studies Program46 (GSP) studies
from the GSP database, and projects funded by the European Commission
under FP7 and Horizon 2020 programmes; ii) the calculation of a novelty
score between 0 and 100 to allow for every idea under evaluation to be com-
pared against other ideas previously selected, GSP study descriptions, and
projects funded by the European Commission; and iii) the extension of the
description of each idea in HYPE with its novelty score and the metadata
used to calculate it, providing evidence-based means to explain such score.
To improve the generated metadata, the coverage of space-related termi-
nology in the expert.ai knowledge graph was further extended, continuing
the work described in section 7. Figure 7 illustrates the metadata extracted
for one of the ideas submitted to the OSIP platform.
Figure 7: Example of metadata extracted from OSIP ideas.
46https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Preparing_for_the_Future/
Discovery_and_Preparation/About_the_GSP
44
8.1. Architecture and workﬂow
The architecture of the OSIP novelty evaluation service is depicted in
ﬁgure 8. The import module ingests data from the diﬀerent sources con-
sidered (the OSIP platform, to extract ideas and campaigns; the Nebula47
library containing studies; and documentation about the projects funded by
the FP7 and H2020 EC programs48). The text that is extracted from such
sources, corresponding to ideas, campaigns, studies, and projects, is sent to
an instance of the expert.ai text analytics services hosted at ESA’s facilities
(Cogito Discover) that extracts semantic metadata from it using the extended
knowledge graph. The resulting metadata is then stored in an Elasticsearch
index along with the original text of the document plus the metadata that was
extracted from each data source. The ﬁelds indexed in Elastichsearch include
among others Id , Title, Description, StartDate, EndDate, Keywords and
AssociatedDocuments, as well as the metadata extracted by Cogito Dis-
cover: Domains, Organizations, People, Places, Concepts, MainGroups,
MainLemmas, MainSentences, and MainSyncons. Next, the novelty of each
idea is evaluated based on the similarity of the idea under evaluation with
other ideas that were previously selected, implemented or archived and ex-
ecuted studies, as well as previous FP7 and H2020 funded projects. The
novelty score plus the documents similar to the idea are saved in the Elas-
ticsearch index.
Finally, once annotated, the ideas are pushed back into
OSIP, including the novelty evaluation score, its associated metadata, and
the related documents.
8.2. Novelty score evaluation
To assess the novelty of an idea we propose to calculate the similarity be-
tween the idea and other ideas previously selected, implemented or archived,
as well as studies and EC projects, so that the evaluator can count with this
information as a ﬁrst step towards the ﬁnal decision. To this purpose, we
use a simple metric based on the intuition that if an idea is very similar to
other idea, study or project the novelty score should be low. Also the other
way around, ideas that are diﬀerent from previous activities are considered
to be more novel.
47https://nebula.esa.int
48Available from: https://cordis.europa.eu/projects/en
45
Figure 8: OSIP novelty evaluation service architecture.
Unlike metrics for text similarity based exclusively on either lexical (keyword-
based) or semantic similarity (Mihalcea et al., 2006), we leverage all the in-
formation that has been previously indexed in Elasticsearch, which in our
case includes both textual ﬁelds and semantic metadata extracted by the
Cogito Discover module.
This allows us to leverage the native similarity
evaluation capabilities of Elasticsearch, which work directly with the val-
ues of the indexed ﬁelds. More speciﬁcally, we focus the calculation of the
similarity between an idea and other documents on the information indexed
about main lemmas and main concepts. Other key terms are obtained from
titles and descriptions by selecting the words with the highest TF-IDF scores.
Equation 2 deﬁnes the novelty score of an idea i, based on its Elasticsearch
similarity (sim) with a collection of other ideas I, a collection of studies S,
and a collection of projects P.
noveltyScore(i, I, S, P) = 100 ∗(1 −max{sim(i, I), sim(i, S), sim(i, P)})
(2)
The novelty score evaluation generates the following metadata for the
ideas under evaluation:
• noveltyCalculated: Whether the novelty score was computed.
• noveltyScore, from 0 to 100. The higher, the more novel the idea.
• similarIdeas: Similar ideas found for the evaluated idea.
• similarProjects: Similar studies and FP7 and H2020 projects.
46
The similarIdeas and similarProjects metadata contains the list of
similar documents and provides information that explains the similarity
with the evaluated idea by explicitly linking them. On a daily basis, every
idea under evaluation is updated with novelty score and its related meta-
data. Such metadata can be viewed in the OSIP platform by selecting an
idea, navigating to the menu option “Manage Idea”, and clicking on “Addi-
tional Information”. Figure 9 shows a screenshot taken from the production
environment of the OSIP platform for an idea (with novelty score 75.1), for
which the system has identiﬁed a slightly similar idea49 previously funded by
OSIP and highlights the semantic metadata both ideas have in common, as
well as the similarity score between them.
In addition, OSIP evaluators have access to a graph visualization (ﬁgure
10) where they can easily see the most similar projects and ideas to the
the idea under evaluation. Such graph is helpful to understand the research
context of the idea and how it relates to previously funded research work.
The idea similarity graph can be used to provide a high level overview
of the content of the ideas submitted to the platform. Nodes in the graph
are ideas or projects and an edge between two nodes exists when similarity
between them has been identiﬁed. To identify the clusters of ideas we inject
the similarity graph in Gephi50, a network analysis tool, and apply the Lou-
vain method for community detection (Blondel et al., 2008). Once we have
the cluster of similar ideas, we aggregate the concepts representing each idea
and choose the most frequents as the representative concepts of the clusters.
The idea clusters we obtained from OSIP are presented in table 14. The
risk of debris in the space is a topic that is highly represented in the ideas
submitted to the platform. In addition, other topics such as the detection
of plastics using satellites and AI, or mars and moon exploration via rovers
are also very frequent.
OSIP managers can tap into these clusters when
planning the future campaigns to gather ideas around subjects that are not
well studied, or to avoid funding ideas on topics that are already well covered.
More critically some clusters might be seen as a forecast of the topics that
could become trendy and important in the future.
49Demonstration of radiation / thermal shielding with (small scale) inﬂatable gas tank
+ regolith sintered (with solar lens) structure. (https://tinyurl.com/mt77ypd8)
50https://gephi.org
47
Figure 9: Screenshot of Novelty Score evaluation in OSIP.
9. Recommendations and lessons learnt
In previous sections, we have seen four case studies of text analytics and
natural language processing and understanding in space, ranging across the
spectrum of applications of AI and particularly NLP in space.
The case
study in section 5 showcases the innovative application of state-of-the-art
deep learning technologies to solve language understanding challenges, like
answering questions about space based on a collection of long technical doc-
48
Figure 10: Screenshot of the similarity network of an idea under evaluation in OSIP. The
thickness of the edge connecting it with other idea and projects is proportional to the value
of the similarity between them. Shared concepts are depicted as leaf nodes in the graph.
When the user hovers over a project or idea the system displays additional information.
uments. Next, section 6 focuses on the automatic generation of quizzes with
questions about key knowledge related to ESA quality management proce-
dures, illustrating the application of text generation technologies in space.
The following case study in section 7 applies information extraction to pro-
duce machine-readable metadata from space documents and scientiﬁc lit-
erature in key scientiﬁc disciplines to contribute to long-term preservation,
making information easier to access by humans and machines. Finally, the
case study in section 8 deals with determining how innovative an idea sub-
mitted to OSIP can be compared to previous ideas, studies, and projects.
In all such case studies, the guidelines proposed in section 3 were con-
sidered, i.e. to deﬁne each use case, identify the relevant NLP tasks, assess
resource availability, and ﬁnally decide whether to opt for a machine learning-
based approach, a knowledge-based approach or a combination of both. As
a general good practice we tried to make results explainable, understood
as the degree to which an observer can understand the cause of a model
prediction (Biran and Cotton, 2017; Buijsman, 2022), and to minimize the
49
Table 14: Clusters extracted from the idea similarity graph in OSIP
Ideas Top Concepts in Cluster
277
satellite, constellation, orbit, debris, cost, spacecraft, risk, aim, space
debris, European Space Agency
195
detection, artiﬁcial intelligence, satellite, European Space Agency, aim,
information, plastic, technology, data, challenge
161
spacecraft, aim, European Space Agency, process, information, data,
measure, magnetosphere, space mission, algorithm
156
rover, exploration, robot, environment, challenge, cave, space mission,
Mars, Moon, project
140
algorithm, machine learning, quantum, information, data, artiﬁcial in-
telligence, European Space Agency, optimization, quantum computer,
process
136
regolith, construction, habitat, Moon, process, sintering, technology, Eu-
ropean Space Agency, equipment, material
133
detector, satellite, information, data, equipment, artiﬁcial intelligence,
cost, solution, radiation, European Space Agency
118
antenna, satellite, radio frequency, frequency, aim, laser beam, informa-
tion, equipment, constraint, communications satellite
115
asteroid, atmosphere, spacecraft, aim, Venus, European Space Agency,
space mission, orbit, process, world
107
artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, solution, detection, data, learn-
ing, process, information, algorithm, European Space Agency
environmental footprint of our models, e.g. by ﬁne-tuning pre-trained models
and applying transfer learning rather than training from scratch.
We think such case studies constitute a representative sample of NLP
projects in space involving either information extraction, comprehension tasks
or both. As shown in several of them, for many information management
challenges in space like document categorization, search, recommendation,
and several forms of information extraction, one of the key components is
often a domain-speciﬁc knowledge graph that explicitly represents the main
concepts and entities of the domain while at the same time describing how
such elements are related to each other. The extended knowledge graph for
space shown in sections 7 and 8 is a good example of such kind of struc-
tured resources.
We recommend to continue dedicating eﬀort to improve
such resources, increasing both quality and coverage of the space domain, in
addition to other initiatives involving related resources like the ESA Tech-
nology Tree and Space Taxonomy. At the same time, in the transit between
50
AI that assists humans to more easily ﬁnd and access information to AI that
is able to understand and reason with scientiﬁc documents, we witness an
increasing role of deep learning approaches and particularly neural language
models. Therefore, the availability of data to ﬁne-tune such models for spe-
ciﬁc NLP tasks in space is of key importance. Special attention should be
given to the production of such datasets, as well as to their distribution and
general availability.
Current methods to train large language models are hardware-intensive,
require large amounts of text data to train them, and such training comes
at the cost of high energy consumption and a large carbon footprint. Be-
cause of this, most of the neural language models available nowadays, like
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), T5 (Raﬀel et al.,
2020), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), etc., have been trained on general-purpose
documents collected from the internet and freely available resources, which
a priori would hinder their application in vertical domains like space, requir-
ing additional pre-training on domain-speciﬁc data that is not easy to ﬁnd.
Few are the examples of neural language models pre-trained on such data,
like SpaceRoBERTa, recently released by Berquand et al. (2021a). However,
more research is still needed to show a signiﬁcant impact on downstream
tasks like question answering and question generation in space (see experi-
mental results in sections 5 and 6) over models trained by ﬁne-tuning general-
purpose language models like RoBERTa on general-purpose labeled datasets
like SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2018).
The type of data required to train text analytics and NLP models can vary
according to the task at hand. Downstream tasks such as named entity recog-
nition, summarization, question answering, and question generation typically
require training and test data to be labeled. However, data labeling can be
a time and eﬀort-intensive task that often requires skilled domain expertise,
which can be a costly overhead. The lack of in-house expertise to create
labeled datasets has increased the demand for third-party data providers. In
addition, online platforms such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk51 are also pop-
ular for (trivial, non-expert) labeling tasks. Nevertheless, our experiments
show evidence that the impact of applying labeled data to ﬁne-tuning pre-
trained language models to solve language understanding tasks like question
answering and question generation in space can be greater in practice than
51https://www.mturk.com
51
investing a similar amount of eﬀort in generating a domain-speciﬁc language
model on space data. More research is needed to identify the sweet spot in the
distribution of eﬀort between language model pre-training and ﬁne-tuning in
order to solve domain-speciﬁc task in space optimally and maximizing the
cost-beneﬁt ratio involved in data management.
In any case, we recom-
mend organizations like ESA to continue investing on an internal culture of
dataset creation and curation, including the annotation of text corpora for
downstream NLP tasks like the ones addressed in this paper.
10. Conclusions
The European Space Agency (ESA) helps to answer the biggest scientiﬁc
questions of our time, such as the mysteries of the Universe, the understand-
ing of our Solar System and the quest for habitable planets. The amount,
depth and scope of the data, information and knowledge generated and man-
aged throughout the lifecycle of the diﬀerent space missions is enormous and
their contribution to scientiﬁc progress is invaluable.
From the announcement of opportunity and feasibility study to space and
ground segment design, development, operations, mission decommissioning
and long-term preservation, a large amount of heterogeneous data and in-
formation is produced that needs to be managed. The source of ESA infor-
mation assets is equally diverse and may range from open calls for ideas to
develop innovative technology stemming from the wider technical and sci-
entiﬁc space community to concurrent design facility documents, technical
reports, operation and quality management procedures, and space records
relevant to missions spanning over more than 40 years, like climate data
records, exploitation reports or scientiﬁc publications.
Managing, mining, and exploiting such wealth of information, of which
a large part is free text, addressing silos and ensuring interoperability is a
colossal task that goes beyond human capabilities and requires automation.
In this paper, we propose a methodological framework for the application of
NLP technologies to address such challenges and illustrate it through diﬀerent
case studies with diﬀerent needs and objectives. The results of our work have
already impacted on several areas of ESA including Long-Term Data Preser-
vation (LTDP), ESA Records and Information Management (ESA Archives),
the Open Space Innovation Platform (OSIP), the Concurrent Design Facility
(CDF), and ESOC Operations Quality Management. We hope that our ef-
forts contribute to the creation of a systematic approach to addressing NLP
52
challenges at ESA, and more generally in space. We also think that part of
our approach can also be extensible to other areas of AI dealing with unstruc-
tured data in addition to language, like vision, facilitating their application
in space.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to ESA and the European Commission for the support
received to carry out this research. The work presented in sections 5 and 6
was funded by ESA under contract AO/1-10291/20/D/AH - Text and Data
Mining to Support Design, Testing and Operations. The work presented in
section 7 was partially funded by ESA as a long-term data preservation ac-
tivity, with ESRIN Purchase Order 5001024309, and by the EC Horizon2020
project Reliance, under grant 101017501. Finally, the work presented in sec-
tion 8 was funded by the activity Exploring AI capabilities to support the
evaluation process of ideas submitted in the OSIP platform, with ESA Con-
tract Nr. 4000129447/19/NL/AS.
References
Abbott, B.P., et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and Virgo Collab-
oration), 2016.
Observation of gravitational waves from a binary
black hole merger.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 061102.
URL: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102, doi:10.1103/
PhysRevLett.116.061102.
Adadi, A., Berrada, M., 2018.
Peeking inside the black-box: A survey
on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai). IEEE Access 6, 52138–52160.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2870052.
Agirre, E., Cer, D., Diab, M., Gonzalez-Agirre, A., Guo, W., 2013. * sem
2013 shared task: Semantic textual similarity, in: Second joint conference
on lexical and computational semantics (* SEM), volume 1: proceedings
of the Main conference and the shared task: semantic textual similarity,
pp. 32–43.
Ahmad, K., Gillam, L., 2005. Automatic ontology extraction from unstruc-
tured texts, in: Meersman, R., Tari, Z. (Eds.), On the Move to Meaningful
Internet Systems 2005: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE, Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. pp. 1330–1346.
53
Bandecchi, M., Melton, B., Ongaro, F., 1999. Concurrent engineering applied
to space mission assessment and design.
Bender, E.M., Koller, A., 2020.
Climbing towards NLU: On meaning,
form, and understanding in the age of data, in:
Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 5185–5198.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.463, doi:10.18653/
v1/2020.acl-main.463.
Berquand, A., Darm, P., Riccardi, A., 2021a. Spacetransformers: Language
modeling for space systems. IEEE Access 9, 133111–133122. doi:10.1109/
ACCESS.2021.3115659.
Berquand, A., Moshfeghi, Y., Riccardi, A., 2020. Space mission design ontol-
ogy: extraction of domain-speciﬁc entities and concepts similarity analysis.
AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum .
Berquand, A., Moshfeghi, Y., Riccardi, A., 2021b.
Spacelda:
Topic
distributions
aggregation
from
a
heterogeneous
corpus
for
space
systems.
Engineering
Applications
of
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
102,
104273.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0952197621001202,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.
2021.104273.
Biran, O., Cotton, C.V., 2017.
Explanation and justiﬁcation in machine
learning : A survey, in: Workshop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(XAI), IJCAI.
Bizer, C., Lehmann, J., Kobilarov, G., Auer, S., Becker, C., Cyganiak, R.,
Hellmann, S., 2009. Dbpedia - a crystallization point for the web of data.
Web Semant. 7, 154–165. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.
2009.07.002, doi:10.1016/j.websem.2009.07.002.
Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E., 2008. Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment 2008, P10008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/
1742-5468/2008/10/p10008, doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/p10008.
Brill, E., Dumais, S., Banko, M., 2002. An analysis of the AskMSR question-
answering system, in: Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on Empirical
54
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2002), Association for
Computational Linguistics. pp. 257–264. URL: https://aclanthology.
org/W02-1033, doi:10.3115/1118693.1118726.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P.,
Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-
Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler,
D., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M.,
Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A.,
Sutskever, I., Amodei, D., 2020. Language models are few-shot learners,
in: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M.F., Lin, H. (Eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates,
Inc.. pp. 1877–1901.
URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Buijsman, S., 2022.
Deﬁning explanation and explanatory depth in xai.
Minds and Machines 32, 563 – 584.
Chen, D., 2018. Neural reading comprehension and beyond. Ph.D. thesis.
Stanford University, USA. URL: https://searchworks.stanford.edu/
view/12857441.
Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., Bordes, A., 2017.
Reading Wikipedia
to answer open-domain questions, in: Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver,
Canada. pp. 1870–1879.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/P17-1171,
doi:10.18653/v1/P17-1171.
Chen, D., Yih, W.t., 2020.
Open-domain question answering, in:
Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts, Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Online. pp. 34–37.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.
acl-tutorials.8, doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-tutorials.8.
Choi, E., He, H., Iyyer, M., Yatskar, M., Yih, W.t., Choi, Y., Liang, P.,
Zettlemoyer, L., 2018. QuAC: Question answering in context, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels,
55
Belgium. pp. 2174–2184. URL: https://aclanthology.org/D18-1241,
doi:10.18653/v1/D18-1241.
Clark, P., Etzioni, O., Khashabi, D., Khot, T., Mishra, B.D., Richardson, K.,
Sabharwal, A., Schoenick, C., Tafjord, O., Tandon, N., Bhakthavatsalam,
S., Groeneveld, D., Guerquin, M., Schmitz, M., 2019. From ’f’ to ’a’ on
the n.y. regents science exams: An overview of the aristo project. ArXiv
abs/1909.01958.
Cohen, J., 1960. A coeﬃcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and Psychological Measurement 20, 37 – 46.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019.
BERT: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,
in: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota. pp. 4171–4186.
URL:
https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423, doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
Domingos, P., 2012. A few useful things to know about machine learning.
Commun. ACM 55, 78–87. doi:10.1145/2347736.2347755.
Ebert, C., Gallardo, G., Hernantes, J., Serrano, N., 2016.
Devops.
Ieee
Software 33, 94–100.
Feigenbaum, E.A., 1984. Knowledge engineering: The applied side of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, in: Proc. of a Symposium on Computer Culture: The
Scientiﬁc, Intellectual, and Social Impact of the Computer, New York
Academy of Sciences, USA. p. 91–107.
Ferrucci, D., Brown, E., Chu-Carroll, J., Fan, J., Gondek, D., Kalyan-
pur, A.A., Lally, A., Murdock, J.W., Nyberg, E., Prager, J., Schlae-
fer, N., Welty, C., 2010.
Building watson: An overview of the deepqa
project. AI Magazine 31, 59–79. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.
php/aimagazine/article/view/2303, doi:10.1609/aimag.v31i3.2303.
Fleiss, J., et al., 1971.
Measuring nominal scale agreement among many
raters. Psychological Bulletin 76, 378–382.
56
Gao, L., Callan, J., 2021.
Condenser:
a pre-training architecture for
dense retrieval, in:
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. pp. 981–993.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.75, doi:10.18653/
v1/2021.emnlp-main.75.
Garcia-Silva, A., Berrio, C., Gomez-Perez, J.M., Mart´ınez-Heras, J.A., Do-
nati, A., Roma, I., 2022a. Spaceqa: Answering questions about the design
of space missions and space craft concepts, in: Proceedings of the 45th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA. p. 3306–3311.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.
3531697, doi:10.1145/3477495.3531697.
Garcia-Silva, A., Berrio, C., Gomez-Perez, J.M., Martinez-Heras, J.A.,
Fleith, P., Scaglioni, S., 2022b. Generating quizzes to support training
on quality management and assurance in space science and engineering,
in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Natural Language
Generation, Association for Computational Linguistics, Waterville, Maine.
pp. 1–11. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.inlg-1.1.
Garcia-Silva, A., Gomez-Perez, J.M., Palma, R., Krystek, M., Mantovani, S.,
Foglini, F., Grande, V., De Leo, F., Salvi, S., Trasatti, E., Romaniello, V.,
Albani, M., Silvagni, C., Leone, R., Marelli, F., Albani, S., Lazzarini, M.,
Napier, H.J., Glaves, H.M., Aldridge, T., Meertens, C., Boler, F., Loescher,
H.W., Laney, C., Genazzio, M.A., Crawl, D., Altintas, I., 2019. Enabling
fair research in earth science through research objects. Future Genera-
tion Computer Systems 98, 550–564. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0167739X18314638, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.future.2019.03.046.
Gil, Y., 2022. Will ai write scientiﬁc papers in the future? AI Magazine 42,
3–15. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/aimagazine/article/
view/18149, doi:10.1609/aimag.v42i4.18149.
G´omez-P´erez, J.M., 2021. Pick your poison: Data hunger versus the knowl-
edge bottleneck in language understanding, Presented at the Artiﬁcial In-
telligence Symposium on Theory, Application and Research in Space (AI
STAR), Darmstadt, Germany. URL: https://www.aistar.esa.int.
57
G´omez-P´erez, J.M., Denaux, R., Garc´ıa-Silva, A., 2020. A Practical Guide
to Hybrid Natural Language Processing - Combining Neural Models and
Knowledge Graphs for NLP. Springer. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-44830-1, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-44830-1.
Gomez-Perez, J.M., Ortega, R., 2020. ISAAQ - mastering textbook ques-
tions with pre-trained transformers and bottom-up and top-down atten-
tion, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online. pp. 5469–5479. URL: https://aclanthology.org/
2020.emnlp-main.441, doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.441.
Gomez-Perez, J.M., Palma, R., Garcia-Silva, A., 2017. Towards a human-
machine scientiﬁc partnership based on semantically rich research objects,
in: 2017 IEEE 13th International Conference on e-Science (e-Science), pp.
266–275. doi:10.1109/eScience.2017.40.
Ji, H., 2009.
Information Extraction. Springer US, Boston, MA.
pp.
1476–1481. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-39940-9_204,
doi:10.1007/978-0-387-39940-9_204.
Johnson, J., Douze, M., J´egou, H., 2021. Billion-scale similarity search with
gpus. IEEE Transactions on Big Data 7, 535–547. doi:10.1109/TBDATA.
2019.2921572.
Joshi, M., Choi, E., Weld, D.S., Zettlemoyer, L., 2017. Triviaqa: A large scale
distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.03551 .
Karpukhin, V., O˘guz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L., Edunov, S., Chen,
D., Yih, W.t., 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906 .
Khattab, O., Zaharia, M., 2020. ColBERT: Eﬃcient and Eﬀective Passage
Search via Contextualized Late Interaction over BERT. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
p. 39–48.
URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3397271.3401075.
Kitano, H., 2016.
Artiﬁcial intelligence to win the nobel prize and be-
yond:
Creating the engine for scientiﬁc discovery.
AI Magazine 37,
58
39–49. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/aimagazine/article/
view/2642, doi:10.1609/aimag.v37i1.2642.
Koˇcisk´y, T., Schwarz, J., Blunsom, P., Dyer, C., Hermann, K.M., Melis, G.,
Grefenstette, E., 2018. The NarrativeQA reading comprehension challenge.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 6, 317–
328.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/Q18-1023, doi:10.1162/tacl_
a_00023.
Kwiatkowski, T., Palomaki, J., Redﬁeld, O., Collins, M., Parikh, A., Al-
berti, C., Epstein, D., Polosukhin, I., Devlin, J., Lee, K., Toutanova,
K., Jones, L., Kelcey, M., Chang, M.W., Dai, A.M., Uszkoreit, J., Le,
Q., Petrov, S., 2019.
Natural questions:
A benchmark for question
answering research.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 7, 452–466.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1026,
doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00276.
Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy,
O., Stoyanov, V., Zettlemoyer, L., 2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-
sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and
comprehension, in: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL, Online. pp. 7871–7880.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.703, doi:10.18653/
v1/2020.acl-main.703.
Lin, H., Ng, V., 2019. Abstractive summarization: A survey of the state of
the art, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence,
pp. 9815–9822.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis,
M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V., 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized
bert pretraining approach. arXiv:1907.11692.
Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I., 2017. A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model
predictions, in: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY,
USA. p. 4768–4777.
Michael, J., Holtzman, A., Parrish, A., Mueller, A., Wang, A., Chen, A.,
Madaan, D., Nangia, N., Pang, R.Y., Phang, J., Bowman, S., 2022. What
59
do nlp researchers believe?
results of the nlp community metasurvey.
ArXiv abs/2208.12852.
Mihalcea, R., Corley, C., Strapparava, C., 2006.
Corpus-based and
knowledge-based measures of text semantic similarity, in: Proceedings of
the 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - Volume 1, AAAI
Press. p. 775–780.
Miller, G.A., 1995.
Wordnet:
A lexical database for english.
Com-
mun. ACM 38, 39–41. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/219717.219748,
doi:10.1145/219717.219748.
Min, S., Chen, D., Hajishirzi, H., Zettlemoyer, L., 2019. A discrete hard EM
approach for weakly supervised question answering, in: Inui, K., Jiang, J.,
Ng, V., Wan, X. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong
Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. pp. 2851–2864.
URL: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1284,
doi:10.18653/v1/D19-1284.
Mitchell, T.M., 1980. The Need for Biases in Learning Generalizations. Tech-
nical Report.
Moldovan, D., Harabagiu, S., Pasca, M., Mihalcea, R., Girju, R., Goodrum,
R., Rus, V., 2000. The structure and performance of an open-domain ques-
tion answering system, in: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Hong Kong. pp. 563–570. URL: https://aclanthology.org/
P00-1071, doi:10.3115/1075218.1075289.
Murdaca, F., Berquand, A., Kumar, K., Riccardi, A., Soares, T., Geren´e, S.,
Brauer, N., 2018. Knowledge-based information extraction from datasheets
of space parts.
Nallapati, R., Zhai, F., Zhou, B., 2017. Summarunner: A recurrent neural
network based sequence model for extractive summarization of documents,
in: Thirty-ﬁrst AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence.
Nallapati, R., Zhou, B., dos Santos, C., Gul¸cehre, C¸., Xiang, B., 2016. Ab-
stractive text summarization using sequence-to-sequence rnns and beyond,
60
in: Proceedings of The 20th SIGNLL Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning, pp. 280–290.
Narayan, S., Cohen, S.B., Lapata, M., 2018. Don’t give me the details, just
the summary! Topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme sum-
marization, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium.
Nguyen, T., Rosenberg, M., Song, X., Gao, J., Tiwary, S., Majumder, R.,
Deng, L., 2016. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading compre-
hension dataset, in: CoCo@ NIPs.
Pasini, T., 2020.
The knowledge acquisition bottleneck problem in mul-
tilingual word sense disambiguation, in: Bessiere, C. (Ed.), Proceedings
of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI-20, International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Organization. pp. 4936–4942. URL: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
2020/687, doi:10.24963/ijcai.2020/687. survey track.
Peters, M.E., Neumann, M., Logan, R., Schwartz, R., Joshi, V., Singh,
S., Smith, N.A., 2019.
Knowledge enhanced contextual word represen-
tations, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), Association
for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China. pp. 43–54.
URL:
https://aclanthology.org/D19-1005, doi:10.18653/v1/D19-1005.
Prager, J.M., 2006. Open-domain question-answering. Found. Trends Inf.
Retr. 1, 91–231.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Amodei, D., Amodei, D., Clark, J., Brundage, M.,
Sutskever, I., 2019. Better language models and their implications. OpenAI
blog 1, 2.
Raﬀel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou,
Y., Li, W., Liu, P.J., 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with
a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research
21, 1–67. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Raganato, A., Camacho-Collados, J., Navigli, R., 2017.
Word sense dis-
ambiguation: A uniﬁed evaluation framework and empirical comparison,
61
in: Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pp.
99–110.
Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R., Liang, P., 2018. Know what you don’t know: Unan-
swerable questions for squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822 .
Rajpurkar,
P.,
Zhang,
J.,
Lopyrev,
K.,
Liang,
P.,
2016.
Squad:
100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250 .
Reddy, R., 1988.
Foundations and grand challenges of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence: Aaai presidential address.
AI Magazine 9, 9.
URL: https://
www.aaai.org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/view/950, doi:10.
1609/aimag.v9i4.950.
Reddy, S., Chen, D., Manning, C.D., 2019. CoQA: A conversational question
answering challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 7, 249–266.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/Q19-1016,
doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00266.
Reimers, N., Gurevych, I., 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using
Siamese BERT-networks, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China. pp. 3982–
3992.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410, doi:10.18653/v1/
D19-1410.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C., 2016. ”why should I trust you?”: Ex-
plaining the predictions of any classiﬁer, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 13-17, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
Ribeiro, M.T., Wu, T., Guestrin, C., Singh, S., 2020.
Beyond accuracy:
Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList, in: Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 4902–4912.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.442, doi:10.18653/
v1/2020.acl-main.442.
62
Richards, M., 2015. Software architecture patterns. volume 4. O’Reilly Me-
dia, Incorporated 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA . . . .
Rico, M., G´omez-P´erez, J.M., Gonz´alez, R., Garrido, A., Corcho, ´O., 2017.
Collaboration spheres: a visual metaphor to share and reuse research ob-
jects. ArXiv abs/1710.05604.
Rush, A.M., Chopra, S., Weston, J., 2015. A neural attention model for
abstractive sentence summarization, in: Proceedings of the 2015 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Lisbon, Portugal. pp. 379–389. URL:
https://aclanthology.org/D15-1044, doi:10.18653/v1/D15-1044.
Settles, B., 2009. Active learning literature survey.
Sheth, A., Perera, S., Wijeratne, S., Thirunarayan, K., 2017. Knowledge
will propel machine understanding of content: extrapolating from current
examples, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Web In-
telligence, ACM, New York, NY, USA. pp. 1–9. doi:10.1145/3106426.
3109448.
Shoham, Y., 2015. Why knowledge representation matters. Commun. ACM
59, 47–49. doi:10.1145/2803170.
Shore, J., Warden, S., 2021. The art of agile development. ” O’Reilly Media,
Inc.”.
Sweenor, D., Hillion, S., Rope, D., Kannabiran, D., Hill, T., O’Connell, M.,
2020. ML Ops: Operationalizing Data Science. O’Reilly Media, Incorpo-
rated.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N.,
Kaiser, L.u., Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need, in: Guyon,
I., Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan,
S., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, Curran Associates, Inc. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Voorhees, E.M., 1999. The trec-8 question answering track report, in: In
Proceedings of TREC-8, pp. 77–82.
63
Vrandeˇci´c, D., Kr¨otzsch, M., 2014. Wikidata: A free collaborative knowl-
edgebase. Commun. ACM 57, 78–85. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
2629489, doi:10.1145/2629489.
Wan, D., Bansal, M., 2022. FactPEGASUS: Factuality-aware pre-training
and ﬁne-tuning for abstractive summarization, in:
Proceedings of the
2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Association
for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States. pp. 1010–1028.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.74, doi:10.18653/
v1/2022.naacl-main.74.
Wang, C., Liu, P., Zhang, Y., 2021a.
Can generative pre-trained lan-
guage models serve as knowledge bases for closed-book qa?
ArXiv
abs/2106.01561.
Wang, R., Tang, D., Duan, N., Wei, Z., Huang, X., Ji, J., Cao, G., Jiang,
D., Zhou, M., 2021b. K-Adapter: Infusing Knowledge into Pre-Trained
Models with Adapters, in: Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Online. pp. 1405–1418.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.
findings-acl.121, doi:10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.121.
Wilkinson, M.D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I.J., Appleton, G., Axton,
M., Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J.W., da Silva Santos, L.B., Bourne,
P.E., et al., 2016. The fair guiding principles for scientiﬁc data management
and stewardship. Scientiﬁc data 3.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cis-
tac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M., Davison, J., Shleifer, S., von
Platen, P., Ma, C., Jernite, Y., Plu, J., Xu, C., Le Scao, T., Gugger,
S., Drame, M., Lhoest, Q., Rush, A., 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-
art natural language processing, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demon-
strations, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. pp. 38–45.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6, doi:10.18653/
v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Yang, W., Xie, Y., Lin, A., Li, X., Tan, L., Xiong, K., Li, M., Lin, J.,
2019. End-to-end open-domain question answering with BERTserini, in:
64
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Demonstrations), Association
for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota. pp. 72–77. URL:
https://aclanthology.org/N19-4013, doi:10.18653/v1/N19-4013.
65
