Title: A Short Review of Ethical Challenges in Clinical Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.10090v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1703.10090v1  [cs.CL]  29 Mar 2017
A Short Review of Ethical Challenges in
Clinical Natural Language Processing
Simon ˇSuster1,2, St´ephan Tulkens1 and Walter Daelemans1
1CLiPS, University of Antwerp
2Antwerp University Hospital
{simon.suster,stephan.tulkens,walter.daelemans}@uantwerpen.be
Abstract
Clinical NLP has an immense potential in
contributing to how clinical practice will
be revolutionized by the advent of large
scale processing of clinical records. How-
ever, this potential has remained largely
untapped due to slow progress primarily
caused by strict data access policies for re-
searchers.
In this paper, we discuss the
concern for privacy and the measures it
entails. We also suggest sources of less
sensitive data. Finally, we draw attention
to biases that can compromise the validity
of empirical research and lead to socially
harmful applications.
1
Introduction
The use of notes written by healthcare providers
in
the
clinical
settings
has
long
been
rec-
ognized
to
be
a
source
of
valuable
infor-
mation for clinical practice and medical re-
search.
Access to large quantities of clinical
reports may help in identifying causes of dis-
eases, establishing diagnoses, detecting side ef-
fects of beneﬁcial treatments, and monitoring
clinical outcomes (Agus, 2016; Goldacre, 2014;
Murdoch and Detsky, 2013).
The goal of clini-
cal natural language processing (NLP) is to de-
velop and apply computational methods for lin-
guistic analysis and extraction of knowledge from
free text reports (Demner-Fushman et al., 2009;
Hripcsak et al., 1995; Meystre et al., 2008).
But
while the beneﬁts of clinical NLP and data min-
ing have been universally acknowledged, progress
in the development of clinical NLP techniques has
been slow. Several contributing factors have been
identiﬁed, most notably difﬁcult access to data,
limited collaboration between researchers from
different groups, and little sharing of implemen-
tations and trained models (Chapman et al., 2011).
For comparison, in biomedical NLP, where the
working data consist of biomedical research litera-
ture, these conditions have been present to a much
lesser degree, and the progress has been more
rapid (Cohen and Demner-Fushman, 2014).
The
main contributing factor to this situation has been
the sensitive nature of data, whose processing may
in certain situations put patient’s privacy at risk.
The ethics discussion is gaining momentum in
general NLP (Hovy and Spruit, 2016). We aim in
this paper to gather the ethical challenges that are
especially relevant for clinical NLP, and to stim-
ulate discussion about those in the broader NLP
community. Although enhancing privacy through
restricted data access has been the norm, we do
not only discuss the right to privacy, but also draw
attention to the social impact and biases emanat-
ing from clinical notes and their processing. The
challenges we describe here are in large part not
unique to clinical NLP, and are applicable to gen-
eral data science as well.
2
Sensitivity of data and privacy
Because of legal and institutional concerns arising
from the sensitivity of clinical data, it is difﬁcult
for the NLP community to gain access to relevant
data (Barzilay, 2016; Friedman et al., 2013). This
is especially true for the researchers not connected
with a healthcare organization. Corpora with trans-
parent access policies that are within reach of
NLP researchers exist, but are few.
An often
used corpus is MIMICII(I) (Johnson et al., 2016;
Saeed et al., 2011). Despite its large size (cover-
ing over 58,000 hospital admissions), it is only
representative of patients from a particular clini-
cal domain (the intensive care in this case) and ge-
ographic location (a single hospital in the United
States). Assuming that such a speciﬁc sample is
representative of a larger population is an exam-
ple of sampling bias (we discuss further sources
of bias in section 3). Increasing the size of a sam-
ple without recognizing that this sample is atypical
for the general population (e.g. not all patients are
critical care patients) could also increase sampling
bias (Kaplan et al., 2014).1 We need more large
corpora for various medical specialties, narrative
types, as well as languages and geographic areas.
Related to difﬁcult access to raw clinical data
is the lack of available annotated datasets for
model training and benchmarking.
The reality
is that annotation projects do take place, but are
typically constrained to a single healthcare or-
ganization.
Therefore, much of the effort put
into annotation is lost afterwards due to impos-
sibility of sharing with the larger research com-
munity (Chapman et al., 2011;
Fan et al., 2011).
Again, exceptions are either few—e.g. THYME
(Styler IV et al., 2014), a corpus annotated with
temporal information—or consist of small datasets
resulting from shared tasks like the i2b2 and
ShARe/CLEF. In addition, stringent access poli-
cies hamper reproduction efforts, impede scien-
tiﬁc oversight and limit collaboration, not only be-
tween institutions but also more broadly between
the clinical and NLP communities.
There are known cases of datasets that had
been used in published research (including re-
production) in its full form,
like MiPACQ2,
Blulab, EMC Dutch Clinical Corpus and 2010
i2b2/VA (Albright et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2015;
Afzal et al., 2014; Uzuner et al., 2011), but were
later trimmed down or made unavailable, likely
due to legal issues. Even if these datasets were still
available in full, their small size is still a concern,
and the comments above regarding sampling bias
certainly apply. For example, a named entity rec-
ognizer trained on 2010 i2b2/VA data, which con-
sists of 841 annotated patient records from three
different specialty areas, will due to its size only
contain a small portion of possible named entities.
Similarly, in linking clinical concepts to an ontol-
ogy, where the number of output classes is larger
(Pradhan et al., 2013), the small amount of train-
ing data is a major obstacle to deployment of sys-
1Sampling bias could also be called selection bias; it is
not inherent to the individual documents, but stems from the
way these are arranged into a single corpus.
2The access to the MiPACQ corpus will be re-enabled in
the future within the Health NLP Center for distributing lin-
guistic annotations of clinical texts (Guergana Savova, per-
sonal communication).
tems suitable for general use.
2.1
Protecting the individual
Clinical notes contain detailed information about
patient-clinician encounters in which patients con-
ﬁde not only their health complaints, but also their
lifestyle choices and possibly stigmatizing condi-
tions. This conﬁdential relationship is legally pro-
tected in US by the HIPAA privacy rule in the case
of individuals’ medical data. In EU, the conditions
for scientiﬁc usage of health data are set out in the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). San-
itization of sensitive data categories and individu-
als’ informed consent are in the forefront of those
legislative acts and bear immediate consequences
for the NLP research.
The GDPR lists general principles relating to
processing of personal data, including that pro-
cessing must be lawful (e.g. by means of con-
sent), fair and transparent; it must be done for ex-
plicit and legitimate purposes; and the data should
be kept limited to what is necessary and as long
as necessary.
This is known as data minimiza-
tion, and it includes sanitization.
The scientiﬁc
usage of health data concerns “special categories
of personal data”.
Their processing is only al-
lowed when the data subject gives explicit consent,
or the personal data is made public by the data
subject. Scientiﬁc usage is deﬁned broadly and
includes technological development, fundamental
and applied research, as well as privately funded
research.
Sanitization
Sanitization techniques are often
seen as the minimum requirement for protect-
ing individuals’ privacy when collecting data
(Berman, 2002; Velupillai et al., 2015). The goal
is to apply a procedure that produces a new ver-
sion of the dataset that looks like the original for
the purposes of data analysis, but which maintains
the privacy of those in the dataset to a certain
degree, depending on the technique. Documents
can be sanitized by replacing, removing or oth-
erwise manipulating the sensitive mentions such
as names and geographic locations.
A distinc-
tion is normally drawn between anonymization,
pseudonymization and de-identiﬁcation. We refer
the reader to Polonetsky et al. (2016) for an excel-
lent overview of these procedures.
Although it is a necessary ﬁrst step in protect-
ing the privacy of patients, sanitization has been
criticized for several reasons.
First, it affects
the integrity of the data, and as a consequence,
their utility (Duquenoy et al., 2008).
Second,
although sanitization in principle promotes data
access and sharing, it may often not be sufﬁ-
cient to eliminate the need for consent.
This
is largely due to the well-known fact that orig-
inal sensitive data can be re-identiﬁed through
deductive
disclosure
(Amblard et al., 2014;
De Mazancourt et al., 2015;
Hardt et al., 2016;
Malin et al., 2013; Tene, 2011).3 Finally, sanitiza-
tion focuses on protecting the individual, whereas
ethical harms are still possible on the group level
(O’Doherty et al., 2016; Taylor et al., 2017).
In-
stead of working towards increasingly restrictive
sanitization and access measures, another course
of action could be to work towards heightening
the perception of scientiﬁc work, emphasizing pro-
fessionalism and existence of punitive measures
for
illegal
actions
(Fairﬁeld and Shtein, 2014;
Mittelstadt and Floridi, 2016).
Consent
Clinical NLP typically requires a large
amount of clinical records describing cases of pa-
tients with a particular condition. Although obtain-
ing consent is a necessary ﬁrst step, obtaining ex-
plicit informed consent from each patient can also
compromise the research in several ways. First,
obtaining consent is time consuming by itself, and
it results in ﬁnancial and bureaucratic burdens. It
can also be infeasible due to practical reasons such
as a patient’s death. Next, it can introduce bias as
those willing to grant consent represent a skewed
population (Nyr´en et al., 2014). Finally, it can be
difﬁcult to satisfy the informedness criterion: In-
formation about the experiment sometimes can not
be communicated in an unambiguous way, or ex-
periments happen at speed that makes enacting in-
formed consent extremely hard (Bird et al., 2016).
The alternative might be a default opt-in pol-
icy with a right to withdraw (opt-out). Here, con-
sent can be presumed either in a broad manner—
allowing unspeciﬁed future research,
subject
to ethical restrictions—or
a tiered manner—
allowing certain areas of research but not others
(Mittelstadt and Floridi, 2016; Terry, 2012). Since
the information about the intended use is no longer
uniquely tied to each research case but is more
general, this could facilitate the reuse of datasets
3Additionaly, it may be due to organizational skepticism
about the effectiveness of sanitization techniques, although
it has been shown that automated de-identiﬁcation systems
for English perform on par with manual de-identiﬁcation
(Deleger et al., 2013).
by several research teams, without the need to
ask for consent each time. The success of imple-
menting this approach in practice is likely to de-
pend on public trust and awareness about possible
risks and opportunities. We also believe that a dis-
tinction between academic research and commer-
cial use of clinical data should be implemented,
as the public is more willing to allow research
than commercial exploitation (Lawrence, 2016;
van Staa et al., 2016).
Yet another possibility is open consent, in which
individuals make their data publicly available. Ini-
tiatives like Personal Genome Project may have
an exemplary role, however, they can only provide
limited data and they represent a biased population
sample (Mittelstadt and Floridi, 2016).
Secure access
Since withholding data from re-
searchers would be a dubious way of ensuring con-
ﬁdentiality (Berman, 2002), the research has long
been active on secure access and storage of sensi-
tive clinical data, and the balance between the de-
gree of privacy loss and the degree of utility. This
is a broad topic that is outside the scope of this ar-
ticle. The interested reader can ﬁnd the relevant
information in Dwork and Pottenger (2013), Ma-
lin et al. (2013) and Rindﬂeisch (1997).
Promotion of knowledge and application of
best-of-class approaches to health data is seen
as one of the ethical duties of researchers
(Duquenoy et al., 2008; Lawrence, 2016). But for
this to be put in practice, ways need to be guar-
anteed (e.g. with government help) to provide re-
searchers with access to the relevant data.
Re-
searchers can also go to the data rather than have
the data sent to them.
It is an open question
though whether medical institutions—especially
those with less developed research departments—
can provide the infrastructure (e.g. enough CPU
and GPU power) needed in statistical NLP. Also,
granting access to one healthcare organization at
a time does not satisfy interoperability (cross-
organizational data sharing and research), which
can reduce bias by allowing for more complete in-
put data. Interoperability is crucial for epidemiol-
ogy and rare disease research, where data from one
institution can not yield sufﬁcient statistical power
(Kaplan et al., 2014).
Are there less sensitive data?
One criterion
which may have inﬂuence on data accessibility is
whether the data is about living subjects or not.
The HIPAA privacy rule under certain conditions
allows disclosure of personal health information of
deceased persons, without the need to seek IRB
agreement and without the need for sanitization
(Huser and Cimino, 2014). It is not entirely clear
though how often this possibility has been used in
clinical NLP research or broader.
Next, the work on surrogate data has re-
cently seen a surge in activity. Increasingly more
health-related texts are produced in social media
(Abbasi et al., 2014), and patient-generated data
are available online. Admittedly, these may not
resemble the clinical discourse, yet they bear to
the same individuals whose health is documented
in the clinical reports. Indeed, linking individu-
als’ health information from online resources to
their health records to improve documentation is
an active line of research (Padrez et al., 2015). Al-
though it is generally easier to obtain access to
social media data, the use of social media still
requires similar ethical considerations as in the
clinical domain.
See for example the inﬂuen-
tial study on emotional contagion in Facebook
posts by Kramer et al. (2014), which has been
criticized for not properly gaining prior consent
from the users who were involved in the study
(Schroeder, 2014).
Another way of reducing sensitivity of data and
improving chances for IRB approval is to work
on derived data. Data that can not be used to
reconstruct the original text (and when sanitized,
can not directly re-identify the individual) include
text fragments, various statistics and trained mod-
els. Working on randomized subsets of clinical
notes may also improve the chances of obtaining
the data. When we only have access to trained
models from disparate sources, we can reﬁne them
through ensembling and creation of silver standard
corpora, cf. Rebholz-Schuhmann et al. (2011).
Finally, clinical NLP is also possible on veteri-
nary texts.
Records of companion animals are
perhaps less likely to involve legal issues, while
still amounting to a large pool of data.
As an
example, around 40M clinical documents from
different veterinary clinics in UK and Australia
are stored centrally in the VetCompass repository.
First NLP steps in this direction were described in
the invited talk at the Clinical NLP 2016 workshop
(Baldwin, 2016).
3
Social impact and biases
Unlocking knowledge from free text in the health
domain has a tremendous societal value.
How-
ever, discrimination can occur when individuals
or groups receive unfair treatment as a result of
automated processing, which might be a result of
biases in the data that were used to train mod-
els. The question is therefore what the most im-
portant biases are and how to overcome them,
not only out of ethical but also legal responsi-
bility.
Related to the question of bias is so-
called algorithm transparency (Goodman, 2016;
Kamarinou et al., 2016), as this right to explana-
tion requires that inﬂuences of bias in training data
are charted. In addition to sampling bias, which
we introduced in section 2, we discuss in this sec-
tion further sources of bias. Unlike sampling bias,
which is a corpus-level bias, these biases here are
already present in documents, and therefore hard
to account for by introducing larger corpora.
Data quality
Texts produced in the clinical set-
tings do not always tell a complete or accurate pa-
tient story (e.g. due to time constraints or due to
patient treatment in different hospitals), yet impor-
tant decisions can be based on them.4 As language
is situated, a lot of information may be implicit,
such as the circumstances in which treatment de-
cisions are made (Hersh et al., 2013). If we fail
to detect a medical concept during automated pro-
cessing, this can not necessarily be a sign of nega-
tive evidence.5 Work on identifying and imputing
missing values holds promise for reducing incom-
pleteness, see Lipton et al. (2016) for an example
in sequential modeling applied to diagnosis classi-
ﬁcation.
Reporting bias
Clinical texts may include bias
coming from both patient’s and clinician’s report-
ing. Clinicians apply their subjective judgments
to what is important during the encounter with pa-
tients. In other words, there is separation between,
on the one side, what is observed by the clinician
and communicated by the patient, and on the other,
4A way to increase data completeness and reduce selec-
tion bias is the use of nationwide patient registries, as known
for example in Scandinavian countries (Schmidt et al., 2015).
5We can take timing-related “censoring” effects as an ex-
ample. In event detection, events prior to the start of an obser-
vation may be missed or are uncertain, which means that the
ﬁrst appearance of a diagnosis in the clinical record may not
coincide with the occurrence of the disease. Similarly, key
events after the end of the observation may be missing (e.g.
death, when it occurred in another institution).
what is noted down. Cases of more serious illness
may be more accurately documented as a result of
clinician’s bias (increased attention) and patient’s
recall bias. On the other hand, the cases of stig-
matized diseases may include suppressed informa-
tion. In the case of trafﬁc injuries, documentation
may even be distorted to avoid legal consequences
(Indrayan, 2013).
We need to be aware that clinical notes may re-
ﬂect health disparities. These can originate from
prejudices held by healthcare practitioners which
may impact patients’ perceptions; they can also
originate from communication difﬁculties in the
case of ethnic differences (Zestcott et al., 2016).
Finally, societal norms can play a role. Brady et al.
(2016) ﬁnd that obesity is often not documented
equally well for both sexes in weight-addressing
clinics. Young males are less likely to be recog-
nized as obese, possibly due to societal norms see-
ing them as “stocky” as opposed to obese. Unless
we are aware of such bias, we may draw premature
conclusions about the impact of our results.
It is clear that during processing of clinical texts,
we should strive to avoid reinforcing the biases. It
is difﬁcult to give a solution on how to actually
reduce the reporting bias after the fact. One pos-
sibility might be to model it. If we see clinical re-
ports as noisy annotations for the patient story in
which information is left-out or altered, we could
try to decouple the bias from the reports. Inspira-
tion could be drawn, for example, from the work
on decoupling reporting bias from annotations in
visual concept recognition (Misra et al., 2016).
Observational bias
Although variance in health
outcome is affected by social, environmental and
behavioral factors, these are rarely noted in clini-
cal reports (Kaplan et al., 2014). The bias of miss-
ing explanatory factors because they can not be
identiﬁed within the given experimental setting is
also known as the streetlight effect.
In certain
cases, we could obtain important prior knowledge
(e.g. demographic characteristics) from data other
than clinical notes.
Dual use
We have already mentioned linking
personal health information from online texts to
clinical records as a motivation for exploring sur-
rogate data sources. However, this and many other
applications also have potential to be applied in
both beneﬁcial and harmful ways. It is easy to
imagine how sensitive information from clinical
notes can be revealed about an individual who
is present in social media with a known identity.
More general examples of dual use are when the
NLP tools are used to analyze clinical notes with
a goal of determining individuals’ insurability and
employability.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we reviewed some challenges that
we believe are central to the work in clinical NLP.
Difﬁcult access to data due to privacy concerns has
been an obstacle to progress in the ﬁeld. We have
discussed how the protection of privacy through
sanitization measures and the requirement for in-
formed consent may affect the work in this do-
main. Perhaps, it is time to rethink the right to pri-
vacy in health in the light of recent work in ethics
of big data, especially its uneasy relationship to
the right to science, i.e. being able to beneﬁt
from science and participate in it (Tasioulas, 2016;
Verbeek, 2014). We also touched upon possible
sources of bias that can have an effect on the ap-
plication of NLP in the health domain, and which
can ultimately lead to unfair or harmful treatment.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Madhumita and the anony-
mous reviewers for useful comments. Part of this
research was carried out in the framework of the
Accumulate IWT SBO project, funded by the gov-
ernment agency for Innovation by Science and
Technology (IWT).
References
[Abbasi et al.2014] Ahmed Abbasi, Donald Adjeroh,
Mark Dredze, Michael J. Paul, Fatemeh Mariam
Zahedi, Huimin Zhao, Nitin Walia, Hemant Jain,
Patrick Sanvanson, Reza Shaker, et al. 2014. Social
media analytics for smart health. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 29(2):60–80.
[Afzal et al.2014] Zubair Afzal, Ewoud Pons, Ning
Kang, Miriam C.J.M. Sturkenboom, Martijn J.
Schuemie, and Jan A. Kors. 2014. ContextD: an al-
gorithm to identify contextual properties of medical
terms in a Dutch clinical corpus. BMC Bioinformat-
ics, 15(1):373.
[Agus2016] David B. Agus. 2016. Give Up Your Data
to Cure Disease, The New York Times, February 6.
https://goo.gl/0REG0n.
[Albright et al.2013] D.
Albright,
A.
Lanfranchi,
A. Fredriksen, W. F. Styler, C. Warner, J. D. Hwang,
J. D. Choi, D. Dligach, R. D. Nielsen, J. Martin,
W. Ward, M. Palmer, and G. K. Savova.
2013.
Towards comprehensive syntactic and semantic
annotations of the clinical narrative.
Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association,
20(5):922–930.
[Amblard et al.2014] Maxime Amblard, Kar¨en Fort,
Michel Musiol, and Manuel Rebuschi.
2014.
L’impossibilit´e de l’anonymat dans le cadre de
l’analyse du discours.
In Journ´ee ATALA ´ethique
et TAL.
[Baldwin2016] Timothy Baldwin.
2016.
Vet-
Compass:
Clinical Natural Language Processing
for Animal Health. Clinical NLP 2016 keynote.
https://goo.gl/ScGFa2.
[Barzilay2016] Regina Barzilay.
2016.
How NLP
can help cure cancer?
NAACL’16 keynote.
https://goo.gl/hi5nrq.
[Berman2002] Jules J. Berman.
2002.
Conﬁdential-
ity issues for medical data miners. Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence in Medicine, 26(1):25–36.
[Bird et al.2016] Sarah Bird,
Solon Barocas,
Kate
Crawford, Fernando Diaz, and Hanna Wallach.
2016. Exploring or Exploiting? Social and Ethical
Implications of Autonomous Experimentation in AI.
In Workshop on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency in Machine Learning.
[Brady et al.2016] Cassandra
C.
Brady,
Vidhu
V.
Thaker, Todd Lingren, Jessica G. Woo, Stephanie S.
Kennebeck,
Bahram
Namjou-Khales,
Ashton
Roach, Jonathan P. Bickel, Nandan Patibandla,
Guergana K. Savova, et al. 2016. Suboptimal Clini-
cal Documentation in Young Children with Severe
Obesity at Tertiary Care Centers.
International
Journal of Pediatrics, 2016.
[Chapman et al.2011] Wendy W. Chapman, Prakash M.
Nadkarni,
Lynette
Hirschman,
Leonard
W.
D’Avolio, Guergana K. Savova, and ¨Ozlem Uzuner.
2011. Overcoming barriers to NLP for clinical text:
the role of shared tasks and the need for additional
creative solutions. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18(5):540–543.
[Cohen and Demner-Fushman2014] Kevin
Bretonnel
Cohen and Dina Demner-Fushman. 2014. Biomed-
ical natural language processing. John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
[De Mazancourt et al.2015] Hugues
De
Mazancourt,
Alain Couillault, Gilles Adda, and Ga¨elle Recourc´e.
2015. Faire du TAL sur des donn´ees personnelles :
un oxymore ? In TALN 2015.
[Deleger et al.2013] Louise Deleger, Katalin Molnar,
Guergana Savova, Fei Xia, Todd Lingren, Qi Li,
Keith Marsolo, Anil Jegga, Megan Kaiser, Laura
Stoutenborough, and Imre Solti.
2013.
Large-
scale evaluation of automated clinical note de-
identiﬁcation and its impact on information extrac-
tion. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 20(1):84.
[Demner-Fushman et al.2009] Dina Demner-Fushman,
Wendy W. Chapman, and Clement J. McDonald.
2009. What can natural language processing do for
clinical decision support?
Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 42(5):760–772.
[Duquenoy et al.2008] Penny
Duquenoy,
Carlisle
George, and Anthony Solomonides.
2008.
Con-
sidering
something
ELSE:
Ethical,
legal
and
socio-economic factors in medical imaging and
medical informatics.
Computer Methods and
Programs in Biomedicine, 92(3):227–237.
[Dwork and Pottenger2013] Cynthia Dwork and Re-
becca Pottenger. 2013. Toward practicing privacy.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation, 20(1):102–108.
[Fairﬁeld and Shtein2014] Joshua Fairﬁeld and Hannah
Shtein. 2014. Big data, big problems: Emerging
issues in the ethics of data science and journalism.
Journal of Mass Media Ethics, 29(1):38–51.
[Fan et al.2011] Jung-wei
Fan,
Rashmi
Prasad,
Romme M. Yabut, Richard M. Loomis, Daniel S.
Zisook, John E. Mattison, and Yang Huang. 2011.
Part-of-speech tagging for clinical text:
wall or
bridge between institutions.
In AMIA Annual
Symposium Proceedings.
[Friedman et al.2013] Carol
Friedman,
Thomas
C.
Rindﬂesch, and Milton Corn.
2013.
Natural
language processing: state of the art and prospects
for signiﬁcant progress, a workshop sponsored
by the National Library of Medicine.
Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 46(5):765–773.
[Goldacre2014] Ben Goldacre. 2014. The NHS plan to
share our medical data can save lives but must be
done right. https://goo.gl/MH2eC0.
[Goodman2016] Bryce W. Goodman. 2016. A Step To-
wards Accountable Algorithms?: Algorithmic Dis-
crimination and the European Union General Data
Protection. In NIPS Symposium on Machine Learn-
ing and the Law.
[Hardt et al.2016] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati
Srebro. 2016. Equality of opportunity in supervised
learning. In NIPS.
[Hersh et al.2013] William R. Hersh, Mark G. Weiner,
Peter J. Embi, Judith R. Logan, Philip R.O. Payne,
Elmer V. Bernstam, Harold P. Lehmann, George
Hripcsak, Timothy H. Hartzog, James J. Cimino,
and Joel H. Saltz. 2013. Caveats for the use of oper-
ational electronic health record data in comparative
effectiveness research. Medical care, 51(8 0 3).
[Hovy and Spruit2016] Dirk Hovy and Shannon L.
Spruit.
2016.
The social impact of natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the 54th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 591–
598, Berlin, Germany, August. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
[Hripcsak et al.1995] George Hripcsak, Carol Fried-
man, Philip O. Alderson, William DuMouchel,
Stephen B. Johnson, and Paul D. Clayton. 1995. Un-
locking clinical data from narrative reports: a study
of natural language processing. Annals of internal
medicine, 122(9):681–688.
[Huser and Cimino2014] Vojtech Huser and James J.
Cimino.
2014.
Don’t take your EHR to heaven,
donate it to science: legal and research policies for
EHR post mortem. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 21(1):8–12.
[Indrayan2013] Abhaya
Indrayan.
2013.
Varieties
of
bias
to
guard
against.
https://goo.gl/SqnuZY.
[Johnson et al.2016] Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J. Pol-
lard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H. Lehman, Mengling Feng,
Mohammad Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter
Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G. Mark.
2016. MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care
database. Scientiﬁc data, 3.
[Kamarinou et al.2016] Dimitra Kamarinou,
Christo-
pher Millard, and Jatinder Singh. 2016. Machine
Learning with Personal Data. Queen Mary School
of Law Legal Studies Research Paper, (247/2016).
[Kaplan et al.2014] Robert M. Kaplan, David A. Cham-
bers, and Russell E. Glasgow.
2014.
Big data
and large sample size: a cautionary note on the po-
tential for bias. Clinical and translational science,
7(4):342–346.
[Kim et al.2015] Youngjun Kim,
Ellen Riloff,
and
John F. Hurdle. 2015. A study of concept extrac-
tion across different types of clinical notes. In AMIA
Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume 2015, page
737. American Medical Informatics Association.
[Kramer et al.2014] Adam D.I. Kramer, Jamie E. Guil-
lory, and Jeffrey T. Hancock.
2014.
Experimen-
tal evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion
through social networks.
Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 111(24):8788–8790.
[Lawrence2016] Neil
Lawrence.
2016.
Data
Analysis,
NHS
and
Industrial
Partners.
https://goo.gl/rRIcu5.
[Lipton et al.2016] Zachary C. Lipton, David Kale, and
Randall Wetzel. 2016. Modeling Missing Data in
Clinical Time Series with RNNs.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.04130.
[Malin et al.2013] Bradley A. Malin, Khaled El Emam,
and Christine M. O’Keefe.
2013.
Biomedical
data privacy: problems, perspectives, and recent ad-
vances. Journal of the American Medical Informat-
ics Association, 20(1):2–6.
[Meystre et al.2008] St´ephane M. Meystre, Guergana K.
Savova, Karin C. Kipper-Schuler, John F. Hurdle,
et al.
2008.
Extracting information from textual
documents in the electronic health record: a review
of recent research. Yearbook of Medical Informatics,
35:128–44.
[Misra et al.2016] Ishan Misra, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
Margaret Mitchell, and Ross B. Girshick.
2016.
Seeing through the Human Reporting Bias: Visual
Classiﬁers from Noisy Human-Centric Labels. In
The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition.
[Mittelstadt and Floridi2016] Brent Daniel Mittelstadt
and Luciano Floridi. 2016. The ethics of big data:
current and foreseeable issues in biomedical con-
texts.
Science and engineering ethics, 22(2):303–
341.
[Murdoch and Detsky2013] Travis B. Murdoch and Al-
lan S. Detsky. 2013. The inevitable application of
big data to health care. JAMA, 309(13):1351–1352.
[Nyr´en et al.2014] Olof Nyr´en, Magnus Stenbeck, and
Henrik Gr¨onberg. 2014. The European Parliament
proposal for the new EU General Data Protection
Regulation may severely restrict European epidemi-
ological research. European Journal of Epidemiol-
ogy, 29(4):227–230.
[O’Doherty et al.2016] Kieran C. O’Doherty, Emily
Christoﬁdes, Jeffery Yen, Heidi Beate Bentzen,
Wylie Burke, Nina Hallowell, Barbara A. Koenig,
and Donald J. Willison.
2016.
If you build it,
they will come: unintended future uses of organised
health data collections. BMC Medical Ethics, 17(1).
[Padrez et al.2015] Kevin
A.
Padrez,
Lyle
Ungar,
Hansen Andrew Schwartz, Robert J. Smith, Shawn-
dra Hill, Tadas Antanavicius, Dana M. Brown,
Patrick Crutchley, David A. Asch, and Raina M.
Merchant. 2015. Linking social media and medical
record data: a study of adults presenting to an aca-
demic, urban emergency department. BMJ quality
& safety.
[Polonetsky et al.2016] Jules Polonetsky, Omer Tene,
and Kelsey Finch.
2016.
Shades of Gray:
Seeing the Full Spectrum of Practical Data De-
identiﬁcation. Santa Clara Law Review, 56(3).
[Pradhan et al.2013] Sameer Pradhan, Noemie Elhadad,
Brett R. South, David Martinez, Amy Vogel, Hanna
Suominen, Wendy W. Chapman, and Guergana
Savova. 2013. Task 1: Share/clef ehealth evaluation
lab. In Online Working Notes of CLEF.
[Rebholz-Schuhmann et al.2011] Dietrich
Rebholz-
Schuhmann, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Chen Li, et al.
2011.
Assessment of NER solutions against the
ﬁrst and second CALBC Silver Standard Corpus.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 2(5):S11.
[Rindﬂeisch1997] Thomas C. Rindﬂeisch. 1997. Pri-
vacy, information technology, and health care. Com-
munications of the ACM, 40(8):92–100.
[Saeed et al.2011] Mohammed Saeed, Mauricio Villar-
roel, Andrew T. Reisner, Gari Clifford, Li-Wei
Lehman, George Moody, Thomas Heldt, Tin H.
Kyaw, Benjamin Moody, and Roger G. Mark. 2011.
Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive
Care II (MIMIC-II): a public-access intensive care
unit database. Critical care medicine, 39(5):952.
[Schmidt et al.2015] Morten Schmidt, S.A. Schmidt,
Jakob Lynge Sandegaard, Vera Ehrenstein, Lars Ped-
ersen, and Henrik Toft Sørensen. 2015. The danish
national patient registry: a review of content, data
quality, and research potential. Clinical Epidemiol-
ogy, 7(449):e490.
[Schroeder2014] Ralph Schroeder. 2014. Big data and
the brave new world of social media research. Big
Data & Society, 1(2):2053951714563194.
[Styler IV et al.2014] William
Styler
IV,
Steven
Bethard, Sean Finan, Martha Palmer, Sameer Prad-
han, Piet de Groen, Brad Erickson, Timothy Miller,
Chen Lin, Guergana Savova, and James Pustejovsky.
2014. Temporal annotation in the clinical domain.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2:143–154.
[Tasioulas2016] John
Tasioulas.
2016.
Van
Hasselt
Lecture
2016:
Big
Data,
Human
Rights and the Ethics of Scientiﬁc Research.
https://goo.gl/QREHUN.
[Taylor et al.2017] Linnet Taylor, Luciano Floridi, and
Bart van der Sloot.
2017.
Group Privacy: New
Challenges of Data Technologies. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing.
[Tene2011] Omer Tene. 2011. Privacy: The new gen-
erations. International Data Privacy Law, 1(1):15–
27.
[Terry2012] Nicolas P. Terry.
2012.
Protecting pa-
tient privacy in the age of big data. University of
Missouri-Kansas City Law Review, 81(2).
[Uzuner et al.2011] ¨Ozlem Uzuner, Brett R. South,
Shuying Shen, and Scott L. DuVall. 2011. 2010
i2b2/va challenge on concepts, assertions, and rela-
tions in clinical text. Journal of the American Medi-
cal Informatics Association, 18(5):552–556.
[van Staa et al.2016] Tjeerd-Pieter
van
Staa,
Ben
Goldacre, Iain Buchan, and Liam Smeeth.
2016.
Big health data: the need to earn public trust. BMJ,
354:i3636.
[Velupillai et al.2015] Sumithra Velupillai, D. Mowery,
Brett R. South, Maria Kvist, and Hercules Dalianis.
2015. Recent advances in clinical natural language
processing in support of semantic analysis.
Year-
book of Medical Informatics, 10:183–193.
[Verbeek2014] Peter-Paul Verbeek.
2014.
Op de
vleugels van Icarus. Lemniscaat.
[Zestcott et al.2016] Colin A. Zestcott, Irene V. Blair,
and Jeff Stone. 2016. Examining the presence, con-
sequences, and reduction of implicit bias in health
care: A narrative review. Group Processes & Inter-
group Relations.
