Title: Research on CPI Prediction Based on Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.05666v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
Research on CPI Prediction Based on Natural Language 
Processing 
Xiaobin Tang 1 Nuo Lei2* 
1 2 University of International Business and Economics 
* 
Corresponding author 
E-mail address: 
tangxb@uibe.edu.cn (Xiaobin Tang) 
201857011@uibe.edu.cn (Nuo Lei) 
 
Funding: This work was supported by CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund [Grant Numbers: 
No. CAAIXSJLJJ-2021-045A] and National Social Science Foundation of China [No. 
22&ZD164] 
 
Abstract: In the past, the seed keywords for CPI prediction was often selected based on 
empirical summaries of research and literature studies, which were prone to select omitted and 
invalid variables. In this paper, we design a keyword expansion technique for CPI prediction 
based on the cutting-edge NLP model, PANGU. We improve the CPI prediction ability using 
the corresponding web search index. Compared with the unsupervised pre-training and 
supervised downstream fine-tuning natural language processing models such as BERT and 
NEZHA, the PANGU model can be expanded to obtain more reliable CPI-generated keywords 
by its excellent zero-sample learning capability without the limitation of the downstream fine-
tuning data set. Finally, this paper empirically tests the keyword prediction ability obtained by 
this keyword expansion method with historical CPI data. 
Keywords: CPI prediction; NLP; Keyword Expansion 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Macroeconomic indicators reflect the main trend of the national economy and have 
important reference significance for the formulation of government fiscal and monetary 
policies. Among them, the consumer price index (CPI) is one of the important macroeconomic 
indicators. On the one hand, it reflects the living cost of ordinary people and is closely related 
to the daily life of the people. On the other hand, it is also an important reference for the Chinese 
growing internal economic cycle. Therefore, using statistical methods to predict CPI has 
become a research focus in academia and industry under the background of expanding domestic 
demand and establishing dual circulation economic development. 
At present, the statistics of macroeconomic indicators represented by CPI mainly come 
from on-the-spot visits of investigators. The obtained macroeconomic indicator data inevitably 
has a time lag problem, which affects the prediction effect of the model. In the era of big data, 
the rise of big data, the Internet, artificial intelligence, and other technologies has provided 
massive research data for CPI forecasting. Among them, the network search index is composed 
of the search frequency of people in search engines for some specific keywords, which can 
reflect people's attention to specific items in real time and has strong timeliness. Therefore, the 
introduction of keywords into the network search index can greatly improve the real-time 
prediction effect of traditional methods for CPI indicators, and has been widely used in research. 
However, the selection of specific keywords is limited by the experience and subjective 
judgment of researchers, and there are often omissions to a considerable extent, which will 
affect the prediction effect of the final model on CPI. In view of the above problems, this paper 
introduces natural language processing (NLP) to expand keywords. Based on subjectively 
selected seed words, NLP technology is used to expand more keywords with good predictive 
ability and their corresponding network search index, thereby improving the forecasting effect 
of CPI. Therefore, this paper considers using natural language processing technology to obtain 
more keywords with excellent predictive ability based on some seed keywords. 
The structure of this paper is as follows: Chapter 2 reviews the literature on using search 
index to improve CPI forecasting effect; Chapter 3 focuses on the NLP model represented by 
PANGU; Chapter 4 explains the expansion and application of PANGU model to specific 
keywords and CPI forecasting; Chapter 5 empirically tests the keyword expansion model 
proposed in this paper through historical CPI and keyword search index. The sixth chapter 
summarizes the research of this paper. 
 
2. Literature Review 
The search indexes of keywords are widely used in CPI related prediction. Liu et al. (2014) 
uses Baidu search index of auto recommended keywords to study the connection between 
Xinjiang CPI and public attention represented by Baidu index, resulting a good prediction with 
only 4.65% predicted average absolute error. Skipper and Andrea (2015) use Google Trends 
 
of ex ante keywords to do nowcasting price prediction in Central America, and find out that 
the introduction of Internet search indexes improve the prediction performance. Xin et al. (2015) 
construct keywords base from CPI related news and choose the Google search data of nouns 
and their synonyms to do the prediction by MIDAS model. Liu and Zhang (2019) select 
keywords from eight CPI categories and subjective keywords popular on the Internet to predict 
CPI half a month before official release. It can be found that although various scholars have 
introduced the CPI-related keyword search index in their research to improve the prediction 
effect, their selection criteria are different. It not only relies mostly on the subjective judgment 
of the researchers, but also leads to omissions and errors of keywords. 
With the development and progress of artificial intelligence technology, the ability of 
natural language processing models to understand texts has been continuously improved. At 
present, the Transformer structure proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017) [6] has been used in 
multiple NLP models, and even exceeded human performance in various test tasks. Thus, it 
has been widely used in the field of economic research. For macroeconomic indicators such as 
CPI prediction keyword expansion task, the NLP model can quickly process massive texts, so 
as to efficiently expand on manually selected seed keywords, and improve the model's ability 
to predict CPI. Currently, it is gradually attracting research attention. Xiaobin Tang(2021) [7] 
used the human-machine interactive TF-IDF algorithm and the BERT model to expand the 84 
keywords related to CPI to obtain more keywords with predictive ability, and empirically tested 
the prediction ability of keywords obtained by the expansion. Among them, the BERT model 
performs downstream fine-tuning on the LCQMC dataset with massive pre-training, so as to 
judge whether the semantics of the two words are the same. However, the model effect obtained 
by downstream fine-tuning depends to a large extent on the selection of datasets, and different 
datasets may lead to significant differences in the results of expanded keywords. On the other 
hand, there are few Chinese keyword datasets, and most of them are aimed at specific fields 
such as news and finance. Therefore, it is difficult to obtain suitable keyword datasets for 
downstream fine-tuning to solve specific CPI keyword expansion problems. 
Large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs) represented by the PANGU model 
provide a solution to the downstream fine-tuning dataset selection problem such as the BERT 
(Zeng et al., 2021) [8]. Through super-large-scale pre-training and model parameters, PLMs 
have superior model performance in few-shot learning and even zero-shot learning problems, 
which can get rid of the constraints of downstream fine-tuning datasets. As an excellent 
Chinese PLMs model, the PANGU model has obtained lots of parameters through training on 
high-quality Chinese text data, so that it can achieve outstanding performance in a series of 
small-sample learning and zero-sample learning problems. In the prediction keyword 
expansion problem of CPI, the superior zero-shot learning ability of the PANGU model can 
judge and expand keywords in multiple domains without a given fine-tuning dataset. Therefore, 
 
this paper uses the PANGU model to expand the CPI prediction keywords, which makes the 
expansion process of the keywords more reasonable. 
The specific research route of this paper is as follows. Firstly, starting from the internal 
composition and external influencing factors of the CPI index, appropriate keywords are 
selected through literature summarization from both microscopic and macroscopic 
perspectives to form the initial seed keywords. Second, we use the web crawler to obtain Baidu 
Baike text related to CPI. Third, natural language processing models such as BERT model and 
PANGU model are used to extract keywords based on massive encyclopedia texts, so as to 
expand potential predictor variables. Then we use web crawlers to obtain the Baidu Index of 
keywords from search engines. Finally, this paper uses PCA and regression analysis to 
empirically test the prediction effect of the expanded keyword search index, so as to compare 
and judge the prediction effect of keywords obtained through NLP expansion 
 
3. Models and Algorithms 
This paper mainly uses the PANGU model to expand new high-quality keywords based 
on the summarized CPI seed keywords. The PANGU model is a large-scale pre-training 
language model for Chinese developed by Huawei Peng Cheng Lab, first developed under 
MindSpore framework[9], which is benchmarked against GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) [10]. It has 
good performance in natural language generation tasks (NLG) and natural language 
understanding tasks (NLU). Especially in multiple few-shot and zero-shot tasks, it even 
surpasses the natural language model after downstream tuning of the corresponding dataset, 
such as BERT, NEZHA, etc. The GPT-3 developed by OpenAI based on the Transformer 
structure is mainly based on English text for pre-training, so it cannot handle NLP tasks for 
Chinese well. Compared with the GPT-3 model, the PANGU model is developed for Chinese 
natural language processing tasks and pre-trained on a large number of Chinese texts, so it can 
better understand the meaning of Chinese texts than the GPT-3 model. This could help the 
model to better extract high-quality keywords related to CPI. On the other hand, the PANGU 
model code has been open-sourced, so that it can be employed more conveniently. 
Compared with the Transformer Encoder structure used in BERT (Devlin et al, 2018)[11], 
the main structure of the PANGU model is based on a multi-layer Transformer decoder 
(Decoder) and a Query layer structure superimposed on it. Therefore, BERT is more suitable 
for dealing with vectorized representation problems, while the PANGU model is more suitable 
for dealing with text generation models. Here we would introduce the structure of PANGU 
based on the research of Zeng et al. (2021) [8] and Devlin et al. (2018) [11]. For the CPI prediction 
keyword expansion problem dealt with in this paper, the PANGU model will perform the 
following encoding preprocessing on the input CPI-related text, so as to convert it into a 
numerical form that the Transformer can process. For a piece of input text  𝑇𝑇= 𝑡𝑡1, 𝑡𝑡2, … , 𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛 
of length n, the model first converts the input text into a matrix 𝑋𝑋0 through Token Embedding 
 
and Position Embedding, so as to perform subsequent calculations. The calculation formulas 
of Token Embedding and Position Embedding are as follows: 
𝑋𝑋0  = 𝑇𝑇 𝑊𝑊𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇+ 𝑊𝑊𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
(1) 
The obtained matrix 𝑋𝑋0 is the initial encoding result of the CPI-related text, which 
contains all the information of the input text. In order to obtain CPI-related keywords with 
excellent predictive ability, the model needs to be able to fully understand CPI-related texts 
through a multi-layer network. Based on the matrix, the PANGU model uses a multi-layer 
Transformer Decoder to calculate 𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙, and the calculation formula is as follows: 
𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙  =  𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1)
(2) 
Among them 𝑙𝑙∈[1, 𝐿𝐿], it represents that the PANGU model could deeply understand the 
CPI-related text through the Transformer decoder structure of 𝐿𝐿 layers, which helps to extract 
effective CPI prediction keywords. 
Transformer is the most important structure in the PANGU model, mainly composed of 
two sub-layers. The first sub-layer is a multi-head self-attention mechanism (MHA), which can 
understand the key sentences in the text in a targeted manner by stacking multiple self-attention 
mechanisms. The second sublayer is a fully connected Feed-Forward Network (FFN). Before 
the multi-head self-attention mechanism and the feed-forward neural network, the pre-layer 
normalization mechanism was adopted to accelerate the training speed of the Transformer and 
help the model to mine the text of keywords later. 
Specifically, the multi-head self-attention mechanism is an important basis for the 
PANGU model to fully understand the deep meaning of text. Through the weighted calculation 
in the self-attention mechanism, the PANGU model can effectively solve the long-distance 
dependency problem that other natural language models cannot handle. In the CPI keyword 
expansion problem, the texts containing high-quality predicted keywords are often very long. 
Therefore, traditional natural language processing models often cannot effectively understand 
the meaning of the text, so it is naturally difficult to extract suitable keywords. The self-
attention mechanism can well grasp the global information of the text through long-distance 
dependencies, and focus on the important position that needs more attention. Therefore, the 
PANGU model is very suitable for keyword expansion for the CPI prediction problem. At the 
same time, the multi-head model design in the PANGU model can achieve effective parallel 
stacking, and then extract effective information from multiple semantic dimensions in the text. 
For the keyword expansion problem of CPI prediction problem, the mechanism can deeply 
understand the semantics of keywords in the original text, and thus expand to obtain keywords 
with excellent prediction ability for CPI. The specific calculation method is as follows. First, 
the original encoding result is converted through the three weight matrices of query 𝑄𝑄, key 𝐾𝐾 
and value 𝑉𝑉. The formula is: 
𝑄𝑄  = 𝑊𝑊𝑞𝑞𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1
(3) 
𝐾𝐾= 𝑊𝑊𝑘𝑘𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1
(4) 
 
𝑉𝑉  = 𝑊𝑊𝑣𝑣𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1
(5) 
The attention score combines all the information of matrix Q, K, and V with the scale 
factor √𝑑𝑑 and softmax function. The scaling processing is to prevent the gradient explosion 
problem caused by too large values. The calculation formula is as follows: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1) = 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆ቆ𝑄𝑄× 𝐾𝐾′
√𝑑𝑑
ቇ𝑉𝑉
(6) 
The multi-head attention mechanism adds up the attention scores of each dimension by 
stacking multiple attention heads, and obtains text information in multiple semantic spaces 
from the summary. Therefore, for the multi-head attention mechanism of N heads, the 
calculation formula is as follows: 
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1)  =   ෍𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1)𝑊𝑊𝑚𝑚
𝑁𝑁
(7) 
Here 𝑊𝑊𝑚𝑚 is also the weight matrices to be trained. On this basis, the PANGU model 
adds a pre-layer normalization mechanism, so the final output of the multi-head attention 
mechanism is as follows: 
𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀= 𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1 + 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀൫𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙−1)൯
(8) 
The PANGU model further mines the information contained in the multi-head attention 
mechanism through the FFN layer. The GeLU function is used as the activation function of the 
model. The formula is as follows: 
𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙= 𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀+ 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹ቀ𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿(𝑋𝑋𝑙𝑙
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀)ቁ
(9) 
Among them, FFN is a fully connected neural network, and LayerNorm is the same as the 
self-attention mechanism, which is normalized before the layer. 
On top of the above Transformer structure, the PANGU model also designs a Query layer 
to explicitly generate the expected output results. The structural design of the Query layer is 
basically the same as that of the Transformer layer, but its query matrix has an additional layer 
of encoding to mark the position of the next predicted word. For the output of the last layer of 
the Transformer structure 𝑋𝑋𝐿𝐿, the query matrix Q is calculated differently as follows: 
𝑄𝑄= 𝑊𝑊𝑛𝑛
𝑞𝑞×𝑝𝑝
(10) 
Based on the above structure, the PANGU model has an excellent performance on a 
variety of cross-domain Chinese natural language processing tasks on the basis of massive pre-
training, and is suitable for the keyword expansion task of CPI. 
 
4. Experimental Design 
Based on the seed keywords summarized by experience, this paper crawls the CPI-related 
web texts in Baidu Baike through web crawler and constructs a potential CPI prediction 
keyword database. In the next step, this paper uses the zero-shot capability of the PANGU 
 
model pre-trained in massive texts to process CPI-related Baidu Baike texts to obtain high-
quality CPI prediction keywords. Finally, this paper uses the methods of Pearson correlation 
coefficient and principal component analysis to screen the expanded CPI prediction keywords, 
so as to further improve the final prediction ability of the CPI series. 
4.1. PANGU Pre-training 
In the past, BERT and NEZHA models based on the Transformer structure divided the 
natural language processing task into two stages: unsupervised pretraining and supervised 
downstream fine-tuning. This model design requires targeted downstream fine-tuning for each 
specific downstream task. For the CPI prediction keyword expansion problem, the 
corresponding datasets collected for CPI are quite scarce, which greatly limits the usage of the 
models. With the continuous improvement of computing ability, researchers found that the 
increase of model parameters can significantly improve the performance of the model in 
various downstream tasks. So with a large amount of unsupervised pre-training, the model can 
have great performance in various downstream tasks. The performance is close to or even better 
than previously fine-tuned models. Therefore, the realization of general artificial intelligence 
through ultra-large-scale pre-training and model parameters has become the frontier direction 
of natural language processing. The PANGU model is representative of the super large model 
in Chinese natural language processing. Its 200 billion parameters and 1.1TB high-quality 
Chinese corpus make it have good performance in various Chinese NLP tasks. 
In terms of unsupervised pre-training datasets, the PANGU model collects a large amount 
of Chinese corpus to help the model better understand Chinese text processing tasks and 
improve the generalization ability of the model. The specific data sources include a large 
number of Chinese open source data sets, crawler data of Chinese web pages, encyclopedia 
texts and e-books, etc., and have undergone a series of data cleaning and deduplication 
processing to ensure the high quality and unbiasedness of the data set. This in turn avoids 
negative impacts on downstream tasks. At the same time, since the encyclopedia text is learned 
and processed in the pre-training, the model is more suitable for the model design of the Baidu 
Baike text corresponding to the CPI keywords in this paper, so that the Zero-shot CPI keyword 
augmentation can be achieved without fine-tuning of the downstream data set. 
In terms of the specific pre-training tasks of the model, the PANGU model refers to the 
design idea of the GPT series model to autoregressively predict the next word of the text 
sentence in the dataset (Radford et al, 2018)[12], so as to achieve unsupervised model training. 
Assuming that the text sequence T = {𝑡𝑡1, 𝑡𝑡2, … , 𝑡𝑡𝑁𝑁}  contains N characters (tokens), the 
PANGU model will autoregressively infer the correct character answer for the next position 
based on all previous characters, thereby maximizing the log-likelihood function as follows: 
𝐿𝐿= ෍𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝑝𝑝(𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛|𝑡𝑡1, … , 𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛−1; 𝜃𝜃)
𝑁𝑁
𝑛𝑛=1
(11) 
 
𝜃𝜃 represents the internal parameters of the PANGU model, which will be estimated by 
back-propagation to minimize the likelihood function in specific training. After obtaining the 
corresponding model parameters through many training estimates, the PANGU model can 
perform inference for downstream tasks in multiple domains including CPI. 
4.2. PANGU Zero-shot Learning 
The biggest advantage of PANGU model pre-training with a large number of samples is 
its outstanding performance in small-shot learning and zero-shot learning problems. Due to the 
rich pre-training parameters, the meaning of the text has been fully understood. This enables 
the PANGU model to avoid the model bias caused by the selection of inappropriate 
downstream fine-tuning datasets through zero-sample learning in the expansion of CPI 
prediction keywords, thereby increasing the credibility of the extracted keywords. 
In this paper's CPI keyword expansion problem, it is necessary to use the PANGU model 
to extract appropriate keywords from Baidu Baike related to the CPI seed keywords. One of 
the most important processing steps is how to construct appropriate prompt information so that 
the fully pre-trained PANGU model can quickly understand the natural language processing 
task to be processed. Aiming at the keyword expansion problem of CPI prediction in this paper, 
the main task of this paper is to extract representative keywords from the obtained CPI-related 
Baidu Baike texts. Therefore, this article constructs the prompt information as follows: 
Input Text =  “Keyword Extraction：\𝑛𝑛” + “Abstract：” + Baike + “\𝑛𝑛”
+ “Keywords：” 
 
Here "\n" represents a newline, the purpose is to let the model understand the structure 
level of the input text. "Keyword Extraction" indicates the type of NLP task that needs to be 
handled by PANGU model. "Abstract:" and the following "Baike" represent the relevant text 
of the CPI seed keywords captured from Baidu Baike, which is the text content that the PANGU 
model needs to focus on. "Keywords:" prompts the PANGU model to output the recognized 
text keywords, and then extract representative keywords from a large number of Baike texts. 
4.3. PANGU Robust Test 
 
Due to the randomly initialized neural network parameters and data shuffle, many deep 
learning models would have unstable performance even under the same hyperparameter setting. 
Therefore, we test the robustness of our designed keywords extraction method through multiple 
experiments. The intuition is that we want to make sure that every generated keyword is 
supposed to be in the result of our multiple experiments. let Ai as the generated keywords in 
the 𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡ℎ experiments. We define the final generated keywords set 𝐴𝐴 as follows: 
A =∩𝑖𝑖=1
𝑁𝑁
𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖
(12) 
 
In our specific CPI keywords generations task, we repeat the keywords generation 
experiments ten times and found that the PANGU model has a good stable performance with 
the same keywords output each time. Therefore we prove the stability of PANGU model 
through our multiple experiments.  
 
 
5. Results 
5.1. Data Description 
Based on the previous literature research, this paper will explore the web search keywords 
related to CPI from the perspectives of micro and macro indicators. Among them, the micro 
indicators include eight categories of CPI, and the macro indicators include common economic 
and financial indicators. The keywords collected from the above perspectives will be used as 
seed keywords, and then expanded from the perspectives of similarity and importance. The 
specific seed words are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Macro and micro seed keyword 
Perspectives 
Seed Keywords 
Macro 
CPI, GDP, price, product price, price increase, price decrease, deposit 
rate, economy, currency, capital, inflation, deflation, finance, market, 
commodity, tax, trade, population 
Micro 
Rice, wheat, pork, beef, fish, vegetables, fruits, edible oil, steamed bread, 
bread, beverages, liquor, tobacco, men's clothing, women's clothing, 
children's clothing, rent, transportation, education, medical care, health 
care, automobiles, gasoline 
According to the above seed keywords, this paper crawls the relevant keyword 
encyclopedia texts from Baidu Baike, and filters out long paragraph texts with a length of about 
300 to 500 words as a corpus for expanding keywords. As a corpus text of popular science and 
encyclopedia nature, Baidu Baike has high readability and accuracy, so it is suitable for 
extracting high-quality predictive keywords related to CPI. On this basis, this paper combines 
the BERT and PANGU models, and performs parallel computing from the perspectives of 
similarity and importance to determine the similar keywords and the important keywords. 
Further, we take the intersection of the two to obtain representative keywords that are not only 
similar to the seed keywords, but also have the ability to summarize and generalize in the 
context, so as to improve the model's ability to interpret and predict the CPI index. 
5.2. BERT Keyword Similarity Selection 
In the process of selecting CPI-related texts based on similarity, this paper uses the BERT 
vectorization method to encode and represent the words from JIEBA word segmentation, so as 
to further calculate the cosine similarity between the seed word and the generated word. 
According to the cosine similarity between words and a preset selecting threshold, we obtain 
similar keywords related to seed keywords. Specifically, a total of 166 macro-similar keywords 
and a total of 400 micro-similar keywords with the similarity of seed words above the threshold 
of 0.9 were selected in this paper. 
 
5.3. PANGU Keyword Importance Selection 
This paper introduces the PANGU model from the perspective of importance to extract 
the keywords from CPI-related Baike text. As a generative model, the PANGU model can 
integrate the relevant text of CPI and appropriate prompt information, and auto-regressively 
generate a keyword sequence that could represent the text. At the same time, the PANGU 
model performs well in zero-shot learning problems, so it can avoid downstream fine-tuning 
on a specific keyword dataset, thereby preventing keyword extraction bias caused by dataset 
selection. Finally, a total of 782 macro-important keywords and 1,138 micro-important 
keywords were obtained. 
Considering the similar keywords obtained by BERT similarity screening and the 
important keywords obtained by PANGU importance screening, this paper takes the 
intersection of the two as the generated keywords, with potential CPI prediction ability, and 
obtains its corresponding Baidu search index. Combined with the availability of Baidu search 
index and the need for CPI forecasting, this paper sets the time interval of the experiment from 
January 2011 to January 2022. The CPI index is the month-on-month data in the RESSET 
macro database. The Baidu indexes of the keywords in the generated keywords are the daily 
data from January 1, 2011, to January 31, 2022, which is converted into monthly data after 
averaging, and the change rate of the monthly search index is calculated. After these 
processings, a total of 18 macro seed words, 27 macro generated words, 23 micro seed words, 
and 76 micro generated words are obtained, as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. Macro and micro keyword expansion results 
Perspective 
Seed Keywords + Generated Keywords 
Macro 
 
CPI, GDP, price, product price, price increase, price decrease, deposit rate, 
economy, currency, capital, inflation, deflation, finance, market, commodity, 
tax, trade, population, tax system, business, tax system, population density, 
Sales price, tax revenue, value-added tax, total investment, PPI, IMF, 
border trade, paper money, capital, business, tax rate, tax policy, 
electronic money, finance, customers, money, financial institutions, 
demand deposits, monetary system, World markets, commodity prices, 
financial markets, time deposits1 
Micro 
 
Rice, wheat, pork, beef, fish, vegetables, fruits, edible oil, steamed bread, 
bread, beverages, liquor, tobacco, men's clothing, women's clothing, children's 
clothing, rent, transportation, education, medical care, health care, 
automobiles, gasoline, higher education, Beef in sauce, shirts, fashionable 
women's clothing, fish gallbladder, flue-cured tobacco, famous wine, 
passenger cars, peanut oil, bakery, diesel cars, swine fever, fragrant rice, 
Xifeng wine, clothing, health, wine, corn oil, tobacco industry, dough, 
burning Fish, animal oil, common wheat, food, tobacco seeds, green 
 
vegetables, children, whole wheat, green vegetables, porridge, eggs, aged 
rice, brown bread, fish, model car, marinade, tobacco seedlings, peppers, 
rice, pig prices, Lamb, shochu, trousers, gasoline for cars, rental, 
marinated chicken, drinks, sesame oil, pigs, teaching materials, steamed 
wine, fashion, health, soft drinks, hospitals, nicotine, frozen fish, sesame 
oil, glutinous rice, fish oil, floating wheat, Clothing, house rental, soybean 
oil, Ministry of Education, suits, learning, tobacco industry, vegetable oil, 
automobile industry, dumplings, car brands, renting a house, fruits and 
vegetables, pig house, Dong wine2 
 
1 2 The words marked in bold are generated keywords. Some words are synonyms in Chinese. 
5.4. Regression Analysis 
This paper compares the explanatory power of the original seed keywords and the 
generated keywords for the CPI prediction through regression analysis. In this paper, the data 
collected above are processed as follows. First, the CPI consumer price index CPIMoM adopts 
the month-on-month data (last month = 100), after subtracting the value of the previous month, 
it represents the change ratio of the price level of household consumer goods in the current 
month compared with the previous month. Secondly, the Baidu search index of the seed 
keywords and the expanded keywords represents the frequency of words appearing in online 
searches in that month, and reflects the residents' attention to word-related events. Therefore, 
this paper also uses the month-on-month data of the Baidu search index, and calculates the 
change ratio of the search index after subtracting the search index of the previous month, which 
is more conducive to analyzing the impact of changes in the attention of CPI-related words on 
CPI changes. Finally, considering the possible influence of an annual cycle, this paper performs 
lag processing of 1 to 12 orders on the CPI change rate and the Baidu search index change rate, 
to tap the potential lag forecasting ability. 
At the same time, because the Baidu search index represents the degree of residents' 
attention to specific concepts, it will be affected by other factors other than price changes, and 
there will be a lot of noise. This paper uses the Pearson correlation coefficient to remove the 
keyword variables that are too low in the CPI change rate, and then removes the impact of other 
factors other than price changes on the Baidu search index. The absolute threshold of the 
correlation coefficient is 0.3, and the variables with the correlation coefficient with the CPI 
change rate below 0.3 are eliminated. In this paper, the above operations are performed on the 
seed words and the generated words respectively, and finally a total of 71 predictors under 
different lag orders are obtained. 
Due to the large number of seed words and generated words, and multi-order lag 
processing at the same time, the above predictors contain many time series. Therefore, in this 
paper, principal component analysis method is used to reduce the dimension of the predictor 
variables, and finally six principal components are obtained, which can explain at least 70% of 
 
the original variables. Finally, six principal components were determined as independent 
variables, and the rate of change of CPI was used as the dependent variable, and the principal 
component regression results were shown in Table 3. 
Table 3. CPI regression results 
 
Seed Keywords 
Generate Keywords 
Principal 
Components 
Component 
Number 
Regression 
coefficients 
Cumulative 
Proportion 
Component 
number 
Regression 
coefficients 
Cumulative  
Proportion 
 
1 
0.0077 *** 
0.3098 
1 
0.0032*** 
0.3574 
 
2 
0.0024** 
0.5061 
2 
-0.0040*** 
0.5010   
 
3 
0.0061*** 
0.6214 
3 
0.0017** 
0.5947 
 
4 
0.0024 
0.7179 
4 
0.0037*** 
0.6623 
 
5 
0.0007 
0.7677 
5 
-0.0022* 
0.6991 
 
6 
0.0034 
0.8096 
6 
-0.0003 
0.7348 
F statistic 
17.63 
21.23 
DW statistics 
1.470 
1.868 
𝑅𝑅2 
0.481 
0.528 
sample size 
120 
120 
Note: *, **, *** represent the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels, respectively 
Significance levels of the model F statistics after the principal component analysis are all 
below 1%, indicating that the regression fitting effects of the model on CPI are good. At the 
same time, this paper uses R-square to compare the predictive and explanatory power of the 
model. The results show that after adding the generated keywords, the corresponding R-
squared is still higher even though the cumulative PCA explanation proportion of the first six 
principal components is lower. Specifically, the R-square of the model corresponding to the 
original keyword is 0.481, while the R-square of the model corresponding to the expanded 
keyword after filtering by BERT similarity and PANGU importance is 0.528. On the other 
hand, the significance of the regression coefficients of each principal component of the 
generated keywords has been improved to varying degrees. The above empirical analysis 
shows that the generated keywords obtained by natural language processing technology based 
on similarity and importance in this paper can improve the prediction effect of the model on 
the CPI change rate. 
 
6. Conclusions 
This paper introduces the BERT model and PANGU model in natural language processing 
to expand the predictor variables in the CPI prediction problem. Among them, the Bert 
vectorization model is based on the Transformer encoder structure, which encodes words into 
word vectors, and mines keywords similar to the seed keywords from the perspective of 
similarity. The PANGU model is based on the Transformer decoder structure, and considers 
 
the global semantics of the sentence to autoregressively generate keywords that have the ability 
to represent context. Through the parallel calculation of the two, this paper extracts the final 
expanded keywords, and uses the principal component regression to compare the original seed 
keywords and the final generated keywords respectively, and verifies the effect of the generated 
keywords’ CPI prediction ability. 
First of all, the Bert vectorization model used in this paper can filter and match the CPI-
related Baidu Baike text after JIEBA word segmentation from the perspective of similarity by 
encoding a single word into a vector form. The multi-head self-attention mechanism structure 
and feed-forward neural network structure in the encoder based on the Transformer structure 
can effectively consider the deep semantics of words, so as to get better vector representation 
of keywords and obtain similar keywords related to CPI. 
Secondly, as a super-large Chinese pre-trained language model, the PANGU model can 
get rid of the dependence on the downstream fine-tuning data set under the appropriate prompt 
information, and automatically generate keyword sequences by integrating the context, 
effectively avoiding the selection of fine-tuning data sets. Therefore, we can generate the 
important keywords with a stronger representation ability of the context. 
Finally, the parallel keyword expansion method of similarity and importance adopted in 
this paper can mine keywords with better predictive ability for CPI index. Through principal 
component regression analysis, this paper conducts an empirical test on the prediction effect of 
the CPI change rate of the seed keywords and the generated keywords. The empirical results 
show that the finally generated keywords have better predictive ability for CPI than the seed 
keywords. Therefore, the text mining process based on the BERT vectorization model and the 
PANGU model designed in this paper can effectively extract high-quality keywords with both 
economic meaning and stronger predictive ability from the Baike text for CPI prediction 
analysis. 
 
References 
[1] Zhang Y. Short-term CPI forecast in the context of big data[J]. China Statistics, 2015(12):49-50. 
(In Chinese) 
[2] Yuan M. A Nowcast Model of CPI Based on Search Volume of Online Shopping[J]. Journal of 
Statistics and Information, 2015, 30(04):20-27. (In Chinese) 
[3] Dong L, Peng K Y, Tang X B. Research on real-time CPI prediction in the context of big data[J]. 
The World of Survey and Research, 2017(08):51-54. (In Chinese) 
[4] Xu Y M, Gao Y M. Construction of the Public Opinion Index of CPI based on the Internet Big Data 
[J]. The Journal of Quantitative and Technical Economics, 2017,34(01):94-112. (In Chinese) 
[5] Zhang H, Shen H L, Xia L. Research on CPI Prediction based on Multi-source Asynchronous Mixed 
Sampling Data[J]. The Journal of Quantitative and Technical Economics, 2020, 37(10):149-168. 
(In Chinese) 
 
[6] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al. Attention is all you need[J]. Advances in neural information 
processing systems, 2017, 30. 
[7] Tang X, Dong M R, Xu R. Design and Application of Text Mining Technology for CPI Prediction 
Based on Big Data[J]. Statistical Research, 2021, 38(08):146-160. (In Chinese) 
[8] Zeng W, Ren X, Su T, et al. PanGu-𝛼𝛼: Large-scale Autoregressive Pretrained Chinese Language 
Models with Auto-parallel Computation[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12369, 2021. 
[9] Mindspore, 2020, https://www.mindspore.cn/. 
[10] Brown T, Mann B, Ryder N, et al. Language models are few-shot learners[J]. Advances in neural 
information processing systems, 2020, 33: 1877-1901. 
[11] Devlin J, Chang M W, Lee K, et al. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for 
language understanding[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. 
[12] Radford A, Narasimhan K, Salimans T, et al. Improving language understanding by generative 
pre-training[J]. 2018. 
