Title: Misspellings in Natural Language Processing: A survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16836v2
--------------------------------------------------

MISSPELLINGS IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING:
A SURVEY
Gianluca Sperduti
, Alejandro Moreo
,
Istituto di Scienza e Tecnologie dell’Informazione,
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
56124 Pisa, Italy
{firstname.lastname}@isti.cnr.it
ABSTRACT
This survey provides an overview of the challenges of misspellings in natural language processing
(NLP). While often unintentional, misspellings have become ubiquitous in digital communication,
especially with the proliferation of Web 2.0, user-generated content, and informal text mediums such
as social media, blogs, and forums. Even if humans can generally interpret misspelled text, NLP
models frequently strug- gle to handle it: this causes a decline in performance in common tasks like
text classification and machine translation. In this paper, we reconstruct a history of misspellings as a
scientific problem. We then discuss the latest advancements to address the challenge of misspellings
in NLP. Main strategies to mitigate the effect of misspellings include data augmentation, double
step, character-order agnostic, and tuple-based methods, among others. This survey also examines
dedicated data challenges and competitions to spur progress in the field. Critical safety and ethical
concerns are also examined, for example, the voluntary use of misspellings to inject malicious
messages and hate speech on social networks. Furthermore, the survey explores psycholinguistic
perspectives on how humans process misspellings, potentially informing inno- vative computational
techniques for text normalization and representation. Finally, the misspelling-related challenges and
opportunities associated with modern large language models are also analyzed, including benchmarks,
datasets, and performances of the most prominent language models against misspellings. This survey
aims to be an exhaustive resource for researchers seeking to mitigate the impact of misspellings in
the rapidly evolving landscape of NLP.
Keywords Misspellings · typos · natural language processing.
1
Introduction
Human language is constantly evolving. The world we live in is governed by information and communication
technologies. Our time, sometimes dubbed the digital era, must thus be prepared to face changes in the way we
communicate, and implement mechanisms to adapt to it. Changes in communication derive from multiple aspects.
The use of non-standard written language might respond to cultural or societal factors, but not only. It may simply
happen by mistake, in which case we speak of misspellings. Misspellings have become pervasive in the digital written
production since the revolutionary Web 2.0 led people interact freely through social medial, blogs, forums, etc. Even
though misspellings are generally unintentional, in some contexts these may also be intentional.
Of course, the presence of misspellings complicate the reading of a text. Notwithstanding this, and somehow surprisingly,
humans have the ability to read and comprehend misspelt text without much effort and, sometimes, even without
realising their presence (Andrews, 1996; Healy, 1976; Shook et al., 2012; McCusker et al., 1981). Computers do not
have similar capabilities though. Although the NLP community has long downplayed the problem of misspellings (if not
for grammatical error correction (Shishibori et al., 2002) or text normalisation (Damerau, 1964)), it is by now abundant
evidence that misspellings represent a serious risk to the performance of NLP systems (Baldwin et al., 2013; Heigold
et al., 2018; Moradi and Samwald, 2021; Náplava et al., 2021; Nguyen and Grieve, 2020; Plank, 2016; Vinciarelli,
2005; Yang and Gao, 2019).
arXiv:2501.16836v2  [cs.CL]  24 Oct 2025
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
The last survey on the topic of misspellings in NLP dates back to 2009 (Subramaniam et al., 2009). Since then, the
problem has come to receive an increased deal of attention, and a number of methods specifically devised to counter
misspellings (Heigold et al., 2018; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018), as well as dedicated benchmarks of misspellings on
which to test the methods (Michel and Neubig, 2018) and even dedicated events and data challenges (Lopresti et al.,
2009; Basili et al., 2010; Dey et al., 2011) have made their appearance in the last decade. This paper aims at offering a
comprehensive overview of recent advancements in the field.
The study of misspellings in NLP is paramount not only as a means for improving the performance of current systems,
but also for reasons that are ultimately bound to safety and ethics. Misspellings are, as hinted above, not always an
involuntary phenomenon. Misspellings may sometimes be carefully and maliciously designed (Li et al., 2019a) with the
purpose of disguising certain words to elude the control of automatic content moderation tools or spam detection filters.
The study of misspelling can help in mitigating the proliferation of hate speech or in preventing unwanted content to
reach the final audience. Additionally, the fact that certain misspellings act as obfuscations for computers but not for
humans suggests that studying this phenomenon from a psycholinguistic perspective might inspire alternative, more
efficient methods for text representation and processing.
The rest of this survey is organised as follows. In Section 2 we offer an overview of the history of misspellings in the
digital era, analysing the main trends before and after the proliferation of user-generated content and the upsurge of
neural networks. In Section 3 we describe how the phenomenon is regarded under the lens of linguistics and NLP. In
Section 4 we survey previous work on the potential harm of misspellings. Section 5 is devoted to describing methods
specifically devised to counter misspellings. The main tasks, evaluation measures, venues, and datasets dedicated
to misspellings are discussed in Section 6. Section 7 is devoted to analysing the phenomenon of misspellings from
the point of view of modern large language models (LLMs). Section 8 discusses the main applications in which the
presence of misspellings gains special relevance. Section 9 concludes, by also pointing to promising directions of
research.
2
A Brief History of Misspellings
The treatment of misspellings in NLP has traversed two main phases that hinge upon the proliferation of the so-called
Web 2.0 and, with these, the spread of huge quantities of (often carelessly generated) user-generated content. The term
Web 2.0 was first coined by Darcy DiNucci in 1999, but it was not until 2004 that the term became popular thanks to
the Web 2.0 Conference.1 It took some time for the user-generated content to take on the Internet, something that we
identified to indicatively happen around 2010. This section is devoted to briefly surveying the history of misspellings
before (Section 2.1) and after (Section 2.2) this event.
2.1
Before 2010: Fewer Data, Less Misspellings
Before the explosion of user-generated data on the Internet, the vast majority of content available on the web (static
web pages, journal articles, etc.) was characterised by the fact that the content was moderately well curated. As a result,
the amount of data was relatively limited, and the available data contained few misspellings. For this reason, automated
text analysis technologies were rarely concerned with the presence of misspellings, if at all. The study of misspellings
was confined to the development of automatic correction tools that aid users in producing misspelling-free texts by, e.g.,
correcting typos, or applying OCR-produced errors. Vinciarelli (2005) is one of the pioneer studies dealing with NLP
systems resilient to misspellings (more precisely, with errors acquired via OCR).
Some studies seemed to indicate that the problem of misspellings was not paramount for text classification technologies,
at least when these concern the classification by topic of (curated) text documents (Agarwal et al., 2007). The situation
differed somewhat when shifting to other, less curated sources, such as emails, blogs, forums, and SMS data, or when
analysing the output generated by automatic speech recognition engines from call centres. The problem attracted little
attention from the research community at the time, and it was not until 2007 that a dedicated workshop, called Analysis
for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND), emerged and renewed interest in the field (see also Section 6.4).
To the best of our knowledge, the only survey on NLP systems robust to noise was published in 2009 (Subramaniam
et al., 2009). This survey primarily focused on handling noise in OCR scans, blogs, call centre transcriptions, and
similar sources.
1Source https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_2.0
2
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Figure 1: Publication trends in NLP papers on misspellings (2004-2024)
2.2
After 2010: The Rise of Social Networks and Deep Learning
Since 2010, user-generated content has become increasingly pervasive, mainly due to the revolution of social networks
as stated in Perrin (2015). At the same time, deep learning technologies have taken the world by storm (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012), not only due to the increase in performance they show off in most NLP tasks (Collobert et al., 2011),
but also because of their potential to eliminate the need for manual feature engineering; instead, the neural network
itself learns to represent the input. This raises questions about the necessity of a pre-processing step for correcting
misspellings beforehand. The increasing prevalence of misspelt data and the proliferation of NLP technologies have
inspired numerous studies analysing the impact of misspellings on state-of-the-art models (Section 4), as well as papers
proposing systems that are resilient to misspellings (Section 5).
The study of misspellings in NLP presents significant benefits. The most apparent advantage is the enhancement
of performance in any NLP tool, but not only. Systems that are resilient to misspellings are also safer. For reasons
discussed later, some misspellings are intentional, designed to evade the scrutiny of content moderation tools or spam
filters. Ultimately, the study of misspelling resilience aims to deepen our understanding of language (further discussions
are offered in Section 9).
This increased interest in the subject was partially fostered by the work of Belinkov and Bisk (2018); Heigold et al.
(2018); Edizel et al. (2019), who showed the performance of different models decrease noticeably in the presence of
misspellings. This renewed momentum has led to the appearance of dedicated workshops devoted to studying the
phenomenon from the point of view of user-generated content (such as the WNUT workshop series2) as well as from
the point of view of machine translation (such as the WMT workshop/conference series3); more information about
dedicated tasks and datasets can be found in Section 6.4.
Between 2017 and 2022, neural machine translation emerged as the most prolific field in the study of misspellings,
closely followed by sentiment analysis. Over recent years, conversely, there has been a noticeable decline in the number
of research papers in this field, coinciding with the advent of large language models (LLMs) (7). In particular, there
has been a lack of new methods aimed at improving performance against misspellings, likely due to the high costs
associated with experimenting with LLMs. However, several studies have conducted extensive analyses and proposed
new benchmarks (Section 6.4.4) and other resources specific to LLMs (Section 7).
Figure 1 shows the publication trends with respect to all NLP papers related to misspellings.
3
What is a Misspelling?
The term misspelling is a too broad concept which has come to encompass many different types of unconventional
typographical alterations. In this section, we turn to review the main considerations behind this term as viewed through
the lens of linguistics and NLP, and we try to break down the many subtle nuances it encompasses. While in NLP, the
2https://aclanthology.org/venues/wnut/
3https://aclanthology.org/venues/wmt/
3
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
terms misspelling and noise are by and large interchangeable, in linguistics the term error is more commonly employed.
Other terms like typo, mistake, or slip are often used in more general, non-specialized contexts. Throughout this survey,
we prefer the term misspelling since it clearly evokes a link with text, and since noise and error are too wide hypernyms
that the target audience of this survey might find rather ambiguous.
3.1
Under the Lens of Linguistics
In linguistics, there are primarily three fundamental viewpoints for models dealing with misspellings: the first is that of
general linguistics, where some authors have attempted to define and categorise various types of misspellings. The
second one is that of sociolinguistics, in which authors analyse misspellings from a social perspective. The last one is
psycholinguistics, which focused more on cognitively relevant aspects of the same problem.
As already mentioned, in general linguistics there is no broadly agreed definition of what a misspelling is, and the term
error is often preferred. Error analysis is one important field of linguistics that studies the phenomenon of errors in
second language learners. James (2013) defines errors as an unsuccessful bit of language. Richards and Schmidt (2013)
instead define errors as the use of a linguistic item (e.g., a word, a grammatical unit, a speech act, etc.) in a way such
that a fluent or native speaker of the language regards as showing faulty or incomplete learning.
In general linguistics, it is customary to draw a distinction between error and mistake. Richards and Schmidt (2013)
point out that errors are due to a lack of knowledge of the speaker, while mistakes instead are made because of other
compounding reasons, such as fatigue or carelessness. In the same work, errors are classified as belonging to lexical
error (i.e., surface forms which are not included in a vocabulary), phonological error (i.e., in the pronunciation), and
grammatical error (i.e., not compliant to syntactic rules). Interestingly enough, none of these concepts seem to embrace
the possibility that misspellings may be created as a voluntary act.
Sociolinguistics focuses on the concept of spelling variation (Nguyen and Grieve, 2020). The very own word misspelling
expresses prejudice against the author: the author of the noise is responsible for missing the correct normative spell
of the word. Contrarily, the sociolinguistic perspective states that there are no such errors, but just variations on the
spellings. These variations can originate from social needs, such as avoiding censorship, expressing group identity, or
representing regional or national dialects.
After outlining key conventions in the fields of general linguistics and sociolinguistics, it is essential to emphasize the
significant relationship between psycholinguistics and the phenomenon of misspellings. As stated by Fernández and
Cairns (2010), psycholinguistics is a discipline that investigates the cognitive processes involved in the use of language,
rather than the structure of language itself. In the case of reading, psycholinguistics is concerned with understanding
the cognitive processes that underlie this activity, from the acquisition of the sensory stimulus derived from the visual
perception of letters, to the subsequent comprehension and cognitive reorganisation of the information within the brain.
The branch of psycholinguistics that is most relevant to the topic of this survey is the one devoted to studying the
cognitive processes behind the acts of writing and reading. It has been noted on several occasions that humans are able
to read long and complex sentences that include misspelt words with little reduction in performance. The most notable
example of this is that of garbled words, in which the internal letters are randomly transposed. Despite this, humans are
able to read them with high accuracy.
Some related work in the psycholinguistics literature include the work by Andrews (1996); Healy (1976); Shook et al.
(2012); McCusker et al. (1981). This cognitive ability of human beings has inspired some of the methods we describe
in Section 5.2.
Some researchers in the field of NLP have gained inspiration from lessons learnt in psycholinguistics, and have taken
advantage of these to devise models robust to misspellings. For example, characters that are graphically similar can be
interchanged without significantly affecting human reading comprehension (e.g., cl0sed for closed). This other intuition
has inspired some of the methods that we discuss in Section 5.5.
From a computational point of view, the study of misspellings would certainly benefit from the synergies with linguistics
and psycholinguistics. The cognitive abilities humans display represent a source of inspiration for methods dealing with
misspellings or the creation of adversarial attacks. As an example, consider spam emails in which the content is made
of garbled words or in which graphically similar characters have been replaced.
3.2
Under the Lens of NLP
Nor in the field of NLP is there a single, clear-cut definition of misspelling. Indeed, the same type of problem
(morphological error) is often expressed with different words, such as noise, typo, and spelling mistake.
4
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
The most common of these, along with misspelling, is noise, which is defined as any non-standard spelling variation
(Nguyen and Grieve, 2020). While this definition of noise may seem appropriate, any attempt to provide a universal
definition of misspellings would appear contrived and, above all, imprecise.
To tackle this issue and establish clear boundaries around the concept of misspelling, NLP researchers have proposed
various categorisations, which draw from different points of view: For example, from the perspective of the word
surface, from the point of view of the user who generated them, or pointing up to the methods used to generate misspelt
datasets in an experimental setting. Misspellings can be fine-grained, where multiple categories of misspellings are
defined in detail, or less fine-grained, where fewer, more representative categories are selected. This lack of uniformity,
among other things, complicates the search for relevant papers on the subject (which has indeed represented one of the
significant challenges we faced when developing this survey).
In this section, we cover some of the main categorisations of misspellings proposed in the literature. In doing so, we
note that the problem of misspelling can be approached from diverse viewpoints and thus there are multiple perspectives
on this matter. For example, Heigold et al. (2018) have established three categories based on the word surface:
• character swaps: nice →ncie, the position of two subsequent characters is exchanged;
• word scrambling: absolute →alusobte, the order of the characters is permuted with the exception of the first
and last one;
• character flipping: nice →nite, one character is replaced by another.
Belinkov and Bisk (2018) proposed an alternative classification of misspellings into two main categories based on the
dataset generation method:
• Natural misspellings: real misspellings that occur in real-world data;
• Synthetic misspellings: misspellings artificially generated by various algorithms and techniques.
Note that the differentiation between natural and synthetic misspellings does not establish a clear-cut boundary, as any
misspelling generated synthetically could plausibly occur naturally. Indeed, this distinction is functional to experimental
setups and was originally conceived with dataset generation in mind. What Belinkov and Bisk (2018) referred to as
natural misspellings actually involves lexical lists that provide context for the misspellings, which can be exploited to
artificially introduce natural-sounding misspellings into otherwise correct sentences. In such cases, we will refer to a
third category of hybrid misspelling, and reserve the term natural misspelling for real-world misspellings found in
actual data. Further aspects related to dataset generation will be discussed in Section 6.4.
Several other researchers, including van der Goot et al. (2018) and Nguyen and Grieve (2020), have emphasized the
user’s intention rather than focusing solely on the surface-level characteristics of misspelt words. They propose to
distinguish between intentional and unintentional misspellings. For instance, Nguyen and Grieve (2020) observed that
intentional misspellings, such as lengthening a word, are often used to add emphasis to an opinionated statement. An
example of this could be the use of the interjection wow in a context where the user wants to emphasize their surprise,
as in wooooooooooow. Furthermore, the categorisation of misspellings can be more or less fine-grained; in this respect,
van der Goot et al. (2018) have proposed as many as 14 different categories of misspellings, while Heigold et al. (2018)
have proposed only 3.
It is thus important to bear in mind that the variability in the terminologies and approaches to this topic—along with
the lack of a universal definition for this type of problem—represent one of the greatest challenges faced by NLP
researchers. As for our survey, we found it particularly useful to list the types of misspellings for dataset generation
(see Section 6.4).
4
How Serious is the Problem?
In principle, a straightforward way to eliminate misspellings is to simply run some Spelling Correction (SC) or Text
Normalization (TN) tools. SC and TN pursue a common goal: translating from non-standard language to normative
language. The distinction between them is subtle; SC is primarily intended to correct unintentional typos, while TN is
rather devoted to converting any non-conventional surface form (e.g., slang) into the standard one.
SC/TN tools are commonly employed as a pre-processing step in many industrial applications as a way to cope with
misspellings, while the core of the system is designed to work with clean text. (Such an approach represents the simplest
scenario within the so-called double-step methods that will be surveyed in Section 5.3.) A legitimate question that arises
is the following: Can we simply rely on SC/TN tools and consider the problem solved?
5
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
As the reader might have wondered, the answer is no. According to Plank (2016), non-standard (or non-canonical)
language is rather a complex matter; there is no commonly agreed definition of what a misspelling is, nor what makes a
text be considered normalised. As an example, Plank (2016) demonstrates that there is no unique standard form for
spelling variations such as labor in American English and labour in British English. As a result, an NLP system should
be able to process them both forms without any significant difference in performance. Furthermore, text normalisation
can introduce undesirable effects, such as the removal of dialectical traits that can be of help in task-specific contexts.
For instance, in literary contexts, preserving a character’s role might require translating a dialectal expression in the
source language into a similar dialectal expression in the target language. Finally, psycholinguistics studies suggest
humans are capable of processing misspellings without significant effort (Andrews, 1996; Rayner et al., 2006; McCusker
et al., 1981). By removing misspellings as a pre-processing step we lose the opportunity to better comprehend how
natural language is processed, and how to improve automated NLP tools accordingly.
A second, legitimate question is Can we simply ignore the phenomenon?. This section is devoted to answering this
question. Throughout it, we offer a comprehensive review of past efforts devoted to quantifying the extent to which
vanilla systems’ performance degrades when in the presence of misspellings. This performance decay is typically large,
and is typically assessed with respect to artificial and natural misspellings (Baldwin et al., 2013; Belinkov and Bisk,
2018).
Note that the work presented in this section focuses on measuring the impact of misspellings in methods that do not
make any attempt to counter them. Systems specifically designed to be robust against misspellings will be described in
Section 5, while datasets and techniques for generating misspellings will be covered in more detail in Section 6.
4.1
The Harm of Synthetic Misspellings
Synthetic misspellings are the most commonly employed type of misspelling in the related literature. The problem
was partially dismissed by Agarwal et al. (2007), who tested traditional classifiers (SVM and Naive-Bayes) using
bag-of-words representations, against misspellings generated using an automatic tool (dubbed SpellMess) which
considers insertions, deletions, substitutions, and QWERTY errors,4 in two well-known datasets for text classification
(Reuters-21578 and 20 Newsgroups). Their results show that even moderately high levels of noise (affecting up to
40% of the words) did not affect classification accuracy as much as expected. The authors conjectured that this can be
explained by the fact that many of the features affected by noise are rather uninformative, and that when classifying by
topic, abundant patterns still remain in the rest of the training data, even at high levels of noise.
Quite some time later, Belinkov and Bisk (2018) confronted various char-based and BPE-based5 encoded neural
translators with synthetic misspellings in what has then come to be considered a milestone paper in the field.
Their results demonstrated that all machine translation models were significantly affected by the presence of synthetic
misspellings.6 This paper became influential and has served to raise awareness on the problem of misspellings.
Inspired by the latter, Naik et al. (2018) conducted robustness experiments on Natural Language Inference (NLI) models
using different types of synthetic misspellings, such as swapping adjacent characters or inserting QWERTY errors. The
authors designed a stress test to assess whether the qualitative result of NLI models are driven not only by strong pattern
matching but also by genuine natural language understanding procedures. The paper goes on by demonstrating that the
performance of NLI models, built on top of BiLSTMs and Word2Vec, declines when misspellings are inserted in the
test set.
Heigold et al. (2018) carried out experiments considering different types of synthetic noise on the tasks of morphological
tagging and machine translation and using different types of encodings, including word-based, character-based, and
BPE-based ones. In their experiments, different models were trained independently on different variants of the training
set, including clean, the original set without misspellings; scramble, obtained by permuting the order of the characters
with the exception of the first and last one in each word; swap@10, that randomly swaps 10% of subsequent characters;
and flip@10, that randomly replaces 10% of the characters with another one. Every pair of (system, training set variant)
was tested against similar variants generated out of the test set. The results show the performance of all tested models
degrades noticeably when exposed to synthetic misspellings different from those on which the system was trained on.
BERT, the popular transformer model proposed by Devlin et al. (2019), has garnered a great deal of attention due to its
ability to deliver state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of NLP tasks. Given its success, several studies have
4Characters substitutions governed by the proximity of the keys in a QWERTY layout, see Section 6.4.2.
5Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) is an encoding method operating at the subword level. Pairs of tokens that appear together frequently
are grouped together, and encoded using a new token.
6In their experiments, Belinkov and Bisk (2018) also considered hybrid misspellings (these are discussed later in Section 4.2),
showing the harm of synthetic misspellings to be more serious than that caused by hybrid misspellings.
6
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
focused on analysing the sensitivity of BERT-based models to misspellings. Yang and Gao (2019) tested Vanilla BERT
(i.e., a raw instance of BERT that does not implement any specific method to counter misspellings) in both extrinsic
(customer review and question answering) and intrinsic (semantic similarity) tasks. To this aim, the authors employed
both word-level noise (i.e., noise involving the addition or removal of entire words from a sentence) as well as various
types of misspellings, showing that misspellings are significantly more detrimental to BERT than word-level noise.
Kumar et al. (2020) confronted BERT against QWERTY misspellings at various probabilities. The scope of this work
was to quantify the extent to which the presence of misspellings harms the performance of a fine-tuned BERT in the
tasks of sentiment analysis (on IMDb and SST-2 datasets) and textual similarity (STS-B dataset).
Their results demonstrated that BERT is highly sensitive to this type of misspelling, even at low rates.
Moradi and Samwald (2021) carried out a systematic evaluation of BERT and other language models (RoBERTa, XLNet,
ELMo) in different tasks (text classification, sentiment analysis, named-entities recognition, semantic similarity, and
question answering) considering different types of synthetic misspellings. Their results confirm that the performance
of all tested models degrades noticeably for all tasks and types of misspelling. For instance, RoBERTa experiences a
significant decrease in performance, with a loss of 33% accuracy in text classification and a 30% decrease in accuracy
in sentiment analysis.
Ravichander et al. (2021) conducted an evaluation assessment of the effect of misspellings on question-answering
performance, considering various state-of-the-art language models (BiDAF, BiDAF-ELMo, BERT, and RoBERTa). The
authors of this study focused on errors induced by specific input interfaces (such as translation, audio transcription,
or keyboard) and devised ways for generating synthetic misspellings that represent these errors. The experiments
conducted revealed a significant decrease in performance across all models for all types of noise, with F1 drops ranging
from 6.1 to 11.7 depending on the nature of the affected words. Additionally, their results indicated that the harm of
synthetic misspellings is generally more pronounced than that caused by natural misspellings.
Both Liu et al. (2019) and Röttger et al. (2021) evaluate model performance on difficult data distributions including
misspellings. Liu et al. (2019) introduce a method called inoculation by fine-tuning which involves creating normal
and challenging versions of both training and test sets. The model is initially trained on the normal set and tested on
both versions. If the performance is high on the normal set but low on the challenging set, the model is then fine-tuned
using the challenging training set. This approach helps to determine whether the issue lies with the model itself or the
original training data. If the model’s performance improves with this fine-tuning, it suggests that data augmentation
could be sufficient for the model to generalize better. The method was applied to NLI datasets (some proposed in Naik
et al. (2018)) and involved two models: the ESIM model of Chen et al. (2017) and the decomposable attention model
of Parikh et al. (2016). The results revealed that all the tested models struggle with synthetic misspellings, even if
fine-tuned.
Röttger et al. (2021) tested the effectiveness of previously trained hate speech detection models when in the presence of
misspellings. Specifically, the models are evaluated on 29 functional classes including categories such as hate expressed
using denied positive statement and denouncements of hate that quote it. This approach allows for very detailed results
on the model’s ability to detect different types of hate speech. Among the 29 classes, 5 are related to the presence of
misspellings (called spelling variations in the paper). The models tested include BERT, Google’s Perspective, and
TwoHat’s SiftNinja. The results revealed all models struggle to handle misspellings, but the model Perspective fared
significantly better than the others.
4.2
The Harm of Natural Misspellings
Naturally occurring misspellings are invaluable resources for testing NLP applications in real-world settings (Baldwin
et al., 2013; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018). However, they are rarely employed in practice since collecting natural
misspellings is anything but a simple task. As we have already pointed out, there is a lack of consensus on what
precisely a natural misspelling is and, despite the fact that some domains of information (like user-generated content)
are known to be prone to naturally generate misspellings, other authors have taken as natural misspellings different
phenomena, like the errors generated by second language learners (Náplava et al., 2021) or by OCR scans (Vinciarelli,
2005). The root of this discrepancy can be traced back to the definition of domain itself; according to Plank (2016),
real-world data emerge as complex interactions of many more dimensions (language, genre, group of age, etc.) than
what we can realistically anticipate in an experimental setting.
Previous studies related to the analysis of natural misspellings are often devoted to understanding which types of
misspellings are more likely to occur in which domains (Plank, 2016; Baldwin et al., 2013). For example, Baldwin et al.
(2013) compared the rate of out-of-vocabulary terms (as a proxy of the number of misspellings) expected to be found in
texts as a function of how curated these texts are. The results were arranged in an ordinal scale of increasing levels of
7
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
curation: tweets, comments, forums, blogs, Wikipedia articles, and documents from the British National Corpus. In
their study, the authors took into account some lexical units like the word length, the sentence length, and the rates of
out-of-vocabulary terms, finding out interesting direct correlations between the level of formality of the text and the
average word and sentence length, with an anti-correlated rate of out-of-vocabulary terms. The same study analysed the
perplexity of language models when processing different types of text. The results show that models trained and tested
in similar domains (hence close to each other in terms of the degree of formality) tend to display lower perplexity. For
example, a model trained on tweets (highly informal) shows a much lower perplexity when used to process blog forums
(somehow informal), than when used to process Wikipedia articles (highly formal).
Nguyen and Grieve (2020) studied how robust different word embedding techniques (such as word2vec variants
and FastText) are to deviations from conventional spelling forms (including misspellings among others) typical of
social-media content. Using two datasets from Reddit and Twitter, the authors found that even techniques that are not
specifically designed to take into account spelling variations (like the word2vec’s skip-gram model) manage to capture
them to some extent. Interestingly enough, the authors draw a connection between intentional spelling variations
(like an elongated word goooood) and performance, suggesting that these variations typically arise in well-controlled
situations acting as a form of sentiment markers and, for this reason, models are somehow able to make sense out of
them. This is in contrast to unintentional misspellings, which are haphazardly distributed and tend thus to be harder to
handle.
In addition to synthetic misspellings, Agarwal et al. (2007) carried out experiments on natural misspellings. To this
aim, the authors used datasets from user-generated content, including logs from call centres, emails, and SMS. Their
results suggest that real noise in user-generated content exhibits some patterns, attributable to the consistent usage of
abbreviations and the repetition certain users do of specific errors. The results showed the models tested (SVM and
Naive-Bayes) performed better than when confronted with synthetic misspellings (see Section 4.1).
In a similar vein, Ravichander et al. (2021) conducted experiments not only using synthetic misspellings (see Section 4.1)
but also natural ones, in the context of question answering using the XQuAD dataset as a reference. The authors
considered two types of natural misspellings: keyboard misspellings and automatic speech recognition (ASR) noise. For
keyboard misspellings, natural misspellings were created by asking people to retype XQuAD questions without being
able to correct their input when they made a mistake. For ASR, natural noise was created by reading and transcribing
every question three times, by three different persons. The experiments showed a noticeable decrease in performance
across all tested models (BiDAF, BiDAF-ELMo, BERT, and RoBERTa) for all types of noise. However, synthetic
misspellings appeared, on average, to be slightly more problematic than natural ones. Among the types of natural
noise, the one generated via ASR was found to be the most harmful. RoBERTa, the top-performing model of the lot,
experienced a decay of 8% terms in F1 when confronted with such misspellings.
The study by Benamar et al. (2022) provides a detailed evaluation of how state-of-the-art subword tokenizers handle
misspelt words. Specifically, they investigated two French versions of BERT (FlauBERT and CamemBERT) against
natural misspellings originating in three different domains (medical, legal, and emails). To test the tokenization of
misspellings, the authors randomly extracted 100 misspelt words from each corpus and paired them with their correct
forms. The test was conducted by measuring the cosine similarity between tokens generated for the misspelt and clean
terms. In all three domains, the average similarity was very low (19% in the legal domain, 39% in the medical domain,
and 27% in the email domain). The authors also observed that incorporating POS tagging information drastically helped
to improve performance. For example, CamemBERT scored 92% of averaged cosine similarity in the email domain
with the aid of POS tags.
As recalled from Section 3.2, aside from the synthetic and natural misspellings, there is a third type of misspelling
called hybrid that refers to real misspellings that have been artificially injected in different contexts for evaluation
purposes (more on this in Section 6.4.3). To our knowledge, the only published record that employs hybrid misspellings
to quantify the performance impact on systems that do not handle them is that of Belinkov and Bisk (2018). In
their study, words from error correction databases (such as Wikipedia edits and second language learner corrections)
were injected into the IWSLT 2016 machine translation dataset. While hybrid misspellings had less of an impact on
machine translation tasks compared to synthetic misspellings, Belinkov and Bisk (2018) noted that hybrid and natural
misspellings are more challenging to evaluate in a rigorous manner.
5
Methods
In this section we offer a comprehensive overview of previous efforts devoted to counter misspellings. We organise
existing methods according to the following categorisation:
8
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
• Data augmentation (Section 5.1): methods that enhance the training set with perturbed signals to develop
resiliency to them. This group can be further divided into two sub-categories:
– Generalized data augmentation approaches (Section 5.1.1)
– Adversarial training approaches (Section 5.1.2)
• Character-order-invariant representations (Section 5.2): methods devoted to counter one specific type of
misspelling caused by variations in the natural order of the characters.
• Double step (Section 5.3): techniques that carry out a step of spelling correction (step 1) before solving the
final task (step 2).
• Tuple methods (Section 5.4): methods that, in order to train a model,
use a list of misspellings each annotated with the corrected surface form.
• Other methods (Section 5.5): relevant techniques that do not squarely belong to any of the above categories.
5.1
Data Augmentation
One of the earliest attempts for addressing the problem of misspellings in NLP comes down to expanding the training
set with misspelt instances, so that the model learns to deal with them during training.
Although data augmentation techniques typically lead to direct improvements, there are important limitations worth
mentioning. Augmenting the training set entails an additional cost, sometimes derived from complex techniques that
seek to uncover the weaknesses of the model. Yet another important limitation regards its circumscription to a limited
frame time. The misspelling phenomenon is not stationary, since language is in constant evolution. Additionally,
data augmentation typically over-represents certain types of misspellings, thus injecting sampling selection bias into
the model (i.e., the prevalence of the phenomena represented in the training set widely differ with respect to the
prevalence expected for the test data as a result of a selection policy). Finally, misspellings consist of different character
combinations, making it nearly impossible to achieve comprehensive coverage.
We first review a direct application of data augmentation strategies to the problem of misspellings (Section 5.1.1)
and then move to describing methods that use a specific kind of generation procedure based on adversarial training
(Section 5.1.2)
5.1.1
Generalized Data Augmentation
To the best of our knowledge, the first attempt to cope with misspellings by means of data augmentation is by Heigold
et al. (2018). The methodology consists in analysing the type of misspellings that most harmed the performance of
a machine translator, and insert similar occurrences in the training set. In a similar vein, Belinkov and Bisk (2018)
injected misspellings of various types in a parallel corpus, including the full permutation, characters swapping, middle
permutation, and insertion of QWERTY errors. Information about how precisely these misspellings are individuated,
and about other types of misspellings is available in Section 6.4 devoted to datasets.
Data augmentation has been extensively applied to the problem of machine translation (Vaibhav et al., 2019; Karpukhin
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2019; Li and Specia, 2019; Passban et al., 2021) as a means to confer resiliency to misspellings
to the models (for the most part, char-based neural approaches). For example, Vaibhav et al. (2019) augment the training
instances of French and English languages in the EP dataset (see Section 6.4) by using the MTNT dataset of Michel and
Neubig (2018) (see Section 6.4).
Noise is injected by randomly adding or deleting characters, and randomly adding emoticons and stop words in order to
simulate noise and grammatical errors.
Karpukhin et al. (2019) experimented with four different types of misspellings, correspondingly generated by deleting,
inserting, substituting, and swapping characters, that were applied to 40% of the training instances for Czech, German,
and French source languages. Some authors have investigated the idea of backtranslation (i.e., reversing the natural
direction of the translation, thus translating from the target language to the source language) as a mechanism to generate
additional data. The idea is to generate the source translation-equivalent in domains in which resources for the target
language are more abundant. The final goal is thus to enhance the source data and to inject misspellings so that a
machine translation model resilient to misspellings can be later trained (Zheng et al., 2019; Li and Specia, 2019).
In particular, Zheng et al. (2019) applied this technique to social media content for English-to-French, based on the
observation that training data for this social media rarely contain misspellings in the target side, or do so in very limited
quantities. They used additional techniques to expand the training set, including the use of out-of-domain documents
(they considered the domain of news) along with their automatic translations.
9
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Similarly, Li and Specia (2019) combined the idea of backtranslation with a method called Fuzzy Matches (Bulté and
Tezcan, 2019). Fuzzy Matches takes as input a parallel corpus and a monolingual dataset and, for each sentence in the
monolingual dataset, searches for the most similar ones in the parallel corpus, and returns the translation equivalent (i.e.,
its parallel view) as a potential translation for the original sentence. This method was applied to a monolingual corpus
containing misspellings either backwards (this happens when the monolingual corpus is from the target language) and
forward (this happens when the monolingual corpus is from the source language), thus generating (clean) translation
approximations of noisy data. They combined this heuristic with a method to generate a monolingual corpus based on
generating automatic transcriptions from audio files (using the so-called Automatic Speech Recognition software), in
the hope that these transcriptions would eventually contain misspellings.
A different approach for developing resiliency to misspellings is the so-called fine-tuning approach that, in the context of
machine translation, comes down to using a pre-trained translator model (typically trained on clean data) and performing
additional epochs of training using source instances with injected misspellings (Namysl et al., 2020). Passban et al.
(2021) experimented with a variant to this approach, called Target Augmented Fine-Tuning (TAFT), that consists of
concatenating, at the end of the target sentence, the correct spelling of the misspelt term of the source sentence. The
idea is to condition the model not only to produce the target sentence but also to discover the correct spelling of the
affected source word.
Data augmentation has been applied to problems other than machine translation as well. For example, Namysl et al.
(2020) propose a mechanism for generating misspelt entries for the tasks of named entity recognition (NER) and neural
sequence labelling (NSL) characters of the words in a sentence as follows. Given a word w = (c1, . . . , cn) consisting
of n characters, a pseudo-character ϵ is inserted before every character and after the last one, thus obtaining a new token
w = (ϵ, c1, ϵ, c2, ϵ, . . . , cn, ϵ). For example, given the word spell, a token ϵ s ϵ p ϵ e ϵ l ϵ l ϵ is created. Subsequently,
a few of these characters are randomly chosen and replaced with another character randomly drawn from a certain
probability distribution (called the character confusion matrix) that also includes ϵ in its domain. For example, two
possible derivations would be (note the underlined characters):
(i) ϵ s ϵ p ϵ e ϵ l ϵ l ϵ →ϵ s m p ϵ e ϵ l ϵ l ϵ
(ii) ϵ s ϵ p ϵ e ϵ l ϵ l ϵ →ϵ s ϵ p ϵ e ϵ l ϵ ϵ ϵ
Finally, all the remaining pseudo-characters are removed. In our example, this would give rise to the words (i) smpell,
and (ii) spel, respectively.
5.1.2
Adversarial Training
A different, related strategy for augmenting the data is by means of adversarial training. There are two main types of
adversarial training that have been applied to the problem of misspellings:
1. White-box setting: Resiliency to misspellings is attained by adopting a perturbation-aware loss as the objective
function of a specific model.
2. Black-box setting: A general-purpose model is trained to develop robustness to adversarial samples.
Li et al. (2019a) propose TEXTBUGGER, a method to generate misspellings by means of adversarial attacks. The method
first searches for the most influential sentences (those for which the classifier returns the highest confidence scores) and
then identifies the most important words in each such sentence (those that, if removed, would lead to a change in the
classifier output). These words are altered by injecting misspellings either in training and in test documents. Zhou et al.
(2020) generate adversarial examples via a loss-aware perturbation (hence, in a white-box setting) following Goodfellow
et al. (2015), i.e., a perturbation to the input optimised for damaging the loss of the model. Their neural model was
dubbed Robust Sequence Labelling (RoSeq), and was applied to the problem of named-entity recognition (NER). The
idea is to optimise both for the original model’s loss and for the perturbation loss, simultaneously. Note that in this case,
there is no explicit augmentation of training data, but rather an implicit regularisation in the loss function that carries out
the adversarial training approach. Cheng et al. (2019) applied a similar idea but in the context of machine translation.
The method is called Doubly Adversarial Input since, in this case, the perturbation is applied both to the source and
to the target sentences. The most influential words in a sentence (hence, the candidates to perturb) are identified by
searching for possible replacements that, if used in place of the original word, would yield the maximum (cosine)
distance in the embedding space with respect to the original vector. The set of candidate words that are electable for
this replacement is made of words that are likely to occur in place of the original one according to a language model
trained for the source or target language, correspondingly. For the target sentences, this set is further expanded with
words that the translator model itself considers likely. Later on, Park et al. (2020) extended this idea to the concept of
subwords and their segmentation (see also Kudo and Richardson, 2018).
10
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
5.2
Character-Order-Agnostic Methods
There is abundant evidence from the psycho-linguistics literature indicating that humans are able to read garbled text
(i.e., text in which the character-order within words is rearrangement, often called scrambled) without major difficulties,
as long as the first and last letters remain in place, as in, The chatrecras in tihs sencetne hvae been regarraned. (see, e.g.,
Andrews, 1996; Rayner et al., 2006; McCusker et al., 1981). This is not true for computational language models relying
on current representation mechanisms, though (Heigold et al., 2018; Yang and Gao, 2019). Character-order-agnostic
methods (Sakaguchi et al., 2017; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018; Malykh et al., 2018; Sperduti et al., 2021) gain inspiration
from these observations and propose different mechanisms that defy the need for representing the internal order of the
characters; Figure 2 depicts this intuition.
The earliest published work we are aware of is by Sakaguchi et al. (2017). Their model, called the Semi-Character
Recurrent Neural Network (ScRNN), represents the first and last characters of a word as separate one-hot vectors, while
the internal characters are encoded as a bag-of-characters, i.e., a juxtaposition of one-hot vectors where character order
is disregarded. The model was applied specifically to spelling correction, rather than to any particular downstream
application. ScRNN was adopted as the first stage of a double-step method by Pruthi et al. (2019) (covered in
Section 5.3).
Later on, Belinkov and Bisk (2018) proposed a representation mechanism, called meanChar, that was tested in machine
translations contexts. In particular, the representation comes down to averaging the character embeddings of a word,
and then using a word-level encoder, along the lines of the CharCNN proposed by Kim (2014).
Malykh et al. (2018) proposed
Robust Word Vectors (RoVe), a method that generates three vector representations out of each word: the Begin (B),
Middle (M), and End (E) vectors. These vectors correspond to the juxtaposition of the one-hot vectors of certain
characters in a word. For example, given the word previous, B is the sum of the one-hot vectors of the first three
characters (pre), E is the sum of the one-hot vectors of the last three characters (ous), while M sums the one-hot vectors
of all characters in the word (and not only of the remaining central characters, as the name may suggest). The method
showed promising results in three different languages including Russian, English, and Turkish, and in three different
tasks including paraphrase detection, sentiment analysis, and identification of textual entailment.
Sperduti et al. (2021) proposed a pre-processing trick, called BE-sort, to tackle the problem. The method comes down
to alphabetically sorting all middle characters of a word, excluding the first and the last character, so that the original
word itself (e.g., embedding) as well as any potentially garbled variant of it (e.g., edbemindg, ebmeinddg, etc.), would
end up being represented by the exact same surface token (e.g., ebddeimng). This pre-processing is not only applied to
the words in the training corpus, but also to every future test word. Word embeddings learned by using Skip-gram with
negative sampling on a BE-sorted variant of the British National Corpus were found to perform almost on par, across 17
standard intrinsic tasks, with respect to word embeddings learned on the original corpus, and much better than word
embeddings learned on variants of this corpus in which words were garbled at different probabilities.
5.3
Double-Step with Text Normalization
As the name suggests, double-step methods tackle any task by performing two subsequent steps: first, a task-agnostic
text normalization step addresses and corrects any misspellings in the input text; second, the actual task of interest is
performed, with the assumption that the input is now error-free. Since the first step removes misspellings from the
source text, some authors have suggested that double-step methods represent the opposite of data-augmentation-based
approaches (Plank, 2016).
Figure 2: Conceptualization of an order-agnostic representation for garbled words. Dotted lines denote garbled variants
of the original word, on the top. Solid lines denote an order-agnostic representation of a surface form word. If all
characters (but the first and last) are represented as a set, then the representation of the original word and the garbled
variants coincide.
11
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
There are two main strategies for implementing double-step methods. The first one, that we could call the independent
approach, in which the error correction step is carried out independently from the second, task-specific step, that
receives the cleaned input. The second one, that we call the end-to-end approach, instead considers the correction step
and the task-specific step as dependent, and optimises both jointly.
While the double-step strategy is certainly the most straightforward and generic one, it loses any opportunity to learn
from the type of misspellings that might characterise the specific task at hand. For example, in tasks like native language
identification or authorship profiling, analysing the misspellings someone is prompt to produce could certainly bring to
bear useful information to uncover their nationality, or the true identity, of the author of an unknown document. For
example, cleaning all QWERTY errors from a document, as in to allñow →to allow, would preclude to draw insights
on the type of keyboard layout the author of a document was using; in this case, the mistake seems to suggest that the
subject was using a Spanish layout (where character ñ is typically placed just to the right of character l), and this in turn
brings evidence towards the fact that the unknown person comes from any Spanish-speaking region.
Aside from these considerations, double-step methods also lose the opportunity to learn from the linguistic phenomenon
of misspellings itself. For example, the observation that garbling the middle letters of a word does not impede a
human to comprehend a text seems to suggest that the way we humans process text does not take character order
into much consideration, opening the gates for investigating new, hopefully more efficient, end-to-end representation
mechanisms for encoding text or training language models. This, along with the fact that there is no precise definition
of what text normalisation or related concepts like spelling correction are exactly, makes double-step methods arguably
represent the least interesting approach to the scientific community (Plank, 2016). Nevertheless, double-step methods
are straightforward solutions, and are customarily employed in industry Bhargava et al. (2017).
Pruthi et al. (2019) adopted a variant of ScRNN (covered in Section 5.2) as the first step of a double-step strategy applied
to the problem of sentiment analysis and part-of-speech tagging. The variant implements heuristics for handling the
unknown tokens (typically denoted by UNK) that ScRNN produces whenever it encounters an out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
word (i.e., words that were not considered during the training phase). In particular, three mechanisms are explored: (i)
pass-through, in which the UNK token is replaced by the original OOV term; (ii) back-off to neutral, in which the UNK
token is replaced by a word that has a neutral value for the classification task; and (iii) back-off to a background model,
in which another, more generic (hence less suitable for the task), spelling corrector is invoked in place of ScRNN.
Kurita et al. (2019) propose the Contextual Denoising Autoencoder. The Autoencoder receives in input the incorrect
version of a textual token (e.g., wrod, incorrect spell of word) and predicts its denoised version in the output (e.g., word)
by leveraging contextual information. The base architecture that Kurita et al. (2019) employed is a transformer model.
To embed words, Kurita et al. (2019) exploited the CNN encoder of ELMO. Both Li et al. (2021) and Passban et al.
(2021) propose methods for machine translation that take into account error correction in an end-to-end manner. Both
approaches resort to an auxiliary task based on a double decoder for correcting the input. Given the noisy instance x′,
the decoder is trained to produce its translated version y, while the correction decoder is trained to regenerate x, the
clean version of x′. The two decoders are jointly optimised by means of a weighted loss, that takes into account the
translation error and the reconstruction loss simultaneously.
5.4
The Tuple-Based Methods
Although the intuitions behind tuple-based methods are variegated, these methods find a common ground in the way
training instances are represented. The two most common approaches are tuples of the form (x, x′), in which x and x′
represent a clean and misspelt instance, respectively, and triplets of the form (x, x′, y) in which y is a task-dependent
specification of the desired output (e.g., a translation of x). The instances can be words, sentences, or any other lexical
unit.
Alam and Anastasopoulos (2020) used a tuple-based method to endow a transformer-based machine translator with
resiliency to misspellings. To do so, they resorted to a dataset originally designed for grammatical error correction and
consisting of tuples (x, x′), with x′ a misspelt version of the sentence x. The idea is to generate translations of x to
create new tuples (x′, y) in which the misspelling-free translation y is presented as the desired output for the misspelt
input x′; tuples thus created are then used to fine-tune a transformer model.
Zhou et al. (2019) proposed a cascade model based on triples for machine translation. Given a triplet (x, x′, y) (in which
x, x′, and y are defined as before), the model combines two auto-encoders sequentially: the first one is a denoising
auto-encoder that receives x as the expected output for input x′, while the second one is a translation decoder that
receives y as the expected output for the encoded representations of x and x′.
Edizel et al. (2019) propose Misspelling Oblivious word Embeddings (MOE), a variant of FastText (Joulin et al., 2017;
Bojanowski et al., 2017) which, in turn, is a variant of the CBOW architecture of WORD2VEC (Mikolov et al., 2013)
12
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
that endows the architecture with the ability to model subword information. The idea is to enhance the loss function of
FastText with a component that favours the embeddings of subwords from misspelt terms to be close to the embedding
of the correct term. To this aim, the authors created a dataset of word tuples (x, x′) by relying on a probabilistic error
model that captures the probability of mistakenly typing a character c′ when the intended character was c by taking into
account the entire word and its context. The probabilistic model was developed using an internal query log of Facebook.
Closely related, Doval et al. (2019) propose a modification of the Skip-Gram with Negative Sampling (SGNS)
architecture of WORD2VEC (Mikolov et al., 2013) based on triplets of the form (w, w′, bj), where bj is the j-th word
in a set of bridge words, and w′ is a misspelt version of word w. The intuition behind bridge words is as follows.
Consider the occurrence of a word friend in a document that also contains the misspelt form frèinnd in similar contexts;
consider, for example, the sentence my friend is tall and my frèinnd is tall. The method first pre-processes the text
by eliminating double letters and accents. In our example, frèinnd would thus become freind (note that two letters
remain still swapped). Then, two sets of bridge words are generated, each containing all the words that would result
from eliminating one single character from friend and freind, respectively. In our example, this would lead to one
set of bridge words for the clean word friend, i.e., {riend, fiend, frend, frind, fried, frien}, and another one for the
misspelt word freind, i.e., {reind, feind, frind, freid, frein}. All the words included in the union of both bridge words
sets are then given as input to the SGNS model, which is requested to predict the target context (my, is, tall). The name
bridge words refers to the fact that there are common elements at the intersection of both sets of variants thus created
(e.g., {frind}) which act as bridges between the correct and the misspelt variant. Some limitations of this method
include the possibility to generate bridge words that collide with other existing words (for example fiend), and the
increased computational cost that derives from the generation of potentially many new training instances. To counter
these problems, the authors propose some heuristics, like generating bridge words only for a limited number of terms,
and to limit the impact of the bridge words during training.
5.5
Other Methods
This section is devoted to discuss relevant related methods that do not belong to any of the aforementioned groups.
Papers in this section include ideas as variegate as experimental encodings (Jones et al., 2020; Sankar et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2020; Salesky et al., 2021), regularisation functions (Li et al., 2016), and contrastive learning (Sidiropoulos and
Kanoulas, 2022; Chen et al., 2022).
Jones et al. (2020) propose Robust Encoding (RobEn), a (context-free) encoding technique that maps a word (e.g., bird)
along with its possible misspellings (e.g., brid, bidr, etc.) to the same token, so that the variability among these surface
forms becomes indistinguishable to the downstream model. Unique tokens therefore represent clusters of terms and
typos. The authors study means for obtaining these clusters, and analyse the impact of different clustering strategies in
terms of stability (measures the resiliency to perturbations) and fidelity (a proxy of the quality of the tokens in terms of
the expected performance in downstream tasks). An initial solution is proposed in which clusters are decided by seeking
for connected nodes in a graph in which nodes represent words from a controlled vocabulary, and in which edges
connect words that share a common typo. Such a solution is found to lead to very stable solutions, but at the expense of
fidelity. The final proposed method relies on agglomerative clustering, and searches for the clusters by optimising a
function that trades-off stability for fidelity. Sankar et al. (2021) propose a method based on Locality-Sensitive Hashing
(LSH). The final goal of LSH representations is to derive vectorial representations on-the-fly, thus reducing the memory
footprint traditional embedding matrices require. In a nutshell, LSH assigns a hash code (i.e., binary representation
much shorter than a standard one-hot encoding) to a word based on its n-grams, skip-grams, and POS tags, and derives
a vector representation as a linear combination of learnable (low dimensional) basis vectors. The intuition is that LSH
projections may lead to similar representations for clean and misspelt sentences, since this hashing is, by construction,
low sensitive to noise. The experiments reported in text classification and perturbation studies seem indeed to confirm
these intuitions.
Wang et al. (2020) experimented with visually-grounded embeddings of characters. The idea consists of generating
an image for every character (i.e., rastering a character in a specific font-type and font-size), thus obtaining a matrix
representation of it (the pixels of the image), that can directly be used as an embedded representation of the character.
The intuition is that visually similar characters (e.g., ‘o’, ‘O’, ‘0’) shall end up being represented by similar such
embeddings. The images (i.e., the character embeddings) are further reduced using PCA, and given as input to a
char-based CNN that acts as the encoder for a machine translation neural model. In a related study, Salesky et al. (2021)
explored visually-grounded representations of sliding windows (specifically, subword tokens) for machine translation.
This work was later used, by the same team of researchers, at the basis of PIXEL (Rust et al., 2023), a language model
that similarly processes text as a visual modality. PIXEL was trained using the ViT-MAE (He et al., 2022) architecture
on the same dataset used to train BERT, and demonstrated strong resilience to graphical misspellings, that is, cases
where characters visually similar.
13
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Li et al. (2016) investigate a special-purpose regularisation of the loss function that aims to confer resiliency to the
presence of misspellings. The regularisation terms gains inspiration from adversarial training in computer vision, and is
based on minimizing the Frobenius norm of the Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives of the outputs with respect to
the (perturbed) inputs. Although the method was found to work better than other regularisation techniques (including
dropout), the method was only tested against masking misspellings, i.e., against one specific type of noise consisting of
replacing random characters with a mask symbol. It thus remains to be seen the extent to which this regularisation
technique is of help when confronted with more general types of misspellings (e.g., swapping, garbling, deletion, etc.).
Sidiropoulos and Kanoulas (2022) studied ways for improving the performance of passage retrieval when the user
questions contain misspellings. The approach is based on a combination of data augmentation and contrastive learning in
dual-encoder architectures. The dual-encoder is based on BERT and is trained to rank, given a user question, the correct
passages higher than incorrect passages. The data augmentation strategy consists of randomly deciding when to issue a
clean question, or instead a misspelt variant of it, to the dual-encoder during training. The contrastive learning enforces
the original question to be closer to the typoed variant than to any other question in the dataset. The experimental
results prove that both data augmentation and contrastive learning help to improve the performance of passage retrieval,
and that these techniques work even better when combined. In a related paper, Chen et al. (2022) propose LOVE,
a contrastive method for learning out-of-vocabulary embeddings for misspellings, that enforces representations of
typoed words to be close to the representations BERT derive for the corresponding correct word. A related body of
papers has to do with the treatment of misspellings in the context of spam detection. Most of these papers belong to
the first era of misspellings (see Section 2.1). For example, Ahmed and Mithun (2004) and Renuka and Hamsapriya
(2010) rely on word stemming as a method to improve spam message detection, while Lee and Ng (2005) use a Hidden
Markov Model-based method to correct misspelt words before performing detection. Recent survey papers like those
by Crawford et al. (2015) and Wu et al. (2018) indicate that analysing the textual content of a spam message is only one
small part of the operations typically used for spam detection. In addition to text, other elements such as key segments
(e.g., URLs), patterns in usernames, account statistics, etc., are also worth considered.
14
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Ref.
Section
Class
Task
Misspelling
Model
Datasets
Metrics
Heigold et al. (2018)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine translation
Swap, Middle-Perm.
Char-based
CNN,
BPT CNN
WMT16, newstest 2016
BLEU
Belinkov and Bisk
(2018)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Full-Perm., Swap, QW-
ERTY
Char-based CNN
TED parallel corpus
BLEU
Vaibhav et al. (2019)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Add., Del.
Back-translation LSTM
MTNT, TED, EP
BLEU
Karpukhin
et
al.
(2019)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Swap, Del.
Char-based CNN
IWSLT
BLEU
Namysl et al. (2020)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Named
Entity
Recognition
Sequence Labeling
Full-Perm.,
Middle-Perm.,
Swap, QWERTY
BiLSTM-CRF
BERT, FLAIR,
ELMo, Glove
CoNLL 2003, 2004,
German Eval 2004
F1
Passban et al. (2021)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Add., Del.
BPE + Transformer
WMT-14,
newstest 2013, 2014
BLEU
Li and Specia (2019)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Various
Transformer
MTNT
BLEU
Zheng et al. (2019)
5.1.1
Data Augmentation
Machine Translation
Various
Transformer
WMT15,
KFTT,
TED parallel corpus, JESC,
MTNT
BLEU
Cheng et al. (2019)
5.1.2
Adversarial Training
Machine Translation
Various
Transformer
LDC,
NIST 2002-2008,
WMT14,
newstest 2013, 2014
BLEU
Park et al. (2020)
5.1.2
Adversarial Training
Machine Translation
Del., Add., Swap
Transformer
MTNT 2018, 2019,
IWSLT 2013, 2015, 2017
BLEU
Li et al. (2019a)
5.1.2
Adversarial Training
Text Classification
Adversarial
LR CNN LSTM
Rot. Tom. Mov. Rev. IMDB
Success
Rate
Accuracy
Zhou et al. (2020)
5.1.2
Adversarial Training
Named Entity Recog-
nition
Natural Misspellings
CNN LSTM HN
CoNLL 2002, 2003,
WNUT 2016, 2017
F1
Belinkov and Bisk
(2018)
5.2
Char-order agnostic
Machine Translation
Full-Perm., Middle-Perm.,
Swap, QWERTY
Char-based CNN
IWSLT 2016
BLEU
Malykh et al. (2018)
5.2
Char-order agnostic
Sentiment Analysis,
Text Entailment
Natural Misspellings
LSTM, SRU, CNN
Reuters RCV1,
Russian National Corpus,
Turkish “42 bin haber”
ROC AUC
Sakaguchi
et
al.
(2017)
5.2
Char-order agnostic
Grammatical
Error
Correction
Middle-Perm., Del., Add.
Char-based,
CNN, ScRNN
PT
Accuracy
Sperduti et al. (2021)
5.2
Char-order agnostic
Various
Full-Perm.,
Middle-
Perm.
Word2vec
British National Corpus
Various
Pruthi et al. (2019)
5.3
Double-step
Sentiment Analysis,
Paraphrase Detection
Swap, Add., Del.,
QWERTY
BERT, Bi-LSTM
Stanf. Sent. Tree., MRPC
Accuracy
Kurita et al. (2019)
5.3
Double-step
Text Classification
Full-Perm.
BERT, ELMO, FastText,
CDAE
Jigsaw 2018, 2019,
OffensEval 2019
Accuracy
Li et al. (2021)
5.3
Double-step
Machine Translation
Various
Transformer, GRU
flickr2017, mscoco2017
BLEU, METEOR
Passban et al. (2021)
5.3
Double-step
Machine Translation
Add., Del.
BPE + Transformer
WMT-14,
newstest 2013, 2014
BLEU
Alam and Anasta-
sopoulos (2020)
5.4
Tuple methods
Machine Translation
Various
Bart For
Conditional Generation
NUCLE,
FCE,
Lang8,
JFFLEG-ES
Various
Zhou et al. (2019)
5.4
Tuple methods
Machine Translation
Various
Transformer
TED, MTNT
BLEU
Edizel et al. (2019)
5.4
Tuple methods
Word Similarity
Other
FastText, MOE
Wikipedia,
WS353,
Rare Words,
Mikolov’s word analogy
Various
Doval et al. (2019)
5.4
Tuple methods
Various
Various
Word2vec, FastText
wordsim353,
SCWS,
SimLex999, SemEval17
Spear.
Jones et al. (2020)
5.5
Other methods
Various
Swap, Add., Del.
BERT
GLUE
Various
Sankar et al. (2021)
5.5
Other methods
Text
Classification,
Data Augmentation
Swap, Add., Del.
BERT, BiLSTM, SGNN,
ProSeqo
MRDA, SWDA, AR, YA
Accuracy
Wang et al. (2020)
5.5
Other methods
Machine Translation
Natural
Misspellings
(various types)
CNN-LSTM
IWSLT 2016
BLEU
Salesky et al. (2021)
5.5
Other methods
Machine Translation
Swap,
Full-Perm.,
Middle-Perm.
fairseq
MTTT TED, MTNT, WIPO,
WMT
BLEU
Li et al. (2016)
5.5
Other methods
Various
Other
CNN
Subj, CR, Stanf. Sent. Tree.,
Rot. Tom. Mov. Rev.
Accuracy
Sidiropoulos
and
Kanoulas (2022)
5.5
Other methods
Question Answering
Full-Perm.,
Middle-
Perm., QWERTY
BERT
MS MARCO,
Natural Questions
MMR,
Recall,
Top k-ranks
Chen et al. (2022)
5.5
Other methods
Sentiment Analysis,
Text
Classifica-
tion, Named Entity
Recognition,
Word
Similarity,
Word
Cluster
Swap, Del., Add., QW-
ERTY
FastText, MIMIC, BoS,
KVQ-FH, LOVE
Stanf. Sent. Tree. 2,
Rot. Tom. Mov. Rev.,
CoNNL 2003,
BC2GM,
Various Intrinsic Datasets
Accuracy, F1, Spear-
man, Purity
Table 1: Reference guide for the methods discussed in Section 5, along with tasks and misspellings addressed, type of
models, datasets, and metrics used in the evaluation.
15
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
6
Tasks, Evaluation Metrics, and Datasets
Misspellings affect written text in a broad sense, and thus no text-related application is at safe from these. However, the
phenomenon has been more actively investigated in particular contexts, with machine translation and text classification
being the most prolific such areas. Figure 3 gives an insight into how methods have been applied to which tasks at
the time of writing this survey. In this section, we turn to describe the most important tasks (Section 6.1) in which
misspellings have been investigated, by also discussing the most employed evaluation metrics (Section 6.2), dedicated
events (Section 6.3), and datasets (Section 6.4).
Figure 3: Distribution of methods (left) across tasks (right)
6.1
Main Tasks
The main tasks in which the phenomenon of misspellings has been more thoroughly investigated are listed below:
• Machine translation (MT) is a supervised learning task that involves producing a text in a target language that
is a translation equivalent of a text written in a different source language. With most modern MT systems
relying on neural networks, the field is nowadays broadly referred to as Neural Machine Translation (NMT).
Undoubtedly, NMT is the field in which more methods for misspellings have been applied. One possible
reason why this area has attracted a lot of attention may have to do with the appearance of two influential
papers by Belinkov and Bisk (2018) and Heigold et al. (2018) that brought the importance of misspellings in
MT to the fore.
Most methods to counter misspellings in NMT rely on data augmentation (Section 5.1); see, e.g., (Heigold
et al., 2018; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018; Vaibhav et al., 2019; Passban et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2019; Cheng
et al., 2019; Park et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Alam and Anastasopoulos, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Salesky
et al., 2021; Karpukhin et al., 2019).
• Text classification (TC) is the supervised learning task of assigning class labels to unseen documents (Sebastiani,
2002). While the class labels may virtually represent anything (e.g., from types of news, to opinion stance, to
characteristics of an author), the most important applications of TC for the concerns of this survey include
spam filtering and content moderation (Kurita et al., 2019). The use of misspellings in such contexts might
be deliberated and malicious, targeting specific relevant words so that they become unrecognisable for an
automatic detector (thus eluding any ban), but easily recognisable for the final recipient of the message. Some
relevant approaches focusing in TC include (Li et al., 2019a; Kurita et al., 2019; Sankar et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2022).
• Named entity recognition (NER) (Sang and De Meulder, 2003) is the task of identifying and categorising
(potentially multi-word) expressions referring to entities such as names, locations, and organisations, in text
(e.g., White House). Namysl et al. (2020) observed that humans can resolve NER even in the presence of
16
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
corrupted inputs, and studied automatic ways for developing NER systems resilient to misspellings. Some
techniques explored for NER include data augmentation (Namysl et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020) and contrastive
learning (Chen et al., 2022).
• Other downstream tasks tested in the field of misspellings include:
– Part-Of-Speech tagging (PoST), the task of labelling words with their correct morphosyntactic part-of-
speech (e.g., verb, noun, preposition, etc.).
– Paraphrase detection is the task of determining whether two given sentences have the same meaning or
not.
– Identification of textual entailment is the task of determining whether there is entailment, contradiction,
or no relation, between two given sentences.
– Question answering: is the task of providing natural language answers to natural language questions.
Influential papers that tested some of these tasks are: Malykh et al. (2018); Sidiropoulos and Kanoulas (2022);
Jones et al. (2020); Doval et al. (2019).
• Intrinsic tasks: misspellings have also been tested by means of problems carefully designed to probe the
capability of the system to cope with one specific language-related ability. Some of these include:
– Semantic word similarity, the task of identifying semantic relationships between words like cat and dog,
or tall and short (Lenci et al., 2021).
– Analogy completion, the task of inferring which, among a closed set of options, is the more likely missing
word from an incomplete analogy like Colosseo stands to Rome as the Buckingham Palace stands to . . .?
(Lenci et al., 2021).
– Outlier detection, the task of identifying the word from a set of candidates that bears less semantic
similarity to the rest of the terms in that set (Camacho-Collados and Navigli, 2016).
Methods that have been assessed in intrinsic tasks include those by Sperduti et al. (2021); Pruthi et al. (2019);
Edizel et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2022); Doval et al. (2019).
6.2
Evaluation Metrics
The most straightforward way to measure the robustness of a system to the presence of misspellings (and the way most
papers have indeed adhered to) comes down to simply confronting the performance a model scores with and without
noisy inputs, given a specific evaluation measure for a specific task.
That is, let m ∈M be a generic inference model m : X →Y issuing predictions ˆy ∈Y on textual inputs x ∈X, that
has been trained to perform any given downstream task (classification, translation, etc.), and let e : M×(X ×Y)n →R
be our evaluation measure (F1 score, BLEU score, etc.) of choice, i.e., any scoring function that takes as input a model
and a (labelled) test set, and computes a value reflecting the empirical goodness of m. The degradation in performance
due to the presence of misspellings can generally be estimated as the difference in performance:
e(m, {(xi, yi)}n
i=1) −e(m, {(˜xi, yi)}n
i=1)
where ˜xi is a misspelt variant of the (clean) input xi.
Such an evaluation strategy is generic enough as to apply to virtually any supervised task, and therefore has nothing
specific to do with any particular evaluation metric. Typical evaluation measures used in the tasks discussed in
Section 6.1 include, among others, BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) for machine
translation; precision, recall, and Fβ score for text classification and named entity recognition (van Rijsbergen, 1979);
Pearson correlation and Spearman correlation for intrinsic tasks (Lenci et al., 2021; Doval et al., 2019). An in-depth
survey of these and other specific evaluation metrics is out of the scope of this article.
A few metrics have been proposed by Anastasopoulos (2019) which are particularly suitable to measuring the robustness
of misspellings in the context of machine translation. These are based on the observation that any perfectly robust-to-
noise MT system would produce the exact same output for the clean and erroneous versions of the same input sentence.
The intuition is sketched as follows: let m∗be a perfect MT system; then m∗(x) should produce the same (correct)
prediction y∗as m∗(˜x), with ˜x a noisy variant of x. Such a perfect model is typically unavailable, but we might have a
reasonably good model m instead. System robustness is therefore estimated by computing the extent to which m(x)
produces outputs similar to m(˜x), even though such predictions might not be perfect. In light of this, Anastasopoulos
(2019) proposes the Robustness Percentage (RB) as:
RB = 100 × |{(x, ˜x) : m(x) = m(˜x)}(x,˜x)∈D|
|D|
(1)
17
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
where D is a dataset of pairs of correct and noisy inputs.
In the same paper, Anastasopoulos (2019) propose the Target-Source Noise Ratio (NR), a more fine-grained evaluation
measure that also accounts for the distance between x and ˜x, given that small differences would count just as much as
large differences for RB. Instead, NR tries to factor out this distance d, which is computed using a surrogate evaluation
metric like BLEU, or METEOR, for example. NR is defined as:
NR(m, x, ˜x) = d(m(x), m(˜x))
d(x, ˜x)
(2)
Anastasopoulos (2019) suggest reporting the mean NR across a all pairs x and ˜x contained in a dataset.
Michel et al. (2019) proposes a metric for evaluating adversarial attacks that requires access to the correct translation y∗.
The metric requires a similarity function s and is computed for each pair of inputs x and ˜x as follows:
A(m, x, ˜x, y∗) = s(x, ˜x) + s(m(x), y∗) −s(m(˜x), y∗)
s(m(x), y∗)
(3)
the adversarial attack is considered to be successful whenever A(m, x, ˜x, y∗) > 1; the metric therefore computes the
fraction of successful cases against all cases in a dataset.
6.3
Conferences and Workshops
The most important venues, including workshops, conferences, and shared tasks, that have been devoted to discussing
the problem of misspellings in NLP include:
• Workshop on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND): This workshop had five editions run
from 2007 to 2011. The main objective of AND was to gather papers discussing techniques for dealing with
noisy inputs. The notion of noisy inputs encompasses misspellings, but also grammatical error correction,
text normalisation, spelling correction, and any other form of noise affecting textual data as those generated
through speech recognition systems or OCR. The first workshop was co-located in the 2007 edition of the
Joint Conference of Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), although no proceedings seem to be available online. The
second edition was co-located at the SIGIR conference in the next year (Lopresti et al., 2008), followed by a
third edition co-located in the International Conference On Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR)
(Lopresti et al., 2009), and a fourth edition co-located in the International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management (CIKM) (Basili et al., 2010). The workshop then evolved as a Joint Workshop on
Multilingual OCR and Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (Dey et al., 2011) and was, to the best of
our knowledge, discontinued after that.
• Robustness task at the World Machine Translation (WMT) Conference: This task was first proposed in
2019 (Li et al., 2019b) and was later followed by a new edition in 2020 (Specia et al., 2020). To the best
of our knowledge, this is the only shared task specifically devoted to testing the MT systems’ resiliency to
misspellings. In both editions, the shared tasks focused on the same language pairs: English-French and
English-Japanese. In the first edition, the test set was constructed by applying the MTNT protocol (Michel
and Neubig, 2018) to data gathered from Reddit, while the previously existing datasets (WMT15 for the
English-French pair, and KFTT (Neubig, 2011), JESC (Pryzant et al., 2018), and TED Talks (Cettolo et al.,
2012) for the English-Japanese pair) were employed as the training set. The systems were evaluated by
professional translators as well as in terms of the BLEU score. In the second edition, the news dataset WMT20
was employed as the training set, while the test sets consisted of multiple sources, including Wikipedia and
Reddit comments, among others.
• Workshop on Noisy and User-Generated Text (W-NUT):7 this is an ongoing workshop series that started
in 2015, has been held every year (except 2023), with the last edition co-located at the EACL 2024; the
proceedings of all editions are published in the ACL Anthology. The workshop focuses on noisy-generated
content in social networks and is not exclusively devoted to misspellings. The workshop gathers papers dealing
with tasks as disparate as geolocalization prediction, global and regional trend detection and event extraction,
fairness and biases in NLP models, etc.
6.4
Datasets
In this section we turn to describe the most important types of datasets that have been used for training and evaluation
of systems dealing with misspellings in literature, with particular emphasis on the techniques that have been employed
7https://aclanthology.org/venues/wnut/
18
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
for generating them. Since misspellings are relatively infrequent in real texts (with varying levels of prevalence that
depend on the medium), the aim of these techniques is that of guaranteeing a relatively high number of misspellings in
the corpus, somehow akin to oversampling strategies often used in extremely imbalanced supervised scenarios. Broadly
speaking, these techniques can be grouped as belonging to the following categories:
• Natural misspellings (Section 6.4.1): techniques that collect real misspellings from textual data, i.e., errors that
occur spontaneously in user-generated (e.g., in social media, emails) or technologically-generated contexts
(e.g., optical character recognition, automatic transcription).
• Artificial misspellings (Section 6.4.2): techniques for generating synthetic misspellings out of the original
(clean) words from the texts in a dataset.
• Hybrid approach (Section 6.4.3): consists of using error correction databases (that is, databases in which real
misspellings have been labelled with the correct word) to inject misspellings in clean texts. The approach is
called hybrid since the misspellings being injected are real, but the injection itself is artificial.
6.4.1
Datasets of Natural Misspellings
This technique comes down to collecting real misspellings to form a dataset. Since real misspellings are relatively
infrequent, datasets of natural misspellings are generated by scanning large quantities of text and retaining those entries
in which some misspellings are identified.
The MTNT dataset (Michel and Neubig, 2018) represents, to the best of our knowledge, the only publicly available
resource devoted to collecting natural misspellings for research purposes. MTNT arises in the context of machine
translation and has come to represent a reference in the field (authors such as Park et al. (2020), Zhou et al. (2019),
Salesky et al. (2021), Vaibhav et al. (2019), among many others, used it as a testbed for their methods). The dataset
consists of four pairs of languages (French-English, English-French, Japanese-English, and English-Japanese), and
contains no less than 75,005 instances gathered from Reddit. Misspellings have been identified with the aid of text
normalisation tools, word vocabularies, and scores of perplexity generated by language models as judgments on the
feasibility of the texts given as input.
6.4.2
Datasets of Artificial Misspellings
Since misspellings affect written natural language in general, they potentially harm any textual application one could
think of. For this reason, when it comes to measuring the impact that misspellings cause in any downstream task, or
when training models that ought to be robust to them, it is customarily to simply take standard datasets routinely used
for these downstream tasks and produce variants of them that contain misspelt entries; this is the approach followed
by, e.g., Belinkov and Bisk (2018); Heigold et al. (2018); Sperduti et al. (2021); Passban et al. (2021). Given that the
phenomenon of misspellings is orthogonal to the downstream tasks in which they are studied, we refrain from listing
typical datasets customarily used across different disciplines (a glance at Table reveals many of them).
The most common strategy comes down to generating synthetic misspelt variants of the original words in a text. Some
techniques that have been proposed for this purpose (see, e.g., Moradi and Samwald, 2021; Belinkov and Bisk, 2018;
Kumar et al., 2020) and that have been reproduced in other papers are listed below. The terminology we use for naming
these types of misspellings is not standard in the literature but is, we believe, appropriate for describing them. A list of
methods with the types of misspellings they used is summarized succinctly in Table.
• FULL PERMUTATION: involves generating a new token by completely permuting the characters of a term, e.g.,
misspell →pseilmls.
• MIDDLE PERMUTATION: generates a new token by permuting all characters of a term except the first and last,
which remain in place, e.g., misspell →mpseisll. This is also known as garbling (Sperduti et al., 2021) or
scrambling (Heigold et al., 2018).
• SWAP: consists of choosing two adjacent characters at random from a word and interchanging their positions,
e.g. misspell →mispsell.
• QWERTY: consists in emulating typographical errors that are likely to arise when employing a QWERTY
layout, e.g. misspell →mi9sspell (note the key ‘9’ is placed nearby the key ‘i’ in this layout). This kind of
error is a special subtype of ADDITION (see below).
• ADDITION: comes down to adding one or more characters to the target word, e.g., misspell →missprell.
• DELETION: amounts to removing one or more characters from a word, e.g. misspell →mispell.
19
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
• SUBSTITUTION: consists of choosing one character at random from a word and replacing it with another
character, e.g., misspell →mrsspell.
Table 2: Types of misspellings applied in each paper. We included in this table only works that used synthetic
misspellings and that explicitly described the kind of misspellings used.
Papers
FULL PERM.
SWAP
MIDDLE PERM.
QWERTY
ADDITION
DELETION
SUBSTITUTION
Agarwal et al. (2007)
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
Li et al. (2016)
X
X
X
X
X
X
✓
Belinkov and Bisk (2018)
✓
✓
✓
✓
X
X
X
Heigold et al. (2018)
X
✓
✓
X
X
X
✓
Yang and Gao (2019)
X
✓
X
X
✓
✓
X
Kurita et al. (2019)
✓
X
X
X
X
X
✓
Karpukhin et al. (2019)
X
✓
X
X
X
✓
✓
Li and Specia (2019)
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
X
Doval et al. (2019)
X
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
Kumar et al. (2020)
X
X
X
✓
✓
X
✓
Nguyen and Grieve (2020)
X
✓
X
✓
✓
✓
X
Jones et al. (2020)
X
✓
X
X
✓
✓
✓
Namysl et al. (2020)
✓
✓
✓
✓
X
X
X
Park et al. (2020)
X
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
Moradi and Samwald (2021)
X
✓
X
X
✓
✓
✓
Sankar et al. (2021)
X
✓
X
X
✓
✓
X
Sperduti et al. (2021)
✓
X
✓
X
X
X
X
Passban et al. (2021)
X
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
Wang et al. (2021)
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Sidiropoulos and Kanoulas (2022)
✓
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
✓
Wang et al. (2023)
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Zhang et al. (2024)
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Zhu et al. (2024)
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
6.4.3
Datasets of Hybrid Misspellings
Hybrid misspellings are natural misspellings found somewhere else, that have been artificially injected in a different
context. These misspellings are typically taken from text normalisation and grammar correction databases, in which
they are listed along with the correct surface form. Some popular examples of such databases are listed below:
• Max and Wisniewski (2010) proposed WiCoPaCo,8 a French database of misspellings created with the edit
correction log of Wikipedia.
• Zesch (2012) generated, also using the edit correction logs of Wikipedia, a German database of misspellings.
• Šebesta et al. (2017) created a database of misspellings from text generated by second-language learners in
Czech.9
Other spelling correction databases that could be potentially useful for creating hybrid misspellings datasets include,
among many others, those by Faruqui et al. (2018); Grundkiewicz and Junczys-Dowmunt (2014); Napoles et al. (2017);
Hagiwara and Mita (2020). However, to the best of our knowledge, no one before has come to use them for this purpose.
Taking a database of misspellings and a dataset specific for any downstream task as inputs, one can easily generate a
variant of the dataset which contains misspellings. The process is straightforward and comes down to finding word
occurrences that appear, as the correct surface form, in any entry of the database, and then replacing such word with any
of the misspelt variants recorded for it. Some popular examples of datasets created following this procedure include
those by Belinkov and Bisk (2018) and Karpukhin et al. (2019).
6.4.4
Benchmarks
There are four main benchmarks that introduce misspellings in adversarial settings, namely AdGlue, AdGlue++,
PromptRobust, and eBench, which we discuss in what follows. In each case, misspellings are generated using
TextBugger (Li et al., 2019a).
8https://wicopaco.limsi.fr/
9https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11234/1-2143
20
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Two of these benchmarks, AdvGlue and AdvGlue++, are from the same research team (Wang et al., 2021, 2023). The
idea is to use various state-of-the-art adversarial methods to create perturbed instances. These methods target models
from different perspectives, including character-based, word-based, and syntax-based approaches. The adversarial
methods are applied across the entire GLUE testbed. In the case of AdvGlue (Wang et al., 2021), the authors focus on
models like BERT, DeBERTa, and others, but exclude larger LLMs. In contrast, AdvGlue++ (Wang et al., 2023) tests
the best-performing LLMs, including GPT-3.5, LLaMA, and GPT-4.
Another relevant benchmark that includes misspellings is PromptRobust (Zhu et al., 2024). The aim of this benchmark
is to evaluate larger LLMs against various adversarial datasets. However, the approach does not introduce misspellings
in instances or labels, but rather in the prompts given to the LLMs. Similarly, Zhang et al. (2024) created a benchmark,
called eBench, to test the most prominent and recent LLMs with different types of adversarial attacks, including one
based on misspellings. In this case, the challenging dataset used is called AlpacaEval.
7
Large Language Models against Misspellings
Large Language Models (LLMs) have brought about a major revolution in the field of NLP, achieving state-of-the-art
performance across several tasks (Bubeck et al., 2023). LLMs have now become part of our everyday life with the
availability of proprietary platforms like ChatGPT (OpenAI et al., 2024), Gemini (Anil and 1376 other authors, 2024),
and open models like LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023).
As LLMs are trained by big companies on vast amounts of data, there are no specific methods designed to fix or reduce
the impact of misspellings. Instead, a plenty of papers focus on diagnosing and analysing how these LLMs perform in
several generic tasks,10 such as solving student tests (Puccetti et al., 2024), respecting morpho-syntactic constraints
(Miaschi et al., 2024), among many others (see, e.g., Chang et al., 2024). Few papers, though, and only recently, have
focused the evaluation study on the impact of misspellings in LLMs. Overall, these papers show all LLMs experience a
drop in performance when tested against misspellings.
Most important techniques to evaluate the performance of LLMs against misspellings used in the literature include
instance-based tests and prompt-based tests. We discuss both types in what follows.
7.1
Instance-based Tests
Instance-based tests come down to inserting misspellings into the test instances themselves. The primary approach to
testing LLMs against misspellings has been through dedicated benchmarks as those described in Section 6.4.4.
Wang et al. (2023, 2024) employ the AdvGLUE benchmark to evaluate the robustness of models like GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4. This benchmark includes misspellings in the test instances, as outlined in Section 6.4.4.
The benchmark AdvGLUE++ (Wang et al., 2023) has served to show that both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 experience a
notable drop in performance when exposed to misspellings. However, Wang et al. (2024) found that these models
are still more robust when compared to smaller models like BART-L, DeBERTa-L, and even bigger models such as
text-davinci-002. Despite these insights, neither AdvGLUE nor AdvGLUE++ allow for a detailed ablation study,
since the exact quantity and typology of misspellings in the dataset are not specified.
7.2
Prompt-based Tests
Prompt-based tests introduce misspellings into the prompts provided to the model. Notable examples include the
PromptRobust (Zhu et al., 2024) and eBench (Zhang et al., 2024) benchmarks.
In contrast to instance-based tests, these benchmarks include an ablation study, which enables further disentangling
of how misspellings impact model performance. (Zhu et al., 2024) experimented with T5-large, Vicuna, LLaMA2,
UL2, ChatGPT and GPT-4 on PromptRobust, while (Zhang et al., 2024) used LLaMA, Vicuna, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4
in eBench. Both studies concluded that LLMs experience significant performance drops when faced with misspelt
prompts, though GPT-4 appears to be much more resilient than other models.
10See also https://huggingface.co/docs/leaderboards/open_llm_leaderboard/about
21
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
8
Applications
Applications of systems robust to misspellings span the entire spectrum of text-based applications, with no exception.
It is not our intention to list any possible such application here, but instead, highlight those in which the presence of
misspellings might be of particular relevance. This is not to say that research in other applicative areas can simply
disregard the problem; certainly, the presence of misspellings harms performance no matter the task, and it is worth
investing efforts in trying to devise (maybe application-dependent) ways for countering them. However, in some
applications, the presence of misspellings may carry over stronger implications. In particular, when the misspellings are
intentional, i.e., are not due to an unadvertised typographical error. Examples of this include:
• Content moderation: language used in social networks is often informal and rich in misspellings and ungram-
matical sentences; the phenomenon is well covered by Baldwin et al. (2013). This poses obvious difficulties
for any automated analysis tool, and this is of particular concern when the misspellings are intentionally placed
for escaping the control of a content moderation tool. Malicious users can cover up offensive comments by
means of misspellings of graphical type (e.g., those based on replacing some characters with others that are
graphically similar, like replacing an ‘i’ with ‘¡’) in order to sneak in toxic comments (e.g., ‘n¡gger’, ‘¡d¡ot’)
into a debate; see, e.g., the work by Hosseini et al. (2017); Kurita et al. (2019). As a matter of fact, in recent
years, online communities have started to develop some alternative slang to avoid censorship that has later
come to be known as algospeak.
The phenomenon has had a big impact on media, to the point that it has been echoed by renowned newspapers
such as the Washington Post.11 The phenomenon is far from new, however, and we might trace its influence
back to the usage of the so-called aesopian languages (encrypted forms of language that became popular
in totalitarian regimes, see also Loseff, 1984). Yet another related area in which (intentional) misspellings
play a special role is that of pro-eating-disorders (pro-ED) communities, in which some users might resort to
complex lexical variants to promote disordered eating habits that may eventually derive in anorexia or obesity
(Chancellor et al., 2016).
• Spam filtering: span filters are text classification tools aimed at preventing the delivery of unsolicited and even
potentially virus-infected emails. The use of misspellings, among many other malicious practices (Fumera
et al., 2006), is one way for eluding the filter to reach—much to her regret—the final user (Ahmed and Mithun,
2004; Lee and Ng, 2005; Renuka and Hamsapriya, 2010; Aldwairi and Flaifel, 2012).
• Authorship analysis: systems resilient to misspellings by design are relevant in authorship analysis. Specifically,
some misspellings reveal the nativity of their author. For example, Berti et al. (2023) note that de, which is
the misspelt form of the, is a typical phonological typo of Spanish native speakers. Double-step methods that
clean the text as a pre-processing step are thus potentially harmful for authorship analysis endeavours. Indeed,
Stamatatos (2009) cite misspellings as relevant features for authorship analysis.
• The applicative area that has, by far, received more attention with respect to the phenomenon of misspellings
is machine translation (see Section 6.1). Belinkov and Bisk (2018) and Heigold et al. (2018) were the first to
argue that neural machine translation models are heavily affected by the presence of misspellings, in contrast
to human translators that have the cognitive ability to bypass misspelt entries without effectively penalizing
comprehension (Rayner et al., 2006).
9
Frontiers and the Road Ahead
While humans can easily read and understand misspelt text, computers cannot. No textual application is out of reach
for the potential harm of misspellings (Sections 4 and 8). Despite this, the field of misspelling resiliency has attracted
uneven attention, with machine translation being the only field in which the phenomenon has been more thoroughly
studied. This may be fostered by the lack of common definitions, frameworks and shared tasks for testing the robustness
to misspellings. Filling these gaps would probably help in boosting research in the field. Text normalisation and
grammatical error correction tools have often been regarded as all we need for dealing with misspellings in downstream
tasks. However, these tools may often prove insufficient, especially when dealing with social-media content (Sections 4
and 5.3). It is our impression that resiliency to misspellings should become a native feature of modern NLP systems,
that will contribute to paving the way toward achieving significant goals:
• Models dealing with misspellings represent a cornerstone not only for handling textual errors (OCR noise,
social-media typo-ridden content, etc.) but also for handling the untamed evolution of natural language, which
is closely tied to the evolution of human culture. Models that resolve misspellings by analysing the context
11https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/04/08/algospeak-tiktok-le-dollar-bean/
22
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
in which these appear, might prove resistant to changes in morphology over time (diachronically), across
different locations (diatopically), or in specific social contexts (diastratically).
• Models handling misspellings can inspire ways for attaining more efficient representations. The fact that
most misspellings go unnoticed by human readers seems to suggest that the way we process them makes few
distinctions between the misspelling and the clean word. From a computational point of view, this is equivalent
to avoiding explicitly codifying information that carries over no really useful information, like the internal
order of characters in certain words (Section 5.2) or the graphical differences between certain characters
(Section 8). Put otherwise, systems resilient to misspellings should, in principle, be able to compress any
spurious information.
We hope this survey has drawn attention to the challenge of misspelling resilience and provides valuable guidance for
researchers interested in this area.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the project “Word Embeddings: From Cognitive Linguistics to Language Engineering,
and Back” (WEMB), funded by the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) under the PRIN 2022 funding
scheme (CUP B53D23013050006).
References
Agarwal, S., Godbole, S., Punjani, D., and Roy, S. (2007). How much noise is too much: A study in automatic text
classification. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2007), pages 3–12, Omaha,
US.
Ahmed, S. and Mithun, F. (2004). Word stemming to enhance spam filtering. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on
Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS 2004), Mountain View, US.
Alam, M. M. and Anastasopoulos, A. (2020). Fine-tuning MT systems for robustness to second-language speaker
variations. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2020), pages 149–158, Online
Event.
Aldwairi, M. and Flaifel, Y. (2012). Baeza-Yates and Navarro approximate string matching for spam filtering. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH 2012), pages 16–20,
Stanford, US.
Anastasopoulos, A. (2019). An analysis of source-side grammatical errors in NMT. In Proceedings of the 2019
Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP (BlackboxNLP 2019), pages 213–223, Firenze, IT.
Andrews, S. (1996). Lexical retrieval and selection processes: Effects of transposed-letter confusability. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35(6):775–800.
Anil, R. and 1376 other authors (2024). Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv:2312.11805
[cs.CL].
Baldwin, T., Cook, P., Lui, M., MacKinlay, A., and Wang, L. (2013). How noisy social media text, how diffrnt social
media sources? In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP
2013), pages 356–364, Nagoya, JP.
Banerjee, S. and Lavie, A. (2005). METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with
human judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine
Translation and/or Summarization (MTSE 2005), pages 65–72, Prague, CZ.
Basili, R., Lopresti, D. P., Ringlstetter, C., Roy, S., Schulz, K. U., and Subramaniam, L. V., editors (2010). Proceedings
of the 4th Workshop on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND 2010), Toronto, CA.
Belinkov, Y. and Bisk, Y. (2018). Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2018), Vancouver, CA.
Benamar, A., Grouin, C., Bothua, M., and Vilnat, A. (2022). Evaluating tokenizers impact on OOVs representation
with transformers models. In Proceedings of the 13th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2022),
pages 4193–4204, Marseille, FR.
Berti, B., Esuli, A., and Sebastiani, F. (2023). Unravelling interlanguage facts via explainable machine learning. Digital
Scholarship in the Humanities, 38(3):953–977.
23
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Bhargava, P., Spasojevic, N., and Hu, G. (2017). Lithium NLP: A system for rich information extraction from noisy
user-generated text on social media. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2017),
pages 131–139, Copenhagen, DK.
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., and Mikolov, T. (2017). Enriching word vectors with subword information.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.
Bubeck, S., Chandrasekaran, V., Eldan, R., Gehrke, J., Horvitz, E., Kamar, E., Lee, P., Lee, Y. T., Li, Y., Lundberg,
S. M., Nori, H., Palangi, H., Ribeiro, M. T., and Zhang, Y. (2023). Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early
experiments with GPT-4.
Bulté, B. and Tezcan, A. (2019). Neural fuzzy repair: Integrating fuzzy matches into neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2019), pages 1800–1809,
Firenze, IT.
Camacho-Collados, J. and Navigli, R. (2016). Find the word that does not belong: A framework for an intrinsic evalua-
tion of word vector representations. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations
for NLP (RepEval 2016), pages 43–50, Berlin, DE.
Cettolo, M., Federico, M., Specia, L., and Way, A. (2012). WIT3: Web inventory of transcribed and translated talks. In
Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation (EAMT 2012),
pages 261–268, Trento, IT.
Chancellor, S., Pater, J. A., Clear, T., Gilbert, E., and De Choudhury, M. (2016). # thyghgapp: Instagram content
moderation and lexical variation in pro-eating disorder communities. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2016), pages 1201–1213, San Francisco, US.
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yi, X., Wang, C., Wang, Y., Ye, W., Zhang, Y.,
Chang, Y., Yu, P. S., Yang, Q., and Xie, X. (2024). A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM Trans.
Intell. Syst. Technol., 15(3):39:1–39:45.
Chen, L., Varoquaux, G., and Suchanek, F. (2022). Imputing out-of-vocabulary embeddings with LOVE makes language
models robust with little cost. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2022), volume 1, pages 3488–3504.
Chen, Q., Zhu, X., Ling, Z., Wei, S., Jiang, H., and Inkpen, D. (2017). Enhanced LSTM for natural language inference.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2017, July 30 -
August 4, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 1657–1668, Vancouver, CA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cheng, Y., Jiang, L., and Macherey, W. (2019). Robust neural machine translation with doubly adversarial inputs. In
Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2019), pages 4324–4333,
Firenze, IT.
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Kuksa, P. (2011). Natural language processing
(almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2493–2537.
Crawford, M., Khoshgoftaar, T. M., Prusa, J. D., Richter, A. N., and Al Najada, H. (2015). Survey of review spam
detection using machine learning techniques. Journal of Big Data, 2(Article 23):1–24.
Damerau, F. (1964). A technique for computer detection and correction of spelling errors. Communications of the ACM,
7(3):171–176.
Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2019), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis,
US.
Dey, L., Govindaraju, V., Lopresti, D. P., Natarajan, P., Ringlstetter, C., and Roy, S., editors (2011). Proceedings of the
2011 Joint Workshop on Multilingual OCR and Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (MOCR/AND 2011),
Bejing, CN.
Doval, Y., Vilares, J., and Gómez-Rodríguez, C. (2019).
Towards robust word embeddings for noisy texts.
arXiv:1911.10876 [cs.CL].
Edizel, B., Piktus, A., Bojanowski, P., Ferreira, R., Grave, E., and Silvestri, F. (2019). Misspelling-oblivious word
embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2019), pages 3226–3234, Minneapolis,
US.
Faruqui, M., Pavlick, E., Tenney, I., and Das, D. (2018). WikiAtomicEdits: A multilingual corpus of Wikipedia edits
for modeling language and discourse. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2018), pages 305–315, Brussels, BE.
24
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Fernández, E. M. and Cairns, H. S. (2010). Fundamentals of psycholinguistics. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Fumera, G., Pillai, I., and Roli, F. (2006). Spam filtering based on the analysis of text information embedded into
images. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(12):2699–2720.
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. (2015). Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2015), San Diego, US.
Grundkiewicz, R. and Junczys-Dowmunt, M. (2014). The WikEd error corpus: A corpus of corrective Wikipedia edits
and its application to grammatical error correction. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on NLP
(PolTAL 2014), pages 478–490, Warsaw, PL.
Hagiwara, M. and Mita, M. (2020). Github typo corpus: A large-scale multilingual dataset of misspellings and
grammatical errors. In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2020), pages
6761–6768, Marseille, FR.
He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R. B. (2022). Masked autoencoders are scalable vision
learners. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2022, June 18-24, 2022,
pages 15979–15988, New Orleans, US.
Healy, A. F. (1976). Detection errors on the word the: Evidence for reading units larger than letters. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2(2):235–242.
Heigold, G., Varanasi, S., Neumann, G., and van Genabith, J. (2018). How robust are character-based word embeddings
in tagging and MT against wrod scramlbing or randdm nouse?
In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA 2018), volume 1, pages 68–80, Boston, US.
Hosseini, H., Kannan, S., Zhang, B., and Poovendran, R. (2017). Deceiving Google’s perspective API built for detecting
toxic comments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08138.
James, C. (2013). Errors in language learning and use: Exploring error analysis. Routledge, New York, NY.
Jones, E., Jia, R., Raghunathan, A., and Liang, P. (2020). Robust encodings: A framework for combating adversarial
typos. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2020),
pages 2752–2765, Online Event.
Joulin, A., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., and Mikolov, T. (2017). Bag of tricks for efficient text classification. In
Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL
2017), volume 2, pages 427–431, Valencia, ES.
Karpukhin, V., Levy, O., Eisenstein, J., and Ghazvininejad, M. (2019). Training on synthetic noise improves robustness
to natural noise in machine translation. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT
2019), pages 42–47, Hong Kong, CN.
Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, (EMNLP 2014), pages 1746–1751, Doha, QA.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2012),
pages 1106–1114, Lake Tahoe, US.
Kudo, T. and Richardson, J. (2018). SentencePiece: A simple and language-independent subword tokenizer and
detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2018), pages 66–71, Brussels, BE.
Kumar, A., Makhija, P., and Gupta, A. (2020). Noisy text data: Achilles’ heel of BERT. In Proceedings of the 6th
Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2020), pages 16–21, Online Event.
Kurita, K., Belova, A., and Anastasopoulos, A. (2019). Towards robust toxic content classification. arXiv:1912.06872
[cs.CL].
Lee, H. and Ng, A. Y. (2005). Spam deobfuscation using a hidden Markov model. In Proceeding of the 2nd Conference
on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS 2005), Stanford, US.
Lenci, A., Sahlgren, M., Jeuniaux, P., Gyllensten, A. C., and Miliani, M. (2021). A comprehensive comparative
evaluation and analysis of distributional semantic models. arXiv:2105.09825 [cs.CL].
Li, J., Ji, S., Du, T., Li, B., and Wang, T. (2019a). Textbugger: Generating adversarial text against real-world applications.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2019), San Diego,
US.
25
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Li, X., Michel, P., Anastasopoulos, A., Belinkov, Y., Durrani, N., Firat, O., Koehn, P., Neubig, G., Pino, J. M., and
Sajjad, H. (2019b). Findings of the first shared task on machine translation robustness. In Proceedings of the 4th
Conference on Machine Translation (WMT 2019), pages 91–102, Firenze, IT.
Li, Y., Cohn, T., and Baldwin, T. (2016). Learning robust representations of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2016), pages 1979–1985, Austin, US.
Li, Z., Rei, M., and Specia, L. (2021). Visual cues and error correction for translation robustness. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics @ EMNLP 2021, pages 3153–3168, Punta Cana, DO.
Li, Z. and Specia, L. (2019). Improving neural machine translation robustness via data augmentation: Beyond back-
translation. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2019), pages 328–336, Hong
Kong, CN.
Liu, N. F., Schwartz, R., and Smith, N. A. (2019). Inoculation by fine-tuning: A method for analyzing challenge
datasets. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 2171–2179, Minneapolis, MN, US.
Lopresti, D. P., Roy, S., Schulz, K. U., and Subramaniam, L. V., editors (2008). Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND 2008), Singapore, SG.
Lopresti, D. P., Roy, S., Schulz, K. U., and Subramaniam, L. V., editors (2009). Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND 2009), Barcelona, ES.
Loseff, L. (1984). On the beneficence of censorship: Aesopian language in modern Russian literature. Peter Lang
International Academic Publishers, Bristol, UK.
Malykh, V., Logacheva, V., and Khakhulin, T. (2018). Robust word vectors: Context-informed embeddings for noisy
texts. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2018), pages 54–63, Brussels, BE.
Max, A. and Wisniewski, G. (2010). Mining naturally-occurring corrections and paraphrases from Wikipedia’s revision
history. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010),
Valletta, MT.
McCusker, L. X., Gough, P. B., and Bias, R. G. (1981). Word recognition inside out and outside in. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7(3):538–551.
Miaschi, A., Dell’Orletta, F., and Venturi, G. (2024). Evaluating large language models via linguistic profiling. In
Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y., editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, address = Miami, US, pages 2835–2848. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Michel, P., Li, X., Neubig, G., and Pino, J. M. (2019). On evaluation of adversarial perturbations for sequence-to-
sequence models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2019), pages 3103–3114, Minneapolis,
US.
Michel, P. and Neubig, G. (2018). MTNT: A testbed for machine translation of noisy text. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2018), pages 543–553, Brussels, BE.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2013), Workshop Track
Proceedings, Scottsdale, US.
Moradi, M. and Samwald, M. (2021). Evaluating the robustness of neural language models to input perturbations. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2021), pages
1558–1570, Punta Cana, DO.
Naik, A., Ravichander, A., Sadeh, N. M., Rosé, C. P., and Neubig, G. (2018). Stress test evaluation for natural language
inference. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2018, August
20-26, 2018, pages 2340–2353, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Namysl, M., Behnke, S., and Köhler, J. (2020). NAT: Noise-aware training for robust neural sequence labeling.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2020), pages
1501–1517, Online Event.
Náplava, J., Popel, M., Straka, M., and Straková, J. (2021). Understanding model robustness to user-generated noisy
texts. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Noisy User-Generated Text (NUT 2021), pages 340–350, Online Event.
26
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Napoles, C., Sakaguchi, K., and Tetreault, J. R. (2017). JFLEG: A fluency corpus and benchmark for grammatical error
correction. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL 2017), volume 2, pages 229–234, Valencia, ES.
Neubig, G. (2011). The Kyoto free translation task. http://www.phontron.com/kftt.
Nguyen, D. and Grieve, J. (2020). Do word embeddings capture spelling variation?
In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2020), pages 870–881, Barcelona, ES.
OpenAI, Achiam, J., and 283 other authors (2024). GPT-4 technical report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL].
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W. (2002). Bleu: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2002), pages
311–318, Philadelphia, US.
Parikh, A. P., Täckström, O., Das, D., and Uszkoreit, J. (2016). A decomposable attention model for natural language
inference. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
2016, November 1-4, 2016, pages 2249–2255, Austin, US. The Association for Computational Linguistics.
Park, J., Sung, M., Lee, J., and Kang, J. (2020). Adversarial subword regularization for robust neural machine translation.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics @ EMNLP 2020, pages 1945–1953, Online Event.
Passban, P., Saladi, P. S. M., and Liu, Q. (2021). Revisiting robust neural machine translation: A transformer case study.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics @ EMNLP 2021, pages 3831–3840, Punta Cana, DO.
Perrin, A. (2015). Social media usage. Pew research center, pages 52–68.
Plank, B. (2016). What to do about non-standard (or non-canonical) language in NLP. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference on Natural Language Processing (KONVENS 2016), Bochum, DE.
Pruthi, D., Dhingra, B., and Lipton, Z. C. (2019). Combating adversarial misspellings with robust word recognition.
In Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2019), pages 54–63,
Firenze, IT.
Pryzant, R., Chung, Y., Jurafsky, D., and Britz, D. (2018). JESC: Japanese-English subtitle corpus. In Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, JP.
Puccetti, G., Cassese, M., and Esuli, A. (2024). The invalsi benchmark: measuring language models mathematical and
language understanding in italian.
Ravichander, A., Dalmia, S., Ryskina, M., Metze, F., Hovy, E. H., and Black, A. W. (2021). NoiseQA: Challenge set
evaluation for user-centric question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL 2021), pages 2976–2992, Online Event.
Rayner, K., White, S., Johnson, R., and Liversedge, S. (2006). Raeding wrods with jubmled lettres: There is a cost.
Psychological Science, 17(3):192–193.
Renuka, D. K. and Hamsapriya, T. (2010). Email classification for spam detection using word stemming. International
Journal of Computer Applications, 1(5):45–47.
Richards, J. and Schmidt, R. (2013). Longman dictionary of language teaching and applied linguistics. Taylor and
Francis, London, UK.
Röttger, P., Vidgen, B., Nguyen, D., Waseem, Z., Margetts, H. Z., and Pierrehumbert, J. B. (2021). Hatecheck:
Functional tests for hate speech detection models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pages 41–58, Nusa Dua, Bali, ID.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rust, P., Lotz, J. F., Bugliarello, E., Salesky, E., de Lhoneux, M., and Elliott, D. (2023). Language modelling with
pixels. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 223), Kigali, RW.
Sakaguchi, K., Duh, K., Post, M., and Durme, B. V. (2017). Robsut wrod reocginiton via semi-character recurrent
neural network. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2017), pages 3281–3287, San
Francisco, US.
Salesky, E., Etter, D., and Post, M. (2021). Robust open-vocabulary translation from visual text representations. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2021), pages
7235–7252, Punta Cana, DO.
Sang, E. F. and De Meulder, F. (2003). Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: Language-independent named
entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2003), pages
142—-147, Edmonton, CA.
27
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Sankar, C., Ravi, S., and Kozareva, Z. (2021). On-device text representations robust to misspellings via projections.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL 2021), pages 2871–2876, Online Event.
Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys, 34(1):1–47.
Šebesta, K., Bedˇrichová, Z., Štindlová, B., Hrdliˇcka, M., Hrdliˇcková, T., Hana, J., Rosen, A., Petkeviˇc, V., Jelínek, T.,
Škodová, S., Janeš, P., Lundáková, K., Skoumalová, H., Štastný, K., and Sládek, Š. (2017). CzeSL grammatical
error correction dataset (CzeSL-GEC). LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digital library at the Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics (ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Prague, CZ.
Shishibori, M., Lee, S. S., Oono, M., and Aoe, J. (2002). Improvement of the LR parsing table and its application to
grammatical error correction. Information Sciences, 148(1-4):11–26.
Shook, A., Chabal, S., Bartolotti, J., and Marian, V. (2012). CLEARPOND: Cross-linguistic easy-access resource for
phonological and orthographic neighborhood densities. PLOS ONE, 7(8):e43230.
Sidiropoulos, G. and Kanoulas, E. (2022). Analysing the robustness of dual encoders for dense retrieval against
misspellings. In Proceedings of the 45th International Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR 2022), pages 2132–2136, Madrid, ES.
Specia, L., Li, Z., Pino, J. M., Chaudhary, V., Guzmán, F., Neubig, G., Durrani, N., Belinkov, Y., Koehn, P., Sajjad,
H., Michel, P., and Li, X. (2020). Findings of the WMT 2020 shared task on machine translation robustness. In
Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Machine Translation (WMT 2020), pages 76–91, Online Event.
Sperduti, G., Moreo, A., and Sebastiani, F. (2021). Garbled-word embeddings for jumbled text. In Proceedings of the
11th Italian Information Retrieval Workshop 2021 (IIR 2021), Bari, IT.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 60(3):538–556.
Subramaniam, L. V., Roy, S., Faruquie, T. A., and Negi, S. (2009). A survey of types of text noise and techniques to
handle noisy text. In Proceedings of the 3th Workshop on Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data (AND 2009),
pages 115–122, Barcelona, ES.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar,
F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A., Grave, E., and Lample, G. (2023). Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models. arXiv:2302.13971 [cs.CL].
Vaibhav, Singh, S., Stewart, C., and Neubig, G. (2019). Improving robustness of machine translation with synthetic
noise. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2019), pages 1916–1920, Minneapolis, US.
van der Goot, R., van Noord, R., and van Noord, G. (2018). A taxonomy for in-depth evaluation of normalization for
user-generated content. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, JP.
van Rijsbergen, C. J. (1979). Information retrieval. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, UK, 2nd edition.
Vinciarelli, A. (2005). Noisy text categorization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern and Machine Intelligence, 27(12):1882–
1895.
Wang, B., Chen, W., Pei, H., Xie, C., Kang, M., Zhang, C., Xu, C., Xiong, Z., Dutta, R., Schaeffer, R., Truong, S. T.,
Arora, S., Mazeika, M., Hendrycks, D., Lin, Z., Cheng, Y., Koyejo, S., Song, D., and Li, B. (2023). DecodingTrust:
A comprehensive assessment of trustworthiness in GPT models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans, December
10–16, 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA.
Wang, B., Xu, C., Wang, S., Gan, Z., Cheng, Y., Gao, J., Awadallah, A. H., and Li, B. (2021). Adversarial GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark for robustness evaluation of language models. In Proceedings of the Neural Information
Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, December 2021,
virtual.
Wang, H., Zhang, P., and Xing, E. P. (2020). Word shape matters: Robust machine translation with visual embedding.
arXiv:2010.09997 [cs.CL].
Wang, J., Hu, X., Hou, W., Chen, H., Zheng, R., Wang, Y., Yang, L., Ye, W., Huang, H., Geng, X., Jiao, B., Zhang, Y.,
and Xie, X. (2024). On the robustness of ChatGPT: An adversarial and out-of-distribution perspective. IEEE Data
Eng. Bull., 47(1):48–62.
Wu, T., Wen, S., Xiang, Y., and Zhou, W. (2018). Twitter spam detection: Survey of new approaches and comparative
study. Computers & Security, 76:265–284.
28
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
Yang, R. and Gao, Z. (2019). Can machines read jmulbed senetcnes? https://runzhe-yang.science/demo/jumbled.pdf.
Unpublished manuscript.
Zesch, T. (2012). Measuring contextual fitness using error contexts extracted from the Wikipedia revision history.
In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL 2012), pages 529–538, Avignon, FR.
Zhang, Z., Hao, B., Li, J., Zhang, Z., and Zhao, D. (2024). E-bench: Towards evaluating the ease-of-use of large
language models. arXiv:2105.09825 [cs.CL].
Zheng, R., Liu, H., Ma, M., Zheng, B., and Huang, L. (2019). Robust machine translation with domain sensitive
pseudo-sources: Baidu-OSU WMT19 MT robustness shared task system report. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT 2019), pages 559–564, Firenze, IT.
Zhou, J. T., Zhang, H., Jin, D., Peng, X., Xiao, Y., and Cao, Z. (2020). RoSeq: Robust sequence labeling. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 31(7):2304–2314.
Zhou, S., Zeng, X., Zhou, Y., Anastasopoulos, A., and Neubig, G. (2019). Improving robustness of neural machine
translation with multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Machine Translation (WMT 2019),
pages 565–571, Firenze, IT.
Zhu, K., Wang, J., Zhou, J., Wang, Z., Chen, H., Wang, Y., Yang, L., Ye, W., Zhang, Y., Gong, N. Z., and Xie,
X. (2024). PromptRobust: Towards evaluating the robustness of large language models on adversarial prompts.
arXiv:2105.09825 [cs.CL].
29
Misspellings in Natural Language Processing
30
