Title: Efficiently Reusing Natural Language Processing Models for Phenotype-Mention Identification in Free-text Electronic Medical Records: Methodology Study
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03995v3
--------------------------------------------------

Original Paper - accepted by JMIR Medical Informatics on 22nd Oct 2019 
Honghan Wu 1,2,3*, Karen Hodgson 4, Sue Dyson 4, Katherine I Morley 4,5,6, Zina M 
Ibrahim 4,7, Ehtesham Iqbal 4, Robert Stewart 4,5, Richard JB Dobson 4,7, and Cathie 
Sudlow 1,2 
 
1 Centre for Medical Informatics, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom 
2 Health Data Research, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
3 School of Computer and Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & 
Technology, China 
4 Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, United 
Kingdom 
5 South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK 
6 Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Global and 
Population Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
7 Health Data Research UK, University College London, United Kingdom 
 
*Corresponding: 9 Little France Rd, Edinburgh EH16 4UX, United Kingdom; +44 
(0)131 651 7882; honghan.wu@ed.ac.uk 
Efficiently Reusing Natural Language Processing Models for 
Phenotype-Mention Identification in Free-text Electronic 
Medical Records: Methodology Study 
Abstract 
Background:  
Many efforts have been put into the use of automated approaches, such as natural 
language processing (NLP), to mine or extract data from free-text medical records to 
construct comprehensive patient profiles for delivering better health-care. Reusing 
NLP models in new settings, however, remains cumbersome - requiring validation 
and/or retraining on new data iteratively to achieve convergent results.    
Objective: The aim of this work is to minimize the effort involved in reusing NLP 
models on free-text medical records. 
Methods: We formally define and analyse the model adaptation problem in 
phenotype-mention identification tasks. We identify “duplicate waste” and 
“imbalance waste”, which collectively impede efficient model reuse. We propose a 
phenotype embedding based approach to minimize these sources of waste without 
the need for labelled data from new settings. 
Results: We conduct experiments on data from a large mental health registry to 
reuse NLP models in four phenotype-mention identification tasks. The proposed 
approach can choose the best model for a new task, identifying up to 76% (duplicate 
waste), i.e. phenotype mentions without the need for validation and model 
retraining, and with very good performance (93-97% accuracy). It can also provide 
guidance for validating and retraining the selected model for novel language 
patterns in new tasks, saving around 80% (imbalance waste), i.e. the effort required 
in “blind” model-adaptation approaches. 
Conclusions: Adapting pre-trained NLP models for new tasks can be more efficient 
and effective if the language pattern landscapes of old settings and new settings can 
be made explicit and comparable. Our experiments show that the phenotype-
mention embedding approach is an effective way to model language patterns for 
phenotype-mention identification tasks and that its use can guide efficient NLP 
model reuse. 
 
Keywords: Natural Language Processing; Text Mining; Phenotype; Word 
Embedding; Phenotype Embedding; Model Adaptation; Electronic Health Records; 
Machine Learning; Clustering 
 
Introduction 
Compared to structured components of electronic health records (EHRs), free-text 
comprises a much deeper and larger volume of health data. For example, in a recent 
geriatric syndrome study[1], unstructured EHR data contributed a significant 
proportion of identified cases: 67.9% falls, 86.6% cases of visual impairment, and 
99.8% cases of lack of social support. Similarly, in a study of co-morbidities using a 
database of anonymised EHRs of a psychiatric hospital in London (the South London 
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust (SLaM))[2], 1,899 cases of co-morbid 
depression and type 2 diabetes were identified from unstructured EHRs, while only 
19 cases could be found using structured diagnosis tables. The value of unstructured 
records for selecting cohorts has also been widely reported[3,4]. Extracting clinical 
variables or identifying phenotypes from unstructured EHR data is, therefore, 
essential for addressing many clinical questions and research hypotheses [5–7]. 
 
Automated approaches are essential to surface such deep data from free-text clinical 
notes at scale. To make NLP tools accessible for clinical applications, various 
approaches have been proposed, including generic, user-friendly tools[8–10] and 
web services or cloud based solutions[11–13]. Among these approaches, perhaps 
the most efficient way to facilitate clinical NLP projects is to adapt pre-trained NLP 
models in new but similar settings[14], i.e. to re-use existing NLP solutions to 
answer new questions or to work on new data sources.. However, it is very often 
burdensome to reuse pre-trained NLP models. This is mainly because NLP models 
essentially abstract language patterns (i.e. language characteristics representable in 
computable form) and subsequently use them for prediction or classification tasks. 
These patterns are prone to change when the document set (corpus) or the text 
mining task (what to look up) changes. Unfortunately, when it comes to a new 
setting, it is uncertain which patterns have and have not changed. Therefore, in 
practice, random samples are drawn to validate the performance of an existing NLP 
model in a new setting and subsequently to plan the adaptation of the model based 
on the validation results. 
 
Such “blind” adaptation is costly in the clinical domain because of barriers to data 
access and expensive clinical expertise needed for data labelling. The “blindness” to 
the similarities and differences of language pattern landscapes between the source 
(where the model was trained) and target (the new task) settings causes (at least) 
two types of potentially unnecessary, wasted effort, which may be avoidable. First, 
for those data in the target setting with the same patterns as in the source setting, 
any validation or retraining efforts are unnecessary because the model has already 
been trained and validated on these language patterns. We call this type of wasted 
effort the “duplicate waste”. The second type of waste occurs if the distribution of 
new language patterns in the target setting is unbalanced, i.e., some - but not all - 
data instances belong to different language patterns. The model adaptation involves 
validating the model on these new data and further adjusting it when performance 
is not good enough. Without the knowledge of which data instances belong to which 
language patterns, data instances have to be randomly sampled for validation and 
adaptation. In most cases, a minimal number of instances of every pattern need to 
be processed so that convergent results can be obtained. This will usually be 
achieved via iterative validation and adaptation process, which will inevitably cause 
commonly used language patterns to be over represented, resulting in the model 
being over validated/retrained on such data. Such unnecessary effort on commonly 
used language patterns result from the pattern imbalance in the target setting, 
which unfortunately is the norm in almost all real world EHR datasets. We call this 
“imbalance waste”. 
 
The ability to make language patterns visible and comparable will address whether 
an NLP model can be adapted to a new task and, importantly, provide guidance on 
how to solve new problems effectively and efficiently through the smart adaptation 
of existing models. In this paper, we introduce a contextualised embedding model to 
visualise such patterns and provide guidance for reusing NLP models in phenotype-
mention identification tasks. Here, a phenotype mention denotes an appearance of a 
word or phrase (representing a medical concept) in a document, which indicates a 
phenotype related to a person. We note two aspects of this definition:  
1. Phenotype mention ≠ Medical concept mention. When a medical concept 
mentioned in a document does not indicate a phenotype relating to a person 
(e.g., cases in the last two rows of Table 1), it is not a phenotype mention.  
2. Phenotype mention ≠ Phenotype. Phenotype (e.g. diseases and associated 
traits) is a specific patient characteristic[15], which is a patient level feature, 
e.g., a binary value indicating a patient is a smoker or not. However, for the 
same phenotype, a patient might have multiple phenotype mentions. For 
example, xxx is a smoker could be mentioned in different documents or even 
multiple times in one document, each of these appearances is a phenotype 
mention. 
  
Table 1. The task of recognising contextualised phenotype mentions is to identify 
mentions of phenotypes from free-text records and also classify the context of each 
mention into 5 categories (listed in the 3rd column of Table 1). The last two rows 
give examples of non-phenotype mentions - the two sentences are not describing 
incidents of a condition. 
Examples 
Types of phenotype mentions 
49 year old man with hepatitis c 
Contextualised 
mentions 
positive mention 
with no evidence of cancer recurrence 
negated mention 
is concerning for local lung cancer recurrence 
hypothetical mention 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY: 1) Atrial Fibrillation, 2)... 
history mention 
Mother was A positive, hepatitis C carrier, and ... 
mention of phenotype in 
another person 
She visited the HIV clinic last week. 
not a phenotype mention 
The patient asked for information about stroke. 
not a phenotype mention 
 
The focus of this work is to minimise the effort in reusing existing NLP model(s) in 
solving new tasks rather than proposing a novel NLP model for phenotype-mention 
identification. We aim to address the problem of NLP model transferability in the 
task of extracting mentions of phenotypes from free-text medical records. 
Specifically, the task is to identify above-defined phenotype mentions and the 
contexts in which they were mentioned[10] . (Table 1) explains and gives examples 
of contextualised phenotype mentions. The research question to be investigated is 
formally defined as follows. 
 
Figure 1. Assess the transferability of a pre-trained model in solving a new task: 
discriminate between differently inaccurate mentions identified by the model in the 
new setting. 
 
 
 
Definition 1. Given an NLP model (denoted as 𝑚) previously trained for some 
phenotype-mention identification task(s), and a new task (denoted as 𝑇, where 
either phenotypes to be identified are new or the dataset is new, or both are new), 
m is used in 𝑇 to identify a set of phenotype mentions - denoted as 𝑆. The research 
question (as illustrated in Figure 1) is how to partition 𝑆 to meet the following 
criteria: 
1. a maximum p-known subset 𝑆𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛 where 𝑚’s performance can be 
properly predicted using prior knowledge of 𝑚; 
2. p-unknown subsets:{𝑆𝑢1, 𝑆𝑢2, . . . , 𝑆𝑢𝑘}, which meet the following criteria: 
a. 𝑆𝑢1 ∪𝑆𝑢2 ∪.. .∪𝑆𝑢𝑘= 𝑆−𝑆𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛; 
b. ∀𝑖, 𝑗∈[1. .𝑘], 𝑖≠𝑗, 𝑆𝑢𝑖∩𝑆𝑢𝑗= ∅; 
c. ∀𝑖∈[1. . 𝑘], 𝑆𝑢𝑖can be represented by a small number of instances 
𝑅𝑢𝑖 so that 𝑚’s overall performance on 𝑆𝑢𝑖 can be predicted by its 
result on 𝑅𝑢𝑖; 
d. 𝑘≪|𝑆| −|𝑆𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛|. 
 
The identification of ‘p-known’ subset (criterion 1) will help eliminate “duplicate 
waste” by avoiding unnecessary validation and adaptation on those phenotype 
mentions. On the other hand, separating the rest of the annotations into ‘p-unknown’ 
subsets allows processing mentions based on their performance-relevant 
characteristics separately, which in turn helps avoid “imbalance waste”. The above 
criterion 2.a ensures completeness of coverage of all performance-unknown 
mentions, 2.b ensures no overlaps between mention subsets so that no duplicated 
effort will be put on the same mentions. Criterion 2.c requires that the partitioning 
of the mentions is performance-relevant, meaning model performance on a small 
number of samples can be generalised to the whole subset that they are drawn from. 
Lastly, a small 𝑘 (criterion 2.d) enables efficient adaptation of a model. 
 
Methods 
Dataset & adaptable phenotype-mention identification models 
Recently, we developed SemEHR[10] - a semantic search toolkit aiming to use 
interactive information retrieval functionalities to replace NLP building so that 
clinical researchers can use a browser based interface to access text mining results 
from a generic NLP model and (optionally) keep getting better results by iteratively 
feeding back to the system. A SLaM instance of this system has been trained for 
supporting 6 comorbidity studies (62,719 patients; 17,479,669 clinical notes in 
total), where different combinations of physical conditions and mental disorders are 
extracted and analysed. Multimedia Appendix 1 give details about the user interface 
and model performance. These studies effectively generated 23 phenotype-mention 
identification models and relevant labelled data (>7,000 annotated documents), 
which we use to study model transferability. 
 
Foundation of Proposed Approach 
Our approach is based on the following assumption about a language pattern 
representation model. 
 
Assumption 1. There exists a pattern representation model, A, for identifying 
language patterns of phenotype mentions with the following characteristics. 
1. Each phenotype mention can be characterised by one and only one language 
pattern; 
2. Patterns are largely shared by different mentions; 
3. There is a deterministic association between NLP models’ performances with 
such language patterns. 
Theorem 1. Given 𝐴 - a pattern model meeting Assumption 1, 𝑚 - an NLP model, 𝑇 - 
a new task, let 𝑃𝑚 be the pattern set 𝐴identifies from dataset(s) that 𝑚 was trained 
or validated on; let 𝑃𝑇 be the pattern set 𝐴 identifies from 𝑆 - the set of all mentions 
identified by 𝑚 in 𝑇. Then, the problem defined in Definition 1 can be solved by a 
solution, where 𝑃𝑚∩𝑃𝑇 is the ‘p-known’ subset and 𝑃𝑇−(𝑃𝑚∩𝑃𝑇) is ‘p-unknown’ 
subsets. 
 
Proof of Theorem 1 can be found in the Multimedia Appendix 2. The rest of this 
section gives details of a realisation of 𝐴using distributed representation models. 
Distributed representation for contextualised phenotype mentions 
In computational linguistics, statistical language models are perhaps the most 
common approach to quantify word sequences, where a distribution is used to 
represent the probability of a sequence of words - 𝑃(𝑤1, .. . , 𝑤𝑛). Among such 
models, the bag-of-words (BOW) model[15] is perhaps the earliest and simplest, yet 
still widely-used and efficient in certain tasks[16]. To overcome BOW’s limitations 
(e.g., ignoring semantic similarities between words), more complex models were 
introduced to represent word semantics [17–19]. Probably, the most popular 
alternative is the distributed representation model[20], which uses a vector space 
to model words so that word similarities can be represented as distances between 
their vectors. This concept has since been extensively followed up, extended and 
shown to significantly improve NLP tasks[21–26]. 
 
In original distributed representation models, the semantics of one word is encoded 
in one single vector, which makes it impossible to disambiguate different semantics 
or contexts that one word might be used in a corpus. Recently, various 
(bidirectional) Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) models were proposed to learn 
contextualised word vectors[27–29]. However, such linguistic contexts are not the 
phenotype contexts (see Table 1) that we seek in this paper. 
 
Figure 2. The framework to learn contextualised phenotype embedding from 
labelled data that an NLP model m was trained or validated on. 
 
 
Inspired by the good properties of distributed representations for words, we 
propose a phenotype encoding approach that aims to model the language patterns 
of contextualised phenotype mentions. Compared to word semantics, phenotype 
semantics are represented in a larger context - at sentence or even paragraph level 
(e.g., he worries about contracting HIV - HIV here is a hypothetical phenotype 
mention). The key idea of our approach is to use explicit mark-ups to represent 
phenotype semantics in the text so that they can be learnt through an approach 
similar to word embedding learning framework. 
 
(Figure 2) illustrates our framework for extending the continuous BOW word 
embedding architecture to capture the semantics of contextualised phenotype 
mentions. Explicit mark-ups of phenotype mentions are added to the architecture as 
placeholders for phenotype semantics. A mark-up (e.g., C0038454_POS) is 
composed of two parts: phenotype identification (e.g., C0038454) and contextual 
description (e.g., POS). The first part identifies a phenotype using a standardised 
vocabulary. In our implementation the Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS)[30] was chosen for its broad concept coverage and the provision of 
comprehensive synonyms for concepts. The first benefit of using a standardised 
phenotype definition is that it helps in grouping together mentions of the same 
phenotype using different names. For example, using UMLS concept identification of 
C0038454 for STROKE helps combining together mentions using Stroke, 
Cerebrovascular Accident, Brain Attack and other 43 synonyms. The second benefit 
comes from the concept relations represented in the vocabulary hierarchy, which 
helps the transferability computation that we will elaborate later. The second part of 
a phenotype mention mark-up is to identify the mention context. Six types of 
contexts are supported: POS for positive mention, NEG for negated mention, HYP for 
hypothetical mention, HIS for history mention, OTH for mention of the phenotype in 
another person and NOT for not a phenotype mention. 
There 
The phenotype mention mark-ups can be populated using labelled data that NLP 
models were trained or validated on. In our implementation, the mark-ups were 
generated from the labelled subset of SLaM EHRs. 
Using phenotype embedding and their semantics for assessing model transferability 
 
Figure 3. Architecture of phenotype embedding based approach for transferring 
pre-trained natural language processing models for identifying new phenotypes or 
application to new corpora. The word & phenotype embedding model is learnt from 
the training data of the re-usable models in its source domain (the task that m was 
trained for). No labelled data in the target domain (new setting) is required for the 
adaptation guidance. 
 
 
The embeddings learnt (including both word and contextualised phenotype vectors) 
are the building blocks underlying the language pattern representation model - 𝐴, as 
introduced at the beginning of this section, which is to compute 𝑃𝑚 (the landscape of 
language patterns that 𝑚 is familiar with) and 𝑃𝑇 (the landscape of language 
patterns in the new task 𝑇) for assessing and guiding NLP model adaptation for new 
tasks. 
 
(Figure 3) illustrates the architecture of our approach. The double-circle shape 
denotes the embeddings learnt from the 𝑚’s labelled data. Essentially, the process is 
composed of two phases: (1) the documents from a new task (on the left of the 
figure) are annotated with phenotype mentions using a pre-trained model - 𝑚; (2) a 
classification task uses the  above embeddings to assess each mention: whether it is 
an instance of p-known (something similar enough to what 𝑚is familiar with) or any 
subset of p-unknown (something that is new to 𝑚). Specifically, the process is 
composed of the following steps. 
 
1. Vectorise phenotype mentions in a new task Each mention in the new 
task will be represented as a vector of real numbers using the learnt 
embedding model to combine its surrounding words as context semantics. 
Formally, 
 
 
let 𝑠 be a mention identified by 𝑚 in the new task, where 𝑠can be 
represented by a function defined as follows: 
𝑣(𝑠) = 𝑓(𝑤→(𝑡𝑖−𝑘,. . . ,𝑡𝑖+𝑘+𝑙))                                                    (1) 
where 𝑤→ is the embedding model to convert a word token into a vector, 𝑡𝑗 
is the 𝑗𝑡ℎ word in a document, 𝑖 is the offset of the first word of 𝑠 in the 
document, 𝑙 is the number of words in 𝑠 and 𝑓 is a function to combine a set 
of vectors into a result vector (we use average in our implementation). 
 
With such representations, all mentions are effectively put in a vector space 
(depicted as a two dimensional space on the right of the figure for illustration 
purposes). 
 
2. Identify clusters (language patterns) of mention vectors In the vector 
space, clusters are naturally formed based on geometric distances between 
mention vectors. After trying different clustering algorithms and parameters, 
DBScan[31] was chosen on Euclidean distance in our implementation for 
vector clustering. Essentially, each cluster is a set of mentions considered to 
share the same (or similar enough) underlying language pattern, meaning 
language patterns in the new task are technically the vector clusters. We 
chose the cluster centroid (arithmetic mean) to represent a cluster (i.e., its 
underlying language pattern). 
 
3. Choose a reference vector for classifying language patterns After clusters 
(language patterns) are identified, the next step is to classify them as p-
known or subsets of p-unknown. We choose a reference vector-based 
approach - classifying using the distance to a selected vector. Such a 
reference vector is picked up (when the phenotype to be identified has been 
trained in 𝑚) or generated (when the phenotype is new to 𝑚) from the learnt 
phenotype embeddings the model 𝑚 has seen previously. Apparently, when 
the phenotype to be identified in the new task is new to 𝑚 (not in the set of 
phenotypes it was developed for), the reference phenotype needs to be 
carefully selected so that it can help to produce a sensible separation 
between p-known and p-unknown clusters. We use the semantic similarity 
(distance between two concepts in the UMLS tree structure) to choose the 
most similar phenotype from the phenotype list 𝑚 was trained for. Formally, 
the reference is chosen as follows. 
Let 𝑐𝑝 be the UMLS concept for a phenotype to be identified in the new task 
and 𝐶𝑚 be the set of phenotype concepts that m was trained for, the 
reference phenotype choosing function is: 
𝑅(𝑐𝑝,𝐶𝑚) = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑐∈𝐶𝑚𝐷(𝑐, 𝑐𝑝)                                        (2) 
where 𝐷 is a distance function to calculate the steps between two nodes in 
the UMLS concept tree. 
 Once the reference phenotype has been chosen, the reference vector can be 
selected or generated (e.g., use the average) from this phenotype’s contextual 
embeddings. 
 
4. Classify language patterns to guide model adaptation Once the reference 
vector has been selected, clusters can be classified based on the distances 
between their centroids (representative vectors of clusters) and the 
reference vector. Once a distance threshold is chosen, this distance-based 
classification partitions the vector space into two subspaces using the 
reference vector as the centre: the sub-space whose distance to the centre is 
less than the threshold is called p-known sub-space and the remainder is p-
unknown sub-space. The union of clusters whose centroids are within p-
known sub-space is p-known meaning 𝑚’s performances on them can be 
predicted without further validation (removing duplicate waste). Other 
clusters are p-unknown clusters. 𝑚 can be validated and/or further trained 
on each p-unknown cluster separately instead of blindly across all clusters. 
This will remove imbalance waste. 
Results 
Associations between embedding based language patterns and model performances 
As stated in the beginning of Method section, our approach is based on 3 
assumptions about language patterns. Therefore, it is essential to quantify to what 
extent the language patterns identified by our embedding based approach meet 
these assumptions. The first assumption - a phenotype mention can be assigned to 
one and only to one language pattern - is met in our approach, since (a) (Equation 1) 
is a One-to-One function; (b) DBScan algorithm (the vector clustering function 
chosen in our implementation) is also a One-to-One function. Assumption 2 can be 
quantified by the percentage of mentions that can be assigned to a cluster. This 
percentage can be increased by increasing the Epsilon(EPS) parameter (the 
maximum distance between two data items for them to be considered as in the same 
neighbourhood) in DBScan. However, the degree to which mentions are clustered 
together needs to be balanced against the consequence of reduced ability to identify 
performance-related language patterns, which is the third assumption - associations 
between language patterns and model performance. To quantify such an 
association, we propose a metric called Bad Guy Separate Power (SP for short), as 
defined in (Equation 3) below. The aim is to measure to what extent a clustering can 
assemble incorrect data items (false positive mentions of phenotypes) together. 
Let C be a set of binary data items - ∀𝑐𝑖∈𝐶, 𝑇(𝑐𝑖) ∈{𝑡, 𝑓} (𝑡 – stands for true; 𝑓 – 
stands for false), given a clustering result {𝐶1,. . . , 𝐶𝑘|𝐶1 ∪𝐶2. . .∪𝐶𝑘= 𝐶}, its 
separate power for f  typed data items is defined as follows. 
𝑆𝑃({𝐶1,. . . ,𝐶𝑘},𝑓) =
∑𝑘
𝑖=1
|{𝑐𝑖|𝑐𝑖∈𝐶,𝑇(𝑐𝑖)=𝑓}|2
|𝐶𝑖|
|{𝑐𝑖|𝑐𝑖∈𝐶,𝑇(𝑐𝑖)=𝑓}|
                                        (3) 
 
In our scenario, we would like to see clustering being able to separate easy cases 
(where good performance is achieved) from difficult cases (where performance is 
poor) for a model 𝑚. 
 
Figure 4. Clustered Percentage vs Separate Power on difficult cases. The X axis is the 
EPS parameter of the DBScan clustering algorithm - the longest distance between 
any two items within a cluster; the Y axis is the percentage. Two types of changing 
information (as functions of EPS) are plotted on each sub-figure: clustered 
percentage (solid line) and Separate Power (SP) on incorrect cases (false positive 
mentions of phenotypes). The latter has two series: (1) SP by chance (dash dotted 
line) - when clustering by randomly selecting mentions; (2) SP by clustering using 
phenotype embedding (dashed line). 𝑁 - number of all mentions; 𝑁𝑓 – number of 
false positive mentions. 
 
To quantify the clustering percentage, the ability to separate mentions based on 
model performances and the interplay between the two, we conducted experiments 
on selected phenotypes by continuously increasing the clustering parameters - 
EPS from a low level. (Figure 4) shows the results. In this experiment, we label 
mentions into two types: correct and incorrect using SemEHR labelled data on the 
SLaM corpus. Specifically, for the mention types in (Table 1), incorrect mentions are 
those denoted ‘not-a-phenotype-mention’ and the remainder are labelled as correct. 
We chose incorrect as the 𝑓 in (equation 3) meaning that we evaluate the separate 
power on incorrect mentions. Four phenotypes were selected for this evaluation: 
Diabetes and Hypertensive disease were selected because they were most validated 
phenotypes; Abscess (with 13% incorrect mentions) and Blindness (with 47% 
incorrect mentions) were chosen to represent NLP models with different levels of 
performance. The figure shows a clear trend in all cases that as EPS increases the 
clustered percentage increases but with decreasing separate power. This confirms a 
trade-off between the coverage of identified language patterns and how good they 
are. Regarding separate power, the performance on two selected common 
phenotypes (Figure 4a and 4b) is generally worse than for the other phenotypes - 
starting with lower power, which decreases faster as EPS increases. The main 
reason is that the difficult cases (mentions with poor performance) in the two 
commonly encountered phenotypes are relatively rare (Diabetes: 8.5%; 
Hypertensive disease: 5.5%). In such situations, difficult cases are harder to 
separate because their patterns are under-represented. However, in general, 
compared to random clustering, the embedding based clustering approach brings in 
much better separate power in all cases. This confirms a high level association 
between identified clusters and model performance. In particular, when the 
proportion of difficult cases reaches near 50% (Figure 4d), the approach can keep 
SP values almost constantly near 1.0 when EPS increases. This means it 
can almost always group difficult cases in their own clusters. 
Model adaptation guidance evaluation 
Technically, the guidance to model adaptation is composed of two parts: avoid 
duplicate waste (skip validation/training efforts on cases the model is already 
familiar with); and avoid imbalance waste (group new language patterns together 
so that validation/continuous training on each group separately can be more 
efficient than doing it over the whole corpus). To quantify the guidance 
effectiveness, the following metrics are introduced. 
● Duplicate Waste. This is the number of mentions whose patterns fall into 
what the model m is familiar with. The quantity
|{𝑠|𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛(𝑠}∈𝑃𝑚∩𝑃𝑇}|
|𝑆|
is the 
proportion of mentions which needs no validation or retraining before 
reusing 𝑚. 
● Imbalance Waste. To achieve convergence performance, an NLP model 
needs to be trained on a minimal number (denoted as 𝑒) of samples from 
each language pattern. Calling the language pattern set in a new task as𝐶=
{𝐶1,. . ., 𝐶𝑘}, the following equation counts the minimum number of samples 
needed to achieve convergent results in ‘blind’ adaptations. 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣_𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝐶, 𝑒) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖=1
𝑘
|𝑆|
|𝐶𝑖| × 𝑚𝑖𝑛(|𝐶𝑖|, 𝑒)                                (4) 
 
When the language patterns are identifiable, the Imbalance Waste that can 
be avoided is quantified as 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣_𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝐶, 𝑒) −∑𝑘
𝑖=1
𝑚𝑖𝑛(|𝐶𝑖|, 𝑒). 
● Accuracy. To evaluate whether our approach can really identify familiar 
patterns, we quantify the accuracy of those within-threshold clusters and 
also those within-threshold single mentions that are not clustered. Both 
macro-accuracy (average of all cluster accuracies) and micro-accuracy 
(overall accuracy) are used - detailed explanations at [32]. 
 
(Figure 5) shows the results of our NLP model adaptation guidance on 4 phenotype 
identification tasks. For each new phenotype identification task, the NLP model 
(pre-)trained for the semantically most similar (defined in Equation 2) phenotype 
was chosen as the reuse model. Models and labelled data for the four pairs of 
phenotypes were selected from six physical comorbidity studies on SLaM data. 
Figure 5 shows that identified mentions have a high proportion of avoidable 
duplicate waste in all 4 cases: diabetes and heart attack start with 50%; stroke and 
multiple sclerosis > 70%. Such avoidable duplicate waste decreases when the 
threshold increases. The threshold is on similarity instead of distance, meaning that 
new patterns need to be more similar to the reuse model’s embeddings to be 
counted as familiar patterns. Therefore, it is understandable that duplicate waste 
decreases in such scenarios. In terms of accuracy, one would expect this to increase 
as only more similar patterns are left when threshold increases. However, 
interestingly, in all cases, both macro and micro-accuracies decrease slightly before 
increasing to reach near 1.0. This is a phenomenon worth future investigation. In 
general, the changes in accuracy are small (.03 to .08), while accuracy remains high 
(>.92). Given these observations, the threshold is normally set at .01, to optimise the 
avoidance of duplicate waste with minimal effect on accuracy. Specifically, in all 
cases, more than half of the identified mentions (50%+ for subfigure 5a and 5b; 
70%+ for 5c and 5d) do not need any validation/training to obtain accuracy 
of >0.95. In terms of effective adaptation on new patterns, the percentages of 
avoidable imbalance waste in all cases are around 80% confirming that a much 
more efficient retraining on data can be achieved through language pattern-based 
guidance. 
 
Figure 5. Identifying new phenotypes by reusing NLP models pre-trained for 
semantically-close phenotypes: the four pairs of phenotype-mention identification 
models are chosen from SemEHR models trained on SLaM data; DBScan EPS value: 
3.8; Imbalance Waste is calculated on e = 3 meaning at least 3 samples are needed 
for training from each language pattern. The X axis is the similarity threshold, 
ranging from 0.0 to 0.8; the Y axes, from top to bottom, are: the proportion of 
duplicate waste saved over total number of mentions; macro-accuracy; micro-
accuracy. 
 
Effectiveness of phenotype semantics in model reuse 
When considering NLP model reuse for a new task, if there is no existing model that 
has been developed for the same phenotype-mention identification task, our 
approach will choose a model trained for a phenotype that is most semantically 
similar to it (based on Equation 2). To evaluate the effectiveness of such semantic 
relationships in reusing NLP models, we conducted experiments on the previous 
four phenotypes by using phenotype models with different levels of semantic 
similarities. (Table 2) shows the results. In all cases, reusing models trained for 
more similar phenotypes can identify more duplicate waste using the same 
parameter settings. The first three cases in the table can also achieve better 
accuracies, while multiple sclerosis had slightly better accuracy by reusing the 
diabetes model than the more semantically-similar myasthenia gravis. However, the 
latter identified 46% more duplicate waste. 
 
Table 2. Comparisons of the performance of reusing models with different semantic 
similarity levels. More similar ones are marked with *. Similarity threshold: 0.01; 
DBScan EPS: 0.38. Reusing models trained for more (semantically) similar 
phenotypes achieved adaptation results that with less effort (more duplicate waste 
identified) in all cases and were also more accurate in 3 out of 4 cases. 
Model reuse cases  
duplicate waste 
macro-accuracy 
micro-accuracy 
Diabetes by Type 2 
Diabetes* 
0.502  
 
0.966  
0.933 
Diabetes by 
Hypercholesterolaemia 
0.477  
0.965 
 0.930 
Stroke by Heart attack* 
0.711  
0.948  
0.955 
Stroke by Fatigue 
0.220  
0.884  
0.938 
Heart attack by Infarct* 
0.569  
0.989   
0.966 
Heart attack by Bruise 
0.529  
0.821 
 0.889 
Multiple Sclerosis by 
Myasthenia Gravis* 
0.761 
 0.944  
0.971 
Multiple Sclerosis by 
Diabetes 
0.522  
0.993  
0.979 
 
Discussion 
Principal Results 
Automated extraction methods (as surveyed recently by Ford and et. al.[33]), many 
of which are made freely available and open source, have been intensively 
investigated in mining free-text medical records[10,34–36]. To provide guidance in 
the efficient reuse of pre-trained NLP models, we have here proposed an approach 
that can automatically (i) identify easy cases in a new task for the reused model, on 
which it can achieve good performance with high confidence; (ii) classify the 
remainder of the cases so that the validation or retraining on them can be conducted 
much more efficiently, compared to adapting the model on all cases. Specifically, in 
four phenotype-mention identification tasks, we have shown that 50-79% of all 
mentions are identifiably easy cases, for which our approach can choose the best 
model to reuse, achieving more than 93% accuracy. Furthermore, for those cases 
that need validation or retraining, our approach can provide guidance that can save 
78-85% of the validation/retraining effort. A distinct feature of this approach is that 
it requires no labelled data from new settings, which enables very efficient model 
adaptation - as shown in our evaluation: zero effort to obtain >93% accuracy among 
the majority (>63% in average) of the results. 
Limitations 
In this study, we did not evaluate the recall of adapted NLP models in new tasks. 
Although the models we chose can generally achieve very good recall for identifying 
physical conditions (96-98%) within the SLaM records, investigating the 
transferability on recalls is an important aspect of NLP model adaptation.  
 
The model reuse experiments were conducted on identifying new phenotypes on 
document sets that had not previously been seen by the NLP model. However, these 
documents were still part of the same (SLaM) EHR system. To fully test the 
generalisability of our approach will require evaluation of model reuse in a different 
EHR system, which will require a new set of access approvals as well as information 
governance approval for the sharing of embedding models between different 
hospitals. 
 
We chose a phenotype embedding model to represent language patterns. One 
reason is that we have limited number of manually annotated data items. The word 
embedding approach is unsupervised and the word-level “semantics” learnt from 
the whole corpus can help group similar words together in the vector space so that 
can help improve the phenotype level clustering performances. However, thorough 
comparisons between different language pattern models are needed to reveal 
whether other approaches, in particular simpler or less-computing-intensive 
approaches can achieve similar or different performances.  
 
In addition, implementation-wise, vector clustering is an important aspect of this 
approach. We have compared DBScan with k-nearest neighbors algorithm in our 
model, which revealed that DBScan could achieve better SP powers in most 
scenarios. Using a 64-bit Windows 10 server with 16G memory and 8 core CPUs (3.6 
GHz), DBScan uses 200M memory and takes 0.038 seconds on near 300 data points 
on average of 100 executions.  However, it is worth in-depth comparisons between 
more clustering algorithms. In particular, a larger datasets might be needed to 
compare the clustering performances on both computational aspect and SP powers.  
Comparison with Prior Work 
NLP model adaptation aims to adapt NLP models from a source domain (with 
abundant labelled data) to a target domain (with limited labelled data). This 
challenge has been extensively studied in the NLP community[37–41]. However, 
most existing approaches assume a single language model (e.g. a probability 
distribution) from each domain. This limits the ability to identify and subsequently 
deal differently with data items with different language patterns. Such a limitation 
prevents fine-grained adaptations, such as the reuse or adaptation of one NLP model 
on those items for which it performs well, and the re-training of the same model or 
reuse of other models on those items for which the original NLP model performs 
poorly. By contrast, our work aimed to depict the language patterns (i.e. different 
language models) of both source and target domains, and subsequently provide 
actionable guidance on reusing models based on these fine-grained language 
patterns. Further, very few NLP model reuse studies have focused on free-text in 
electronic medical records. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, this work is among 
the first to focus on model reuse for phenotype-mention identification tasks on real-
world free-text electronic medical records. 
 
Modelling language patterns has been investigated for different applications, such as 
the k-Signature approach[42] for identifying unique “signatures” of micro-message 
authors. This paper models language patterns for characterising “landscape” of 
phenotype mentions. One main difference is that we do not know how many 
clusters (or “signatures”) of language patterns exist in our scenario. Technically, we 
use phenotype embeddings to model such patterns and, particularly, utilise 
phenotype semantic similarities (based on ontology hierarchies) for reusing learnt 
embeddings when necessary. 
 
Conclusions 
Making fine-grained language patterns visible and comparable (in computable form) 
is the key to support ‘smart’ NLP model adaptation. We have shown that the 
phenotype embedding based approach proposed in this paper is an effective way to 
achieve this. However, our approach is just one way to model such fine-grained 
patterns. Investigating novel pattern representation models is an exciting research 
direction to enable automated NLP model adaptation and composition (i.e. 
combining various models together) for efficiently mining free-text electronic 
medical records in new settings with maximum efficiency and minimal effort. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was funded by Medical Research Council / Health Data Research UK 
Grant (MR/S004149/1); Industrial Strategy Challenge Grant (MC_PC_18029); the 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South 
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or 
the Department of Health and Social Care. 
Ethical approval and informed consent  
De-identified patient records were accessed through the Clinical Record Interactive 
Search (CRIS) at the Maudsley NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, South London and 
Maudsley (SLaM) NHS Foundation Trust. This is a widely used clinical database with 
a robust data governance structure which has received ethical approval for 
secondary analysis (Oxford REC 18/SC/0372). 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
none declared 
Abbreviations 
EHR: Electronic Health Record 
LSTM: Long Short Term Memory 
NLP: Natural Language Processing 
SemEHR: a semantic search toolkit that can be trained for different studies 
SLaM: South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust  
Data availability statement  
The clinical notes are not sharable in the public domain. However, interested 
researchers can apply for research access through 
https://www.maudsleybrc.nihr.ac.uk/facilities/clinical-record-interactive-search-
cris/. The natural language processing tool, models and code of this work are 
available at https://github.com/CogStack/CogStack-SemEHR. 
 
Multimedia Appendix 1 User interface and model performances of phenotype 
NLP models 
Multimedia Appendix 2 Proof of Theorem 1  
References 
1.  
Kharrazi H, Anzaldi LJ, Hernandez L, Davison A, Boyd CM, Leff B, et al. The Value of 
Unstructured Electronic Health Record Data in Geriatric Syndrome Case Identification 
[Internet]. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2018. pp. 1499–1507. 
doi:10.1111/jgs.15411 
2.  
Perera G, Broadbent M, Callard F, Chang C-K, Downs J, Dutta R, et al. Cohort profile of 
the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust Biomedical Research Centre 
(SLaM BRC) Case Register: current status and recent enhancement of an Electronic 
Mental Health Record-derived data resource [Internet]. BMJ Open. 2016. p. e008721. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008721 
3.  
Roque FS, Jensen PB, Schmock H, Dalgaard M, Andreatta M, Hansen T, et al. Using 
electronic patient records to discover disease correlations and stratify patient cohorts. 
PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7: e1002141. 
4.  
Wang Y, Ng K, Byrd RJ, Hu J, Ebadollahi S, Daar Z, et al. Early detection of heart failure 
with varying prediction windows by structured and unstructured data in electronic 
health records [Internet]. 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). 2015. 
doi:10.1109/embc.2015.7318907 
5.  
Abhyankar S, Demner-Fushman D, Callaghan FM, McDonald CJ. Combining structured 
and unstructured data to identify a cohort of ICU patients who received dialysis 
[Internet]. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2014. pp. 801–807. 
doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001915 
6.  
Margulis AV, Fortuny J, Kaye JA, Calingaert B, Reynolds M, Plana E, et al. Value of Free-
text Comments for Validating Cancer Cases Using Primary-care Data in the United 
Kingdom [Internet]. Epidemiology. 2018. pp. e41–e42. 
doi:10.1097/ede.0000000000000856 
7.  
Bell J, Kilic C, Prabakaran R, Wang YY, Wilson R, Broadbent M, et al. Use of electronic 
health records in identifying drug and alcohol misuse among psychiatric in-patients 
[Internet]. The Psychiatrist. 2013. pp. 15–20. doi:10.1192/pb.bp.111.038240 
8.  
Jackson MSc RG, Ball M, Patel R, Hayes RD, Dobson RJB, Stewart R. TextHunter--A User 
Friendly Tool for Extracting Generic Concepts from Free Text in Clinical Research. 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2014;2014: 729–738. 
9.  
Savova GK, Masanz JJ, Ogren PV, Zheng J, Sohn S, Kipper-Schuler KC, et al. Mayo clinical 
Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System (cTAKES): architecture, component 
evaluation and applications. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17: 507–513. 
10.  Wu H, Toti G, Morley KI, Ibrahim ZM, Folarin A, Jackson R, et al. SemEHR: A general-
purpose semantic search system to surface semantic data from clinical notes for 
tailored care, trial recruitment, and clinical research* [Internet]. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. 2018. pp. 530–537. 
doi:10.1093/jamia/ocx160 
11.  Christoph J, Griebel L, Leb I, Engel I, Köpcke F, Toddenroth D, et al. Secure Secondary 
Use of Clinical Data with Cloud-based NLP Services. Towards a Highly Scalable 
Research Infrastructure. Methods Inf Med. 2015;54: 276–282. 
12.  Tablan V, Roberts I, Cunningham H, Bontcheva K. GATECloud.net: a platform for large-
scale, open-source text processing on the cloud [Internet]. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 2012. pp. 
20120071–20120071. doi:10.1098/rsta.2012.0071 
13.  Chard K, Russell M, Lussier YA, Mendonça EA, Silverstein JC. A cloud-based approach to 
medical NLP. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2011;2011: 207–216. 
14.  Carroll RJ, Thompson WK, Eyler AE, Mandelin AM, Cai T, Zink RM, et al. Portability of an 
algorithm to identify rheumatoid arthritis in electronic health records. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc. 2012;19: e162–9. 
15.  Harris ZS. Distributional Structure [Internet]. WORD. 1954. pp. 146–162. 
doi:10.1080/00437956.1954.11659520 
16.  Salton G, Wong A, Yang CS. A vector space model for automatic indexing [Internet]. 
Communications of the ACM. 1975. pp. 613–620. doi:10.1145/361219.361220 
17.  Brown PF, Desouza PV, Mercer RL, Pietra VJD, Lai JC. Class-based n-gram models of 
natural language. Comput Linguist. 1992;18: 467–479. 
18.  Deerwester S, Dumais ST, Furnas GW, Landauer TK, Harshman R. Indexing by latent 
semantic analysis. Journal of the American society for information science. 1990;41: 
391–407. 
19.  Blei DM, Ng, Rew Y, Jordan MI. Latent dirichlet allocation. J Mach Learn Res. 2003;3: 
993–1022. 
20.  Hinton GE. Distributed representations. Carnegie-Mellon University; 1984. 
21.  Bengio Y, ’e, Vincent P, Jauvin C. A neural probabilistic language model. J Mach Learn 
Res. 2003;3: 1137–1155. 
22.  Collobert R, Weston J. A unified architecture for natural language processing: Deep 
neural networks with multitask learning. Proceedings of the 25th international 
conference on Machine learning. ACM; pp. 160–167. 
23.  Glorot X, Bordes A, Bengio Y. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment 
classification: A deep learning approach. Proceedings of the 28th international 
conference on machine learning (ICML-11). pp. 513–520. 
24.  Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado GS, Dean J. Distributed Representations of 
Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. In: Burges CJC, Bottou L, Welling M, 
Ghahramani Z, Weinberger KQ, editors. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 26. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2013. pp. 3111–3119. 
25.  Gouws S, Bengio Y, Corrado G. Bilbowa: Fast bilingual distributed representations 
without word alignments. Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on 
Machine Learning. 
26.  Hill F, Cho K, Korhonen A. Learning Distributed Representations of Sentences from 
Unlabelled Data [Internet]. Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language 
Technologies. 2016. doi:10.18653/v1/n16-1162 
27.  Peters M, Neumann M, Iyyer M, Gardner M, Clark C, Lee K, et al. Deep Contextualized 
Word Representations [Internet]. Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language 
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers). 2018. doi:10.18653/v1/n18-1202 
28.  McCann B, Bradbury J, Xiong C, Socher R. Learned in translation: Contextualized word 
vectors. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2017; 6294–6305. 
29.  Peters M, Ammar W, Bhagavatula C, Power R. Semi-supervised sequence tagging with 
bidirectional language models [Internet]. Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2017. 
doi:10.18653/v1/p17-1161 
30.  Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical 
terminology [Internet]. Nucleic Acids Research. 2004. p. 267D–270. 
doi:10.1093/nar/gkh061 
31.  Schubert E, Sander J, Ester M, Kriegel HP, Xu X. DBSCAN revisited, revisited: why and 
how you should (still) use dbscan. ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS). 
2017;42: 19. 
32.  Van Asch V. Macro-and micro-averaged evaluation measures. Belgium: CLiPS; 2013. 
Report No.: 1--27. 
33.  Ford E, Carroll JA, Smith HE, Scott D, Cassell JA. Extracting information from the text of 
electronic medical records to improve case detection: a systematic review [Internet]. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2016. pp. 1007–1015. 
doi:10.1093/jamia/ocv180 
34.  Wu Y, Denny JC, Trent Rosenbloom S, Miller RA, Giuse DA, Wang L, et al. A long journey 
to short abbreviations: developing an open-source framework for clinical abbreviation 
recognition and disambiguation (CARD). J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017;24: e79–e86. 
35.  Savova GK, Ogren PV, Duffy PH, Buntrock JD, Chute CG. Mayo Clinic NLP System for 
Patient Smoking Status Identification [Internet]. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association. 2008. pp. 25–28. doi:10.1197/jamia.m2437 
36.  Albright D, Lanfranchi A, Fredriksen A, Styler WF 4th, Warner C, Hwang JD, et al. 
Towards comprehensive syntactic and semantic annotations of the clinical narrative. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc. 2013;20: 922–930. 
37.  Moriokal T, Tawara N, Ogawa T, Ogawa A, Iwata T, Kobayashi T. Language Model 
Domain Adaptation Via Recurrent Neural Networks with Domain-Shared and Domain-
Specific Representations [Internet]. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2018. doi:10.1109/icassp.2018.8462631 
38.  Samanta S, Das S. Unsupervised domain adaptation using eigenanalysis in kernel space 
for categorisation tasks [Internet]. IET Image Processing. 2015. pp. 925–930. 
doi:10.1049/iet-ipr.2014.0754 
39.  Xiao M, Guo Y. Domain Adaptation for Sequence Labeling Tasks with a Probabilistic 
Language Adaptation Model. International Conference on Machine Learning. 2013. pp. 
293–301. 
40.  Xu F, Yu J, Xia R. Instance-based Domain Adaptation via Multiclustering Logistic 
Approximation [Internet]. IEEE Intelligent Systems. 2018. pp. 78–88. 
doi:10.1109/mis.2018.012001555 
41.  Jiang J, Zhai C. Instance weighting for domain adaptation in NLP. Proceedings of the 
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics. Association for 
Computational Linguistics; 2007. pp. 264–271. 
42.  Schwartz R, Tsur O, Rappoport A, Koppel M. Authorship Attribution of Micro-Messages. 
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2013. pp. 1880–1891. 
 
