Title: Quantum Natural Language Processing based Sentiment Analysis using lambeq Toolkit
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19383v1
--------------------------------------------------

Quantum Natural Language Processing based
Sentiment Analysis using lambeq Toolkit
Srinjoy Ganguly
Escuela T´ecnica Superior de Ingenier´ıa de Sistemas Inform´aticos
Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
srinjoyganguly@gmail.com
Sai Nandan Morapakula
Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences
Coimbatore, India
sainandanm2002@gmail.com
Luis Miguel Pozo Coronado
Escuela T´ecnica Superior de Ingenier´ıa de Sistemas Inform´aticos
Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
lm.pozo@upm.es
Abstract—Sentiment classification is one the best use case
of classical natural language processing (NLP) where we can
witness its power in various daily life domains such as banking,
business and marketing industry. We already know how classical
AI and machine learning can change and improve technology.
Quantum natural language processing (QNLP) is a young and
gradually emerging technology which has the potential to provide
quantum advantage for NLP tasks. In this paper we show the first
application of QNLP for sentiment analysis and achieve perfect
test set accuracy for three different kinds of simulations and a
decent accuracy for experiments ran on a noisy quantum device.
We utilize the lambeq QNLP toolkit and t|ket > by Cambridge
Quantum (Quantinuum) to bring out the results.
Index Terms—Quantum Computing, Quantum Natural Lan-
guage Processing, lambeq
I. INTRODUCTION
Taking computational speeds and performance into con-
sideration, quantum computers are exponentially faster than
the present generation classical computers. Until the last two
decades or the end of the 20th century quantum computer was
a fictional story developed by great mathematicians and physi-
cists such as Richard Feynman, Erwin Schrodinger, David
Deutsch, etc. In the early 21st century quantum computers
gained its importance and the fictional story was greatly read,
understood and was theoretically well developed. Recently, the
first quantum computers have been built, some of them have
been made publicly available, and they have already gained
its significance and showed its power in various domains
like machine learning, chemistry, natural language processing,
biomedicine, etc. In this paper we will see how quantum
computers can help us in improving the domain of natural
language processing.
Quantum computing is itself a nascent field so is Quan-
tum Natural Language Processing (QNLP), we take the phe-
nomenon of superposition, entanglement, interference to our
own advantage and run NLP models or language related tasks
on the hardware. As of now we are currently in the Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) [1] computers era, where
the error rate is directly proportional to the number of qubits
and information a qubit contains can be lost easily which is
why quantum computers are stored at very cool temperatures
and requires great maintainence.
QNLP is different from classical NLP. QNLP has its ori-
gins in abstract mathematical theory which includes category
theory - especially monoidal categories, diagramatic quantum
theory and ZX calculus. To gain more understanding about
the concepts of diagrammatic quantum theory, the reader can
refer to [2] which explains the fundamentals of diagrammatic
reasoning for quantum theory and is the core of QNLP.
Since a model of natural language is being equivalent to
a model which explains quantum mechanical phenomena,
this approach makes QNLP quantum-native. By this process
linguistic structure can be encoded easily where as encoding
grammer in classical is very costly.
In this paper we are going to see how accurately quantum
computers can predict the sentiments, where they are already
trained with around 130 sentences. We will also see how
classical computers and quantum computers with embedded
noise will give the results and compare them to get a better
understanding of why we need quantum computers and how
powerful they are.
The rest of the paper is ordered as follows: section 2
gives an introduction to the related work that is done and the
research going on in this field; section 3 gives a clear picture
and brief intuition on QNLP and also explains the sentiment
classification experiment; In section 4 we discuss the results
of classical, quantum and quantum with noise devices, section
5 summarises the work and also proposes some future lines
of work in the domain of QNLP.
II. RELATED WORK
As researchers, scientists, enthusiasts identified the capabil-
ity of quantum devices and the power they have got, more
effort and time is put into this domain. Despite of QNLP
being a new and emerging field, Noisy Intermediate Scale
arXiv:2305.19383v1  [quant-ph]  30 May 2023
Quantum(NISQ) devices have already led to some propitious
results [3] and also appiled to divergent field such as quantum
music [4].
As we all know that the applications of classical NLP is
already seen in our day-to-day lives. Voice assistants such
as Siri and Alexa are the best examples. The problem and
constraint with classical NLP is that it can only read and
decipher bits but cannot deeply understand the meaning of
the language and that is where there is scope for quantum to
do this in a meaning-aware manner.
In QNLP, the sentences are depicted by variational quantum
circuits and each and every word in a sentence is transformed
into quantum states by using parameterized quantum gates.
With the help of the variational circuit technique, QNLP
becomes NISQ-friendly [5].
Scientists and researchers at Cambridge Quantum developed
the first high level python framework for QNLP named lam-
beq. This unique toolkit is a open source package which offers
the functionality of converting sentences into quantum circuits
[6].
The first and foremost effort of designing and execution
of natural language models on a real quantum computer
was accomplished by Cambridge Quantum where they used
an intermediate dataset containing sentences of two different
classes - Food or IT and results obtained were profound as
given in [7].
In this work, we present the first application of QNLP
for sentiment analysis on an intermediate level dataset where
we achieve successful results in a binary classification of
sentiments - positive and negative sentences. We demonstrate
that for both classical and quantum simulations we achieve
proper convergence.
III. METHODOLOGY AND EXPERIMENTS
We have utilized the Distributional Compositonal Cate-
gorical (DisCoCat) [8] framework for our task of sentiment
classification. The DisCoCat framework provides a unique way
of combining different constitutent words to form the meaning
of a whole sentence. It follows a compositional mechanism for
the grammar to entangle word meanings which are distributed
in a vector space. Lambek’s pregroup grammar is used in
DisCoCat to retrieve the meaning of a sentence from the
meaning of the words.
A. Compositional Model of Meaning
The compositional model of meaning is inspired from
Lambek’s pregroup grammar. In this formalism, we assign
atomic types ’n’ for noun and ’s’ for sentence to the words
present in a sentence which assists in the composition of the
word meanings together. The grammatical rules to compose
different types of sentences can be found in [9] and the string
diagrams shown have utilized those rules given by Lambek.
Fig. 1 shows the string diagram for a sentence ”siva hates
thrilling comics” where the words are represented by boxes
or alternatively triangle shaped boxes and the wires (cups and
straight wires) represent the entagling effect which composes
Fig. 1. String diagram of ”siva hates thrilling comics”.
the words together to give the meaning of the sentence, which
is the grammar. The juxtaposition of the atomic types reduces
to ’s’ which signifies that the sentence is grammatically
correct. This juxtaposition is solved in (1).
n · nr · s · nl · n · nl · n →1 · s · 1 · 1 →s
(1)
Due to today’s NISQ devices i.e. small number of qubits,
qubit decoherece and since the string diagrams themselves are
resource intensive, they need to be rewritten into a more NISQ
friendly version which is going to consume less number of
qubits to represent the sentences.
Fig. 2. Rewritten string diagram of ”siva hates thrilling comics”.
Since cups consume twice the number of qubits assigned
to either ’n’ or ’s’, therefore, removing the cups from the
original string diagrams results in a diagram which actually
consumes less number of resources and is better adapted to
today’s NISQ hardware. From Fig. 2 it can be seen that the
diagram has reduced in size by removing the cups.
B. Language into Quantum Circuits
After we have designed the string diagrams for the lan-
guage, we have to transform them into quantum circuits in
order to run them on simulators and quantum hardware. The
compositional model of meaning described before follows
a bottom-up approach i.e. composing words to form the
meaning of sentence. On the contrary, language in the form
of quantum circuits follows a top-down approach i.e. inferring
the meaning of words using the meaning of sentence. This top-
down approach is valid because for training quantum circuits
a dataset of sentences with labels is provided and from that
the meaning of words is inferred.
Fig. 3. Circuit diagram of ”siva hates thrilling comics”.
Fig. 3 refers to the quantum circuit of the string diagram
shown in Fig. 1. The upper triangles (faced upwards) are
called ”states” or |states > and the lower trianlges (faced
downwards) are knows as ”effects” or < effects|. It can be
seen that there are 7 states i.e. 7 qubits and 6 effects i.e. 6
qubits for post-selected measurement. This means that 6 out
of 7 qubits need to be used for measurement.
Fig. 3 shows that we have Hadamard gates and CNOT gates
used to create the entangling effects or cups present in the
string diagram. The nouns such as ”siva” and ”comics” have
been converted into circuit form using parametrized quantum
gates - Rz(α) and Rx(α). The verbs such as ”hates” and
”thrilling” have been denoted by parameterized controlled Rz
gates. This quantum circuit is denoted as Instantaneous Quan-
tum Polynomial (IQP) [10] which consists of fixed Hadamard
gates, parametrized single qubit gates and controlled two
qubit quantum gates. Since the IQP consists of parametrized
gates which can vary or modify their output based on input
parameters, so it is an example of a variational quantum circuit.
Fig. 4. Rewritten circuit diagram of ”siva hates thrilling comics”.
According to the original string diagram quantum circuit,
we require 7 qubit quantum hardware to run the sentence on
a quantum computer. Fig. 4 displays the quantum circuit of
the diagram in Fig. 2 and it can be deciphered that there are
4 qubits (states) and 3 qubits for post-selected measurement.
This is a great reduction of qubits instead of having 6 of 7,
we get 3 of 4 after removing the cups by using rewriting
technique. Therefore the rewritten circuit can be utilized for
NISQ devices.
C. Experimental Details
For conducting sentiment analysis on a quantum computer
we have used a binary sentiment classification dataset which
contains positive and negative sentiments of candidates on
reading various book generes such as fiction, nonfiction,
comics and classics. A label of 0 is assigned to positive
sentiments and a label of 1 is assigned to negative sentiments.
The dataset consists of 130 sentences, out of which 70 are
in the training set, 30 in development set and 30 in test set.
There are 7 nouns, 3 adjectives and 5 verbs in total for the
sentences present in the dataset.
We have employed lambeq [6], world’s first QNLP toolkit
for carrying out our experiments. This toolkit provides a
convenient way of converting string diagrams into quantum
circuits and then using those circuits for each of the sentences
for training purpose on a quantum computer. The toolkit itself
is based on Python programming language and entails unique
features - high level, open source - code available on GitHub,
modular - gives independent modules for greater flexibility,
extensive - object-oriented design and interoperability - simple
communication with other packages.
Fig. 5. lambeq QNLP Toolkit Pipeline. Fig from [6].
The lambeq pipeline shown in Fig. 5 is the general process
for QNLP training. A sentence is first parsed by a parser
and then converted into a string diagram. Here lambeq uses
the state-of-the-art DepCCGParser given in [11] to parse the
sentences in a CCG format and then converts them to string
diagrams. The process of converting CCG to string diagram
and vice-versa has been explained in [12] by considering CCG
as a biclosed category.
After the sentence is converted into a string diagram, it is
converted into a quantum circuit based on the ansatz present
in lambeq. There are several ansatz which lambeq provides
such as SpiderAnsatz, TensorAnsatz, IQPAnsatz, etc. For each
sentence present in the dataset, a circuit is formed and for all
the sentences in the dataset those circuits are stored in a list.
Based on the optimization scheme chosen, these circuits are
sent to the simulator or quantum hardware for training.
The training process in QNLP is very similar to that of a
classical machine learning method. The circuits are ran one
by one, measurements are collected from each of the circuits
into prediction labels using classical post-processing. These
prediction labels are compared with the true labels using a
suitable cost function and the output of the cost function is fed
into a classical optimizer which calculates the new parameters
of the quantum gates. These modified parameters are fed back
into the variational circuit again and the process repeats until
convergence.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
We apply QNLP using lambeq toolkit to our sentiment
analysis dataset, and there are four simulation types which
we cover: In classical pipeline the sentences in our dataset
are modeled as tensor networks; Quantum pipeline simulation
without noise; Quantum pipeline simulation using JAX, JAX
is a powerful scientific computing library used for automatic
differentiation; Quantum pipeline simulation with noise, by
using IBM Qiskit’s fake hardware simulator. We have used
FakeVigo as the fake hardware backend simulator for this
experiment; it can be changed according to one’s requirement.
A. Classical Simulation
In all the four experiments, first we convert each sentence
present in our data set into string diagrams using the DepCCG-
Parser. Once the sentences are converted into string diagrams,
we apply Spider anstaz by which the noun and sentence spaces
each receive a dimension of 2. The PyTorch backend is used
for the training with Adam optimizer.
Fig. 6. Results of classical pipeline simulation.
The plots for accuracy obtained on training and development
sets are shown in Fig. 6. We have obtained perfect accuracy
on the test set for this case.
B. Noiseless Quantum Simulation
This experiment is not very different from the classical one.
We use the same configuration as we used in classical pipeline,
however, we change the backend from PyTorch to IBM
Qiskit’s Aer simulator that is accessible through pytket, which
is t|ket >’s python interface. We use a gradient-approximation
technique called Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Ap-
proximation (SPSA) [13]. The reason to choose this optimizer
is because SPSA does not calculates the gradient of a quantum
circuit but rather approximates it. Evaluating gradients on a
quantum hardware by differentiating quantum circuits is very
resource intensive and this is where SPSA comes to the rescue.
Even though there is a lot of instability during the early
stages of training as shown in Fig. 7, but eventually the
model converges to good accuracy. The test set accuracy using
quantum pipeline is also perfect but the performance varies
depending upon on the number of iterations.
C. Quantum Simulation with JAX
The string diagrams are changed into variational quantum
circuits using the IQP anasatz. The noun and sentence types
get a single qubit each and the layers of IQP are set to 1. We
use JAX because the prediction functions are compiled with
great speed and JAX takes a very short time to run and execute
the results.
Results can be seen in Fig. 8. Even though we obtain
perfect accuracy using JAX, this configuration needs 4 times
Fig. 7. Results of quantum noiseless pipeline simulation.
Fig. 8. Results of quantum pipeline with JAX simulation.
the number of iterations of noiseless quantum pipeline to gain
this feat.
D. Noisy Quantum Simulation
Running circuits on real hardware, taking into account the
130 circuits needed, will be quite difficult and time consuming.
So to make this process a bit simpler, we have used Qiskit’s
fake quantum hardware backend called FakeVigo with the help
of t|ket >. The FakeVigo hardware has 5 qubits and is easily
able to run our circuits because of the diagram rewriting we
have employed. If we exclude the noise, everything else is
same in noisy pipeline.
The test accuracy is not perfect for noisy quantum simula-
tion which can be seen in Fig. 9. We achieved 83.33% accuracy
on the test set. To attain perfect accuracy it requires even more
iterations. To compare and show the difference of how noisy
quantum simulation differs from noiseless quantum simulation
we haven’t ran the experiment with increased number of
iterations.
Fig. 9. Results of quantum noisy pipeline simulation.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have showed the first application of QNLP
- binary sentiment classification using the lambeq QNLP
toolkit on an intermediate dataset consisting of book genre
sentiments. We were able to achieve successful convergence
for all the simulations carried out using classical and quantum
pipelines. Perfect accuracy on the test set was achieved for
three simulations and a decent accuracy was obtained for the
noisy quantum pipeline case.
QNLP is a new field and much work needs to be done
in this field in order to achieve quantum advantage. The
current work can be extended by including more number of
nouns, adjectives and verbs for each of the sentiments in
the dataset. This will increase the parameter space. We have
performed binary sentiment classification, therefore another
direction would be include multi class sentiment classification
by including neutral sentiments as well. It would be a great
direction of research if random sentences (without following a
particular pattern) are also being utilized in the dataset which
is of interest to us as that will provide intuition about the
scalability aspects of QNLP.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
S. G. is very grateful to L. M. P. C. for his guidance and
suggestions for improvement of the experiments and to Uni-
versidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid for supporting this research. S.
N. M. thanks Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences for
letting him explore research directions in the field of quantum
technology. The authors acknowledge the use of Google Colab
Pro for carrying out the experiments and the libraries lambeq
& t|ket > from Cambridge Quantum (Quantinuum).
REFERENCES
[1] J. Preskill, “Quantum computing in the nisq era and beyond,”
Quantum,
vol.
2,
p.
79,
Aug
2018.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79
[2] B. Coecke and A. Kissinger, Picturing Quantum Processes: A First
Course in Quantum Theory and Diagrammatic Reasoning.
Cambridge
University Press, 2017.
[3] W. Zeng and B. Coecke, “Quantum algorithms for compositional
natural language processing,” Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
Computer Science, vol. 221, p. 67–75, Aug 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.221.8
[4] E. R. Miranda, R. Yeung, A. Pearson, K. Meichanetzidis, and B. Coecke,
“A quantum natural language processing approach to musical intelli-
gence,” 2021.
[5] B. Coecke, G. de Felice, K. Meichanetzidis, and A. Toumi, “Foundations
for near-term quantum natural language processing,” 2020.
[6] D. Kartsaklis, I. Fan, R. Yeung, A. Pearson, R. Lorenz, A. Toumi,
G. de Felice, K. Meichanetzidis, S. Clark, and B. Coecke, “lambeq:
An efficient high-level python library for quantum nlp,” 2021.
[7] R. Lorenz, A. Pearson, K. Meichanetzidis, D. Kartsaklis, and B. Coecke,
“Qnlp in practice: Running compositional models of meaning on a
quantum computer,” 2021.
[8] B. Coecke, M. Sadrzadeh, and S. Clark, “Mathematical foundations for
a compositional distributional model of meaning,” 2010.
[9] J.
Lambek,
From
Word
to
Sentence:
A
Computational
Algebraic Approach to Grammar, ser. Open access publications.
Polimetrica,
2008.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.co.in/
books?id=ZHgRaRaadJ4C
[10] V. Havl´ıˇcek, A. D. C´orcoles, K. Temme, A. W. Harrow, A. Kandala,
J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, “Supervised learning with quantum-
enhanced feature spaces,” Nature, vol. 567, no. 7747, p. 209–212, Mar
2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0980-2
[11] M. Yoshikawa, H. Noji, and Y. Matsumoto, “A* CCG parsing with
a supertag and dependency factored model,” in Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers).
Vancouver, Canada: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2017, pp. 277–287. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/P17-1026
[12] R. Yeung and D. Kartsaklis, “A ccg-based version of the discocat
framework,” 2021.
[13] J. Spall, “Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous
perturbation gradient approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 332–341, 1992.
