Title: Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.01406v1
--------------------------------------------------

Kartsaklis, D., Lewis, M. and Rimell, L. (Eds):
2016 Workshop on Semantic Spaces at the Intersection of
NLP, Physics and Cognitive Science (SLPCS’16)
EPTCS 221, 2016, pp. 67–75, doi:10.4204/EPTCS.221.8
c⃝W. Zeng & B. Coecke
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial License.
Quantum Algorithms for
Compositional Natural Language Processing
William Zeng and Bob Coecke∗
Rigetti Computing and University of Oxford
zeng.will@gmail.com - bob.coecke@cs.ox.ac.uk
We propose a new application of quantum computing to the ﬁeld of natural language processing.
Ongoing work in this ﬁeld attempts to incorporate grammatical structure into algorithms that compute
meaning. In [5, 7], Coecke, Sadrzadeh and Clark introduce such a model (the CSC model) based
on tensor product composition. While this algorithm has many advantages, its implementation is
hampered by the large classical computational resources that it requires. In this work we show how
computational shortcomings of the CSC approach could be resolved using quantum computation
(possibly in addition to existing techniques for dimension reduction). We address the value of
quantum RAM [8] for this model and extend an algorithm from Wiebe, Braun and Lloyd [24] into
a quantum algorithm to categorize sentences in CSC. Our new algorithm demonstrates a quadratic
speedup over classical methods under certain conditions.
1
Introduction
As human computer interfaces become more advanced, natural language processing has grown to be a
ubiquitous part of our world. Its techniques allow computers to understand natural language to perform
tasks like automatic summarization, machine translation, information retrieval, and sentiment analysis.
Most approaches to this problem, such as Google’s search, understand strings of separate words in a ‘bag
of words’ approach, ignoring any grammatical structure. This is certainly unsatisfactory, as we know that
the meaning of a sentence is more than the meaning of its component words. Research in distributional
compositional semantics (DisCo) seeks to address this by incorporating grammatical structure.
In [5, 7], Coecke, Sadrzadeh and Clark introduce a DisCo model (the CSC model) based on tensor
product composition that gives a grammatically informed algorithm to compute the meaning of sentences
and phrases. Interestingly, this algorithm was directly inspired by quantum theory, and more speciﬁcally,
teleportation-like protocols [4].
While this algorithm has many advantages, its implementation is
hampered by the large classical computational resources that it requires. This paper presents ways that
quantum computers potentially could solve some of these problems, and doing so without the further
assumptions and inaccuracies of the existing classical techniques for dimension reduction (e.g. those
based on [18]). Hence making the CSC an attractive application for quantum computation.
We use the fact that quantum computation is naturally suited to managing high dimensional tensor
product spaces. Recent literature has shown that quantum algorithms can thus provide advantages for
machine learning [24, 20], inference [16], and regression [23, 22] tasks. We leverage these results in two
particular ways:
1. We employ the scaling of quantum systems to address computational difﬁculties inherent in tensor-
product based compositional semantics.
∗This work was funded by Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research grant FA9550-14-1-0079 and The Rhodes Trust.
68
Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing
2. Shared structure makes algorithms in the CSC model especially amenable to quantum speedups.
We specify a CSC sentence similarity algorithm that, under certain conditions, gives quadratic
speedups for natural language tasks.
In Section 2, we cover the basic framework of distributional compositional linguistics. Section 3
introduces the advantages of quantum representations for this framework. Sections 4 and 5 propose a
quantum algorithm with quadratic speedup for calculating sentence similarity within CSC. Section 6
brieﬂy discusses the noise tolerance of these methods.
2
Distributional Compositional Semantics and the CSS model
In modern natural language processing, the vector space model is widely used to compute the meaning
of individual words [21]. In this approach we ﬁrst specify a set of context words, for example the 2000
most common words in a given corpus. These context words then form the basis of the vector space of
word meanings in the following manner: for some given word, say “quantum”, we look through a corpus
and count the frequency with which each basis word appears ‘near’ to “quantum”. It is likely that we
would have a high frequency for words like “physics” and “information” for example. These frequencies
then form the word vector for “quantum”. Words represented by normalised vectors are similar if the
inner product of their word vectors is close to one. These ‘bag of words’ methods are typically referred
to as distributional.
As the same sentence rarely occurs repeatedly, this distributional technique cannot be directly
extended to calculate the meaning of longer phrases, sentences, paragraphs, etc. Instead, compositional
semantics designs algorithms for deriving the meaning of a sentence or phrase from known meanings
of component words, taking into account types and grammatical structure [15].
The distributional
compositional semantic model (DisCo) combines both approaches to introduce grammatical form to
the composition of word vectors [5, 7].
In this model, each grammatical type is assigned a tensor product space based on Lambek’s pregroup
grammar [15] or combinatorial categorical grammar [11].
The meaning of nouns is, for example,
calculated as in the distributional case, and we label their vector space N . A transitive verb’s meaning
is then, following the grammar, a vector in the space N ⊗S ⊗N , where S is the meaning space for
sentences [5, 7]. An intuition for this is that the transitive verb takes a subject noun as a left argument
and an object noun as a right argument. An adjective lives in the space N ⊗N .
We use a diagrammatic notation for vectors, tensors, and linear maps as is common for both CSC and
quantum information. Here vertical composition (read top to bottom) represents composition of linear
W. Zeng & B. Coecke
69
maps and horizontal composition represents the tensor product:
−−−→
Mary ∈N :=
N
Mary
f : N →N :=
M
N
f
−−→
likes ∈N ⊗S ⊗N :=
N SN
likes
g◦f =
N
g
N
M
f
−−−→
Mary⊗−−→
likes :=
N
Mary
likes
N SN
∑
i
⟨ii| :=
N
N
where f : N →M and g : M →N are linear maps and the linear map ∑i⟨ii| sums over all the basis
vectors of N and is called a cap.
Given a well-typed sentence with meaning vectors ⃗w j for each of k words, the classical CSC
algorithm for calculating a sentence’s meaning is [4]:
1. Compute the tensor product −−−→
words = ⃗w0 ⊗... ⊗⃗wk in the order that each word appears in the
sentence.
2. Construct a linear map that represents the grammatical type reduction by “wiring up” the vectors
with the appropriate caps. For example, given that the pregroup type reduction of a noun/transitive
verb/noun sentence is:
n· −1n·s·n−1 ·n ≤1·s·1 ≤s
this linear map is:
∑
i
⟨ii| ⊗id ⊗∑
i
⟨ii|
3. Compute the meaning of the sentence by applying the linear map to the −−−→
words vector. This results
in a vector in S which corresponds to the meaning of the sentence. In the above example the
result corresponds to the diagram:
N
N SN
N
Mary
likes
words.
(1)
We refer the reader to [7] for a fuller description of the distributional compositional model and to [10, 13]
and [14] for experimental implementations.
These models suggest a promising approach to incorporate grammatical structure with vector space
models of meaning, yet they come with the computational challenges of large tensor product spaces
[9]. While there do exist some classical approaches to avoid the calculation of the full tensor product,
70
Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing
such as the holographic reduced representations from [18] or the use of dimensionality reduction [19],
these approaches introduce further assumptions and inaccuracies. For this reason, ameliorating the large
computational costs introduced these large spaces through quantum computation is of particular interest.
3
Quantum computation for the CSC model
The most immediate advantage for quantum implementations of the CSC model is gained by storing
meaning vectors in quantum systems. For α,β ∈C a two-level quantum system, a qubit, is deﬁned by:
Qubit
Qubits
|ψ⟩
=
α|0⟩+β|1⟩
=
α
 1
0

+β
 0
1

|ψ1⟩⊗|ψ2⟩=




α1α2
α1β2
β1α2
β2β2




and composition of qubits is given by the tensor product. This leaves each n-qubit system with 2n degrees
of freedom, indicating that N-dimensional classical vectors can be stored in log2 N qubits. Consider a
corpus whose word-meaning space is given by a basis of the 2,000 most common words. Even if we
make the simplifying assumption that the sentence-meaning space is no larger than the word-meaning
space we obtain the dramatic improvements details in Table 1.
One Transitive Verb
10k tr. verbs
Classical
8×109 bits
8×1013 bits
Quantum
33 qubits
47 qubits
Table 1: Rough comparisons of the storage necessary for verbs in quantum and classical frameworks.
Further, these word meanings can be imported into a “bucket bridgade” quantum RAM that allows
them to retrieved with a complexity linear in the number of qubits [8]. The general point is that because
quantum systems compose via the tensor product they are natural choices to store complex types and
sentences that have the same compositional structure. We can then employ quantum algorithms on for
natural language classiﬁcation as presented in Section 5.
4
A quantum algorithm for the closest vector problem
Many tasks in computational linguistics such as clustering, text classiﬁcation, phrase/word similarity,
and sentiment analysis rely on computations that determine the closest vector to⃗s out of some set of N-
dimensional vectors {⃗v0,⃗v1,...⃗vM−1}. In clustering algorithms, for example, the set of vectors could be
either the centroids of different clusters or the full set of training vectors, as in nearest neighbor clustering
algorithms. Either the inner-product distance or Euclidean distance can be used. We will assume that all
vectors are N-dimensional.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Given vector ⃗s and a set of M vectors U = {⃗v0,⃗v1,...⃗vM−1} the closest vector problem
asks one to determine which vj has the smallest inner product distance with⃗s.
Direct calculation of the smallest vector would have complexity O(MN).
In [24] the authors
introduce a quantum algorithm for this problem that, under certain conditions, demonstrate quadratic
speedups over direct calculation and polynomial speedups over Monte-Carlo methods.
Some proof
W. Zeng & B. Coecke
71
of principle experiments have then demonstrated clustering of eight-dimensional vectors, based on
these techniques, on a small photonic quantum computer [3]. This algorithm requires the following
assumptions, where we write vji for the ith entry of the jth vector:
1. Vectors ⃗vj and⃗s are d-sparse, with no more than d non-zero entries.
2. The relevant vectors are stored in some kind of quantum memory so that the quantum computer
can access their entries with the two oracles of the form:
O| j⟩|i⟩|0⟩:= | j⟩|i⟩|vji⟩,
F| j⟩|l⟩:= | j⟩| f( j,l)⟩,
(2)
where f( j,l) is the location of the lth non-zero entry of vj. It is against these memory access oracles
that the performance of our algorithm will be measured.
3. max(|vji|2) ≤rmax for some known constant rmax.
4. All the vectors are normalized.
Under these assumptions we are able to run a quantum nearest-neighbor algorithm with complexity
characterized by the following theorem:
Theorem 4.2 ([24]). We can ﬁnd max j |⟨s | vj⟩|2 with success probability 1 −δ and error ε using an
expected number of O and F queries that is bounded above by
1080
√
M
4π(π +1)d2r4
max
ε
ln(81M(ln(M)+γ))/δ0
2(8/π2 −1/2)2

,
(3)
where γ ≈0.5772 is Euler’s constant.
It is clear that for this quantum algorithm there is a quadratic improvement in scaling with M,
the number of training vectors. While the dimension of the vectors N is not explicitly included, in
general it is implicitly there through the dependence on d. It is also clear that if rmax ∝1/
√
d, then
the algorithm’s dependence on both d and N drops out. As the vectors are normalized, this can be
expected to occur if the vectors have sparsity that grows linearly with their size [24]. The authors further
assume that for “typical” cases the error ε scales as Θ(1/
√
N) so that the runtime for the quantum
inner-product algorithm becomes O
 √
NMln(M)d2r4max

.1 This result shows a quadratic improvement
over direct calculations and also shows improvement over Monte Carlo methods, whose complexity is
O
 NMd2r4max

. These comparisons are summarized in Table 2.
Type
Typical cases
Atypical cases
Classical Direct
O(NM)
O(NM)
Classical Monte Carlo
O
 NMd2r4max

O
 Md2r4max/ε2
Quantum
O
 √
NMlog(M)d2r4max

O
 √
Mlog(M)d2r4max/ε

Table 2: Complexity comparisons for different closest vector algorithms. Adapted from [24].
In the following section we adapt this algorithm to sentence similarity calculations in the
distributional compositional framework.
1 This is argued for in Appendix D of [24] for a “typical” case where the vectors are uniformly distributed over the unit
sphere.
72
Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing
5
A quantum algorithm for CSC sentence similarity
The quantum algorithm from Section 4 can be used to advantage in natural language processing tasks
however, the computational overhead of the CSC approach would dwarf this algorithm’s advantages
if it were naively applied. Throughout this section we will assume both that rmax ∝1/
√
d and that
the accuracy necessary for our calculation means ε scales as Θ(1/
√
N).
Consider the example of
probabilistically classifying the meaning of a simple sentence. We illustrate this example with a noun-
verb-noun sentence. The meaning of the nouns are vectors in an N-dimensional vector space and the
meaning of the verb is a vector in the space N ⊗S ⊗N . We represent a derivation of the meaning of
the full sentence with the following map:
|φ⟩=
N
N S N
N
kids
play
football
From now on, we will take sentences to exist in the same meaning space as words, i.e. S ≃N .
Deﬁnition 5.1. For meaning vector⃗s and M sets of meaning vectors, a classiﬁcation task assigns⃗s to the
set containing the nearest-neighbor of⃗s.
An example task would be to determine if a sentence is about sports or politics or if a sentence
expresses agreement or disagreement. If, to present a simpliﬁed example, we take each cluster to only
contain a single vector (⃗v and ⃗w respectively) then the sentence would be classiﬁed by computing
N
N SN
N
kids
play
football
⃗v
sports
and
N
N SN
N
kids
play
football
⃗w
politics
(4)
and assigning the sentence to the one of smaller value. We would proceed with two steps:
1. Compute the derivation of |ψ⟩, which, by classical direct calculation, takes O(3N) operations.
2. See which of ⃗v and ⃗w is closest to |φ⟩. This is an instance of the closest vector problem where
⃗s = |φ⟩, M = 2, and U = {⃗v,⃗w}. With direct calculation or Monte Carlo the second step requires2
O(2N) to be compared with the quantum method at O(
√
2N log2). Even if we include the step
to import the classical data from step one into quantum form, which can be done with O(log2 N)
overhead [8], then we obtain a speedup for this step.
Still, despite the quantum speedup from step two, the full algorithm for general M runs in
O(3N
√
M logM), remaining linear in N.
2If we assume the appropriate d-sparsity scaling.
W. Zeng & B. Coecke
73
In order to recover a speedup we reﬁne the application of the quantum algorithm by posing a version
of the closest vector problem that avoids the initial calculation of |φ⟩altogether. Note the equivalence of
the calculations in Equation 4 with
N
S
N
kids
play
football
sports
and
N
S
N
kids
play
football
politics
(5)
Rather than directly calculating |φ⟩, which is not relevant to the classiﬁcation task, we can formulate
a closest vector problem where ⃗s = |play⟩, M = 2 and U = {|kids⟩⊗|v⟩⊗| football⟩,|kids⟩⊗|w⟩⊗
| football⟩}. The runtime of this deferred quantum algorithm, including import, will then be O(
√
MN),
showing our desired quadratic speedup in both variable.
We extend this to result to include general sentences in the CSC model with the following theorem.
Theorem 5.2. For an N-dimensional noun meaning space, there exists a quantum algorithm to
classify any CSC model sentence composed of n tensors ⃗w0, ⃗w1,..., ⃗
wn−1 into M classes with time
O(
√
MN logM). This improves on classical methods that require O(NM).
Proof. The trick we play in Equation 5 amounts to splitting the sentence derivation into a bipartite
graph. As the CSC connections are based on a pregroup derivation, the connections will always form
a tree, taking words as nodes and connections as edges. Trees can always be partitioned into bipartite
graphs, thus, up to the ordering of inputs on each tensor which can be kept track of, we can always
give a deferred quantum algorithm with associated speedup for any such CSC sentence. The following
procedure explicitly details how to construct this bipartite partitioning.
For every CSC sentence there is one word that acts as the head of the derivation. This is the word
whose output S wire contains the sentence meaning following its derivation’s linear map. In Equation
5 this is the word “play”. Connect the dangling wire of the head word ⃗wh with the vector ⃗vi against
which similarity is being measured. Starting with this head word we then separate the sentence into a
top layer and a bottom layer with the following steps. Assign the head word to the top layer. Place every
word it is connected to on the bottom layer. Next for every word just assigned to the bottom, take all
their connected words, which are not yet assigned, and assign them to the top. Continue this procedure
while alternating top and bottom until all words are assigned. This gives a simple two-coloring of the
derivation graph.
Example 5.3. Consider the following sentence [12]:
1
2
2
3
1
0
John
saw
Mary
read
a
book
74
Quantum Algorithms for Compositional Natural Language Processing
where we have labeled the vectors based on their depth in the derivation tree. The two-layer form assigns
even vectors to the top layer and odd vectors to the bottom:
John
saw
Mary
read
a
book
Hooking the dangling wire up to a classifying vector reduces the similiarity computation to the
calculation of a single inner product. Note that this procedure works for any derivation tree,3 so sentence
fragments, such as noun phrases, can be easily analyzed in exactly the same manner.
6
Noise tolerance and Conclusion
To reap the beneﬁts of quantum algorithm in the domain of natural language processing, we apply a
new technique to defers the calculation of a sentences compositional meaning, eliminating the overhead
costs. By this method we are able to introduce a quantum algorithm for calculating sentence similarity
that offers quadratic speedup over classical direct calculation and Monte-Carlo methods. These kinds
of algorithms are particularly attractive for practical applications of quantum computing as noisy results
can be tolerated: in our case when the desired errors is lower bounded by 1/
√
N. Vector space models
are already inherently noisy and typical tasks allow for errors in results, so this restriction does not affect
rule out their efﬁcacy.
An additional point is that the density matrix formalism of [17, 2] can also be naturally modeled by
mixed states of quantum systems. In fact, this analogy was the genesis for the theory of disambiguation
presented there, as another example of the shared structure that led to the results presented here. At a
basic level, our work exploits the abstract connection between natural language processing and quantum
information. More formally, we can see both quantum computation in the category of ﬁnite dimensional
Hilbert spaces and linear maps [1, 6] and CSC in the product category of pregroup grammar and ﬁnite
dimensional vectors spaces [7]. The connection between these two (as dagger compact categories) makes
the application of one to the other apparent.
References
[1] Samson Abramsky & Bob Coecke (2004): A categorical semantics of quantum protocols.
In: Logic
in Computer Science, 2004. Proceedings of the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on, IEEE, pp. 415–425,
doi:10.1109/LICS.2004.1319636.
[2] Dea Bankova, Bob Coecke, Martha Lewis & Dan Marsden (2016): Graded Entailment for Compositional
Distributional Semantics. arXiv:1601.04908.
[3] X-D Cai, D Wu, Su Z-E, M-C Chen, Wang X-L, Li Li, N-L Liu, C-Y Lu & J-W Pan (2015): Entanglement-
Based Machine Learning on a Quantum Computer.
Physical Review Letters 114(11), p. 110504,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.110504.
3Even non-pregroup and non-CCG models will work as long as there is some tree derivation.
W. Zeng & B. Coecke
75
[4] Stephen Clark, Bob Coecke, Edward Grefenstette, Stephen Pulman & Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh (2014): A
quantum teleportation inspired algorithm produces sentence meaning from word meaning and grammatical
structure. Malaysian Journal of Mathematical Sciences 8, pp. 15–25. arXiv:1305.0556.
[5] Stephen Clark, Bob Coecke & Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh (2008): A compositional distributional model of
meaning. In: Proceedings of the Second Quantum Interaction Symposium (QI-2008), pp. 133–140.
[6] Bob Coecke & Aleks Kissinger (2016): Picturing Quantum Processes. A First Course in Quantum Theory
and Diagrammatic Reasoning. Cambridge University Press. To appear.
[7] Bob Coecke, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh & Stephen Clark (2010): Mathematical foundations for a compositional
distributional model of meaning. Linguistic Analysis — A Festschrift for Jim Lambek 36. arXiv:1003.4394.
[8] Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd & Lorenzo Maccone (2008): Quantum random access memory. Physical
Review Letters 100(16), p. 160501, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.160501.
[9] Edward Grefenstette (2013): Category-Theoretic Quantitative Compositional Distributional Models of
Natural Language Semantics. Ph.D. thesis. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.1539.
[10] Edward Grefenstette & Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh (2011): Experimental Support for a Categorical Composi-
tional Distributional Model of Meaning. In: The 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural Lan-
guage Processing., pp. 1394–1404.
[11] Karl Moritz Hermann & Phil Blunsom (2013): The Role of Syntax in Vector Space Models of Compositional
Semantics. In: In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 894–904.
[12] Dimitri Kartsaklis (2015): Compositional Distributional Semantics with Compact Closed Categories and
Frobenius Algebras. Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford.
[13] Dimitri Kartsaklis & Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh (2013): Prior disambiguation of word tensors for constructing
Sentence vectors. In: The 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods on Natural Language Processing., ACL,
pp. 1590–1601.
[14] Dimitri Kartsaklis, Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh & Stephen Pulman (2012): A uniﬁed sentence space for categorical
distributional-compositional semantics: Theory and experiments. In: Proceedings of COLING: Posters, pp.
549–558.
[15] Joachim Lambek (2008): From word to sentence. Polimetrica, Milan.
[16] Guang Hao Low, Theodore J Yoder & Isaac L Chuang (2014): Quantum inference on Bayesian networks.
Physical Review A 89(6), p. 062315, doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.89.062315.
[17] Robin Piedeleu, Dimitri Kartsaklis, Bob Coecke & Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh (2015): Open System Categorical
Quantum Semantics in Natural Language Processing. In: Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Algebra and
Coalgebra in Computer Science (CALCO), Nijmegen, Netherlands, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CALCO.2015.270.
[18] Tony Plate (1991):
Holographic Reduced Representations:
Convolution Algebra for Compositional
Distributed Representations. In: International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 30–35.
[19] Tamara Polajnar, Luana Fagarasan & Stephen Clark (2013): Learning type-driven tensor-based meaning
representations. arXiv:1312.5985.
[20] Patrick Rebentrost, Masoud Mohseni & Seth Lloyd (2014): Quantum support vector machine for big data
classiﬁcation. Physical Review Letters 113(13), p. 130503, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.130503.
[21] Hinrich Schutze (1998): Automatic word sense discrimination. Computational Linguistics 24(1), pp. 97–123.
[22] Guoming Wang (2014): Quantum Algorithms for Curve Fitting. arXiv:1402.0660.
[23] Nathan Wiebe, Daniel Braun & Seth Lloyd (2012): Quantum algorithm for data ﬁtting. Physical Review
Letters 109(5), p. 050505, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.050505.
[24] Nathan Wiebe, Ashish Kapoor & Krysta Svore (2015): Quantum nearest-neighbor algorithms for machine
learning. Quantum Information & Computation 15(3 & 4), pp. 0318–0358.
