Title: The neural correlates of logical-mathematical symbol systems processing resemble that of spatial cognition more than natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14358v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
The neural correlates of logical-mathematical symbol systems 
processing resemble that of spatial cognition more than natural 
language processing 
 
Yuannan Li1, Shan Xu2*, Jia Liu1 
*: corresponding author 
 
1 Department of Psychology & Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100086, China 
2 Faculty of Psychology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China 
Address correspondence to Shan Xu, Faculty of Psychology, Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing, 100875, China. Email: shan.xu@bnu.edu.cn 
 
 
2 
 
Abstract: The ability to manipulate logical-mathematical symbols (LMS), 
encompassing tasks such as calculation, reasoning, and programming, is a cognitive 
skill arguably unique to humans. Considering the relatively recent emergence of this 
ability in human evolutionary history, it has been suggested that LMS processing may 
build upon more fundamental cognitive systems, possibly through neuronal recycling. 
Previous studies have pinpointed two primary candidates, natural language processing 
and spatial cognition. Existing comparisons between these domains largely relied on 
task-level comparison, which may be confounded by task idiosyncrasy. The present 
study instead compared the neural correlates at the domain level with both automated 
meta-analysis and synthesized maps based on three representative LMS tasks, 
reasoning, calculation, and mental programming. Our results revealed a more 
substantial cortical overlap between LMS processing and spatial cognition, in contrast 
to language processing. Furthermore, in regions activated by both spatial and 
language processing, the multivariate activation pattern for LMS processing exhibited 
greater multivariate similarity to spatial cognition than to language processing. A 
hierarchical clustering analysis further indicated that typical LMS tasks were 
indistinguishable from spatial cognition tasks at the neural level, suggesting an 
inherent connection between these two cognitive processes. Taken together, our 
findings support the hypothesis that spatial cognition is likely the basis of LMS 
processing, which may shed light on the limitations of large language models in 
logical reasoning, particularly those trained exclusively on textual data without 
explicit emphasis on spatial content. 
3 
 
 
Keywords: logical-mathematical symbols processing, natural language processing, 
spatial cognition, language of thought, large language model 
 
 
4 
 
1. Introduction 
Throughout its relatively brief history, humans have devised and mastered numerous 
logical-mathematical symbol (LMS) systems such as logical reasoning and 
calculation, reflecting our cultural and technological evolution. This trend continues 
with the creation of novel LMS systems with emerging knowledge domains such as 
programming, showcasing the remarkable adaptability of the human mind to 
increasingly complex cognitive challenges. In addition, the use of LMS systems to 
tackle abstract problems is attracting further interest, particularly for its potential to 
bridge the intellectual gap between artificial intelligence (AI) and human cognition. 
Despite its diverse applications and functionalities, LMS processing is theorized to 
originate from a single foundational system, namely the logical-mathematical 
intelligence, as proposed by Gardner’s multiple intelligences theory (1983). However, 
the exact cognitive functionality of this foundational system remains largely elusive. 
Especially, considering that known LMS-related behaviors have emerged relatively 
recently, within the last 6000 years (Pande, 2010), it is unlikely that a completely new 
set of neural facilities evolved specifically for this purpose. Accordingly, LMS 
processing may have evolved by repurposing phylogenetically more ancient cognitive 
systems through neuronal recycling (Dehaene, 2005; Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; 
Fedorenko et al., 2019; Kazanina & Poeppel, 2023).  
The primary systems thought to underlie LMS processing are natural language 
processing and spatial cognition (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; Fedorenko et al., 2019). In 
terms of form, LMS systems bear an ostensible resemblance with natural language 
5 
 
(Dehaene et al., 2022; Fedorenko et al., 2019). This similarity is especially evident in 
the syntax-like operations of LMS, which are thought to parallel those in language 
processing (Fedorenko et al., 2019). For example, the verbal reasoning approach, which 
views deductive reasoning, a representative LMS task, as a transformation of verbal 
information, relies on processes similar to those in language comprehension and 
generation (Krumnack et al., 2011; Polk & Newell, 1995). However, empirical evidence 
regarding the association between language and LMS processing is inconclusive, both 
in terms of correlation in behavioral performance (Fedorenko & Varley, 2016; LeFevre 
et al., 2010; Prat et al., 2020; Shearer & Karanian, 2017) and identification of common 
neural correlates (Amalric & Dehaene, 2016; Castelhano et al., 2021; Coetzee et al., 
2022; Fedorenko & Varley, 2016; Floyd et al., 2017; Houdé & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; 
Ivanova et al., 2020; Y.-F. Liu et al., 2020; Maruyama et al., 2012; Monti et al., 2009, 
2012; Prat et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), implying the complexity of the relationship 
between LMS and language systems. In addition, the comparison is limited to a handful 
of representative tasks, such as prose cloze versus code function judgment, sentence 
reading versus mental programming, and syllable concatenation versus number 
addition (Endres, Karas, et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021; Zago et al., 2008), and the 
specifics of corresponding task settings risk confounding the test of commonality (but 
see Ikutani, Itoh, et al., 2021 for a comparison between programming comprehension 
with the meta-analysis map of language, and Castelhano et al., 2021 for a comparison 
between program understanding with the meta-analysis results of reading). 
An alternative hypothesis proposes that LMS processing is built upon spatial 
6 
 
cognition, which views the processing of the properties and relations among non-spatial 
LMS elements dependent on spatial abilities (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; Lin & Dillon, 
2023). For instance, the mental model theory argues that reasoning is achieved by 
manipulating reasoning components in a visuospatial workspace, rather than a 
linguistic medium (Johnson-Laird, 2001). Similarly, the mental simulation theory posits 
that the ability to navigate physical environments underpins the simulation processes 
used to arrive at solutions in a logical-mathematical space (Barsalou, 2008; Hawes & 
Ansari, 2020). Supporting these theoretical models is behaviour and neural evidence 
linking LMS processing abilities, such as numerical, arithmetical, and geometric 
abilities (Houdé & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; Wei et al., 2012; Xie et al., 2020), logical 
reasoning (Goel, 2007; Houdé & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; Knauff et al., 2003), 
programming (Helmlinger et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2019; Sharafi et al., 2021), 
computational thinking (Román-González et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2021), and other 
STEM domains (Wai et al., 2009; Khine, 2017; Shea et al., 2001) to spatial ability. This 
suggests that spatial cognition may play a critical role in facilitating LMS processing, 
offering an important perspective alongside the language-based approach. However, 
similar to the situation with the language hypothesis, only a handful of specific LMS 
and spatial tasks were utilized in the comparison (Endres, Fansher, et al., 2021; Endres, 
Karas, et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2019; Zago et al., 2008). For example, in our previous 
study (Xu et al., 2021), to infer the cognitive substrates of computational thinking, we 
broke up the neural correlates of mental programming according to their varied pattern 
of neural resemblance with three other LMS tasks and a representative visuospatial task 
7 
 
(mental folding), and we observed that the part showing resemblance between mental 
programming and other LMS tasks does not necessarily show high resemblance with 
mental folding. This leaves open a question of whether the hypothetical neural 
resemblance between LMS and spatial processing exists above task variation, being 
evident at the domain level, and whether such neural resemblance is constantly larger 
than the LMS-language resemblance across tasks.  
 
To examine these two hypotheses at the domain level, here we compared the 
involvement of cortical regions associated with language processing and spatial 
cognition in LMS processing, respectively. Our rationale, grounded in the concept of 
neuronal recycling (Dehaene, 2005; Dehaene & Cohen, 2007), is that the basis of LMS 
processing is more likely to be the cognitive function whose cortical regions are 
predominantly engaged in LMS processing. The present study presented a novel 
attempt at direct and quantitative domain-level examination of the two hypotheses.  
Instead of comparing the activation of specific tasks, we ran large-scale automated 
meta-analyses to identify the cross-task neural correlates of language processing and 
spatial cognition, respectively. For LMS processing, with few dedicated studies, we 
operationalized it by its three core cognitive units as defined in logical-mathematical 
intelligence (Gardner, 1983), namely, calculation, logical reasoning, and problem-
solving, and compiled a synthesized activation map through a conjunctive analysis of 
whole-brain univariate activations based on inhouse data of three representative tasks 
of each core unit: reasoning, calculation, and mental programming from our previous 
work for another purpose (Xu et al., 2021). 
8 
 
With these meta-analysis results, we quantified and compared the domain-level 
overlap of LMS processing with language processing and spatial cognition, respectively. 
We indeed observed greater domain-level resemblance of LMS with spatial processing 
than with language processing, the cross-task homogeneity of which was further 
validated by multivariate activation pattern analysis. Finally, we used clustering 
analysis to explore the hierarchical structure among the neural correlates of LMS 
processing and its functional bases. These analyses collectively revealed a notable link 
between LMS processing and spatial cognition, supporting the hypothesis that the root 
of LMS processing lies in spatial cognition.  
 
2. Results 
2.1. Univariate analysis revealed more overlap of LMS processing with spatial 
cognition 
We first investigated whether LMS processing shared neural activation to a greater 
extent with language processing or spatial cognition. To identify the neural correlates 
intrinsic to LMS processing, distinct from those linked to task-specific properties, we 
conducted a conjunctive analysis using fMRI data from three representative tasks: 
reasoning, calculation, and mental programming (see Methods 4.2.2) (Figure 1a, 
middle). This synthesis allowed the generation of an activation map associated with 
LMS processing embedded across these three tasks. The resulting map revealed 
bilateral activation, in the frontal lobe (the middle frontal gyrus, the inferior frontal 
9 
 
gyrus), the supplementary motion area spanning to the cingulum, the insula, the 
posterior parietal cortex, the precuneus, and the inferior temporal gyrus (Supplemental 
Figure 1, Supplemental Table 1).  
To map the neural substrates of language processing and spatial cognition, we 
leveraged large-scale automated meta-analyses to generate cross-task activation maps 
for each (see Methods 4.1) (Figure 1a, left and right). Language processing activates a 
left-lateralized network, including the precentral and the inferior frontal gyri, the 
supplementary motion area, and the superior and middle temporal gyri (Supplemental 
Figure 2, Supplemental Table 2). In contrast, spatial cognition recruits the bilateral 
superior frontal gyrus, the opercular part of the inferior frontal gyrus, the supplementary 
motion area, the insula, the superior parietal lobule spanning to the middle occipital 
gyrus, the precuneus, and the inferior occipital gyrus spanning to the fusiform 
(Supplemental Figure 3, Supplemental Table 3). These activation patterns are consistent 
with findings from previous reviews (Cona & Scarpazza, 2019; Price, 2012).  
Figure 1c shows the activation overlap among LMS processing, language 
processing, and spatial cognition. For a full list of the overlapping clusters, refer to 
Supplementary Table 4. Visual inspection shows that the activation map of LMS 
processing overlapped with that of language processing mainly in the left inferior 
frontal gyrus and the left supplementary motion area. In contrast, overlap with spatial 
cognition is mainly in the bilateral posterior parietal cortex, the inferior and the middle 
frontal gyri, the right supplementary motion area, the right insula, and the right 
precuneus. Critically, there is substantial co-activation between LMS processing and 
10 
 
spatial cognition, and to a somewhat lesser extent, between LMS processing and 
language processing. In the neural activation of LMS processing, the voxels 
overlapping with spatial cognition (n = 1694) amount to 2.7 times the number of voxels 
overlapping with language processing (n = 634). This difference is also reflected in the 
dice coefficient, where the coefficient between spatial cognition and LMS processing 
(0.255) was larger than that between language processing and LMS processing (0.113), 
suggesting a greater similarity in the univariate activation maps of spatial cognition and 
LMS processing. 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 1. The comparison between neural correlates of LMS processing, language 
processing, and spatial cognition. (a) The generation of the domain-level neural 
correlate maps. LMS processing (middle): Image-based meta-analysis by 
representative tasks, i.e., reasoning, calculation, and mental programming. Language 
processing (left): automated meta-analysis by Neurosynth based on large-scale text 
12 
 
statistics. The word cloud showed the composition of the words from the titles of the 
included papers, excluding neuroimaging terminology such as “fMRI”. Spatial 
cognition (right): automated meta-analysis by Brainmap based on the established 
categorization (Fox et al., 2005). The tree graph displayed the experimental paradigms 
and contrasts included. (b) The dorsal view of the resultant domain-level maps. The 
warmer color indicated a stronger likelihood of activation in the meta-analysis. All the 
maps were FDR corrected at  p = 0.01. (c) The overlap between the domain-level maps 
of LMS processing and either language processing or spatial cognition. 
 
To replicate these domain-level findings and statistically compare the resemblance 
of LMS processing to either language processing or spatial cognition, we calculated the 
subject-wise overlap between each subject’s LMS synthesized map and their fMRI 
activation in representative language and spatial tasks, sentence processing, and mental 
folding, respectively (see methods 4.2.2) (Figure 2a, left and right). All the subject-wise 
maps were thresholded by a voxel-level threshold at  p = 0.001. Consistent with our 
observations from the domain-level analysis, the dice coefficients between spatial 
cognition and LMS processing were significantly higher than those for language 
processing and LMS processing (t(19) = 8.825, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 2.025) (Figure 
2b, left). This result illustrates the greater similarity in neural activation of LMS 
processing and spatial cognition compared to that between LMS processing and 
language processing. 
Given that our synthesized LMS activation map was derived from three distinct 
13 
 
representative LMS tasks, we further asked whether our findings were consistent across 
each task. To this end, we compared the group-level activation map of each LMS task 
(corrected by FDR at  p = 0.01) with the domain-level language and spatial processing 
maps, and further statistically tested the difference between the task-wise LMS 
activations and those of sentence processing and mental folding. 
In the reasoning task, overlap with spatial cognition was mainly in the bilateral 
posterior parietal cortex, the inferior frontal gyrus, the right middle frontal gyrus, the 
right insula, and the left precuneus, while overlap with language processing was mainly 
in the left inferior and middle frontal gyri, and the left supplementary motion area 
(Supplemental Figure 4). The overlap of reasoning with spatial cognition doubled the 
size of its overlap with language processing. Consistently, the dice coefficient for 
reasoning with spatial cognition (0.280) was larger than that with language processing 
(0.170). This pattern was confirmed by a significant difference between corresponding 
subjective dice coefficients (t(19) = 5.770, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.324) (Figure 2b, 
right).  
Similar patterns were observed for calculation and mental programming tasks. In 
the calculation task, overlap with spatial cognition was mainly in the bilateral inferior 
parietal lobule, the supplementary motion area, the left middle frontal gyrus, the 
opercular part of the right inferior frontal gyrus, and the right insula, while that with 
language processing was relatively limited, predominantly in the opercular part of the 
left inferior frontal gyrus (Supplemental Figure 5). Overlap between calculation and 
spatial cognition was 1.8 times larger than its overlap with language processing, 
14 
 
consistent with the comparison of dice coefficients (with spatial cognition: 0.149 versus 
with language processing: 0.053), indicating a more substantial resemblance between 
the neural correlates of calculation and spatial cognition. This pattern was confirmed 
by a significant difference between corresponding subjective dice coefficients (t(19) = 
3.477, p < 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.798) (Figure 2b, right).   
In the mental programming task, overlap with spatial cognition was mainly in the 
left inferior parietal lobule and the left precuneus, while that with language processing 
was mainly in the left precentral gyrus and the triangular part of the left inferior frontal 
gyrus (Supplemental Figure 6). The overlap between mental programming and spatial 
cognition is more than 10 times the size of the overlap between mental programming 
and language processing, consistent with the larger programming-spatial than 
programming-language dice coefficients at both the group level (with spatial cognition: 
0.065 versus language processing: 0.044) and subject level (t(19) = 5.215, p < 0.001, 
Cohen’s d = 1.196) (Figure 2b, right), suggesting that the neural activation in mental 
programming was more similar to spatial cognition than language processing.  
In summary, we found substantially greater overlap in activation maps of LMS 
processing with spatial processing, especially in the posterior parietal cortex and 
inferior frontal gyrus, supporting the spatial origin hypothesis. 
 
15 
 
 
Figure 2. Task-level comparison between the univariate activation of LMS processing, 
language processing, and spatial cognition. (a) The representative tasks for each domain. 
The LMS processing tasks (middle): reasoning, calculation, and mental programming; 
the language processing task (left): sentence processing; the spatial cognition task 
(right): mental folding. (b) The subject-wise LMS-spatial and LMS-language dice 
coefficients (left) and the corresponding dice coefficients after breaking LMS into 
separate representative tasks (right). All the subject-level activation maps were voxel-
level thresholded at  p = 0.001. The error bar denotes the standard error (SE). The 
asterisks denote the significance of the difference between the dice coefficients. *p<.05, 
**p<.01, ***p<.001.  
 
16 
 
2.2. Similarity in activation patterns between LMS processing and spatial 
cognition 
While the univariate analysis above revealed that LMS processing shared more 
similarities with spatial cognition in terms of activation maps overlap, it is important to 
note that a single cortical region can support distinct cognitive processes (Duncan, 2010; 
Woolgar et al., 2011, 2016). Particularly, the frontal and parietal cortex were known to 
be functionally heterogeneous and showed substantial cross-individual variation (Blank 
& Fedorenko, 2017; Braga et al., 2019; Frost & Goebel, 2012; Ivanova et al., 2020; 
Tahmasebi et al., 2012; Vázquez-Rodríguez et al., 2019). Therefore, anatomical overlap 
in activation between LMS processing and spatial cognition in these regions does not 
necessarily imply functional similarity. To further test the hypothetical functional 
association between LMS and spatial processing, we examined whether the 
multivariate activation pattern of LMS processing more closely resembled that of 
spatial cognition than language processing. For an unbiased comparison, we 
deliberately chose cortical regions activated by both language processing and spatial 
cognition. This region of interest (ROI), delineated as the overlap between the 
corresponding meta-analysis activation maps, was left-lateralized, encompassing the 
precentral gyrus, the inferior frontal gyrus, the supplementary motor area, and the 
posterior parietal cortex, as well as the bilateral superior temporal gyrus (Supplemental 
Figure 7, Supplemental Table 5).  
The similarity between domains was quantified by examining the likelihood of the 
multivariate activation patterns of LMS processing being classified as those of the 
17 
 
representative spatial task rather than those of the representative language task in the 
ROI. To do this, we trained a support vector machine (SVM) for each subject, using it 
to classify the multivariate patterns of language processing, indexed by the sentence 
processing task, from those of spatial cognition, indexed by the mental folding task 
(Figure 
3a) 
with 
leave-one-out 
cross-validation. 
Having 
established 
the 
boundary surface that divides multivariate patterns into two distinct classes, language 
processing and spatial cognition (Figure 3b), we then applied this classifier to the 
untrained multivariate patterns of LMS processing, indexed by the three representative 
tasks (Figure 3d). The underlying rationale is that if the ROI represented LMS in a 
manner more similar to spatial codes than to linguistic elements, then the classifier 
would more frequently classify LMS processing as spatial cognition than language 
processing (Figure 3e). 
As expected, the spatial-linguistic SVM classifier demonstrated an accuracy close 
to 100% in distinguishing the multivariate patterns of language processing from those 
of spatial cognition across all subjects (Figure 3c), demonstrating the effectiveness of 
the classifier. Critically, when applying this classifier to the multivariate patterns of 
LMS processing in the ROI, the likelihood of LMS processing being classified as 
spatial cognition was 65%, significantly surpassing the 35% likelihood of being 
classified as language processing (t(19) = 3.127,  p = 0.006, Cohen’s d = 0.717) (Figure 
3f). That is, in regions recruited by both language processing and spatial cognition, the 
activation patterns elicited by LMS processing were more similar to those of spatial 
cognition than to language processing. 
18 
 
 
 
Figure 3. ROI analysis of the multivariate pattern similarity between LMS processing 
and spatial cognition (or language processing). (a-c) The schematic illustration of the 
SVM trained to classify language processing and spatial cognition. (a) illustrates the 
composition of the training (dots) and the testing (triangles) data. Blue denotes language 
processing and yellow spatial cognition. The gray matrices in the box are an illustration 
of the training and the testing data, i.e., the individual activation patterns during 
corresponding task runs in the ROI. (b) illustrates the boundary surface for the two 
target classes (the line). The dots above the line would be classified as language 
processing, and the dots below the line as spatial cognition. (c) shows the resultant 
confusion matrix averaged across participants, whose rows correspond to the real class 
of the data, and the columns represent the predicted class by the SVM. (d-f) The 
schematic illustration of the classification of LMS processing activation patterns. The 
data of LMS processing (green triangles, d) was classified by the identical SVM (e) 
19 
 
from b of the same subject. The dots above the line would be classified as language 
processing, and the dots below the line as spatial cognition. (f) shows the subject-wise 
confusion rate of LMS processing to language processing and spatial cognition, 
respectively. The error bar denotes the standard error (SE). The asterisks denote the 
significance of the difference between the confusion rates. *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001. 
 
The observed anatomical and functional similarities between LMS processing and 
spatial cognition lead to an interesting question: Are the LMS system and the spatial 
cognition system distinct entities, with the latter supporting the former (Figure 4a)? 
Alternatively, could it be that the LMS processing is essentially one of the many 
manifestations of spatial cognition, rendering them indistinguishable in terms of neural 
correlates (Figure 4b)? To test these two hypotheses, we calculated the intra-LMS 
similarity by averaging pairwise pattern similarities among LMS tasks (i.e., reasoning, 
calculation, and mental programming) and the LMS-spatial similarities by averaging 
the similarities between each LMS task and the representative spatial cognition task 
(i.e., mental folding) based on their multivariate pattern in the ROI. The underlying 
rationale is that if the LMS processing is indeed synonymous with spatial cognition, 
LMS-spatial similarity should fall within the range of intra-LMS similarity. We also 
calculated LMS-language similarity by averaging the similarities between each LMS 
task and the representative language task (i.e., sentence processing) in the ROI, and 
expected it to be lower than both intra-LMS and LMS-spatial similarity. 
As expected, the LMS-language similarity is significantly lower than both the 
20 
 
intra-LMS similarity (t(59) = 5.978, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.778) and the LMS-spatial 
similarity (t(59) = 7.255, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.945). Critically, the intra-LMS 
similarity did not significantly exceed the LMS-spatial similarity (one-tail t(59) = -
1.911,  p = 0.061, Cohen’s d = -0.249), challenging the hypothesis that LMS processing 
and the spatial cognition are distinct entities. This point is further supported by the 
hierarchical clustering analysis on the multivariate activation patterns of the LMS and 
spatial cognition tasks. As shown in Figure 4c, the LMS tasks did not form a distinct 
cluster separate from the spatial cognition task, revealing an intermingled relation 
among these tasks. This finding supports the idea that LMS processing likely operates 
via the same underlying mechanisms as spatial cognition.  
 
 
Figure 4. The multivariate pattern similarity between individual LMS processing tasks 
and spatial cognition. (a) Possibility 1: the LMS processing and the spatial cognition 
system are distinct entities. (b) Possibility 2: the various LMS tasks and spatial tasks 
are essentially manifestations of the same system. (c) The hierarchical cluster of the 
multivariate activation patterns in the ROI. The longer horizontal line illustrates a 
21 
 
higher distance and later inclusion in the cluster.  
 
3. Discussion 
The ability to process logical-mathematical symbols underpins everyday human 
activities such as calculation, reasoning, and programming. Based on the neuronal 
recycling hypothesis (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007), we investigated the functional origin 
of this processing by comparing the neural correlates of LMS processing with those of 
language processing and spatial cognition, respectively. The comparison of spatial 
extents in meta-analysis maps revealed a more substantial overlap between LMS 
processing and spatial cognition than that between LMS and language processing. 
Furthermore, a pattern similarity analysis revealed that the multivariate activation 
patterns of LMS processing were more similar to that of spatial cognition than language 
processing in regions activated by both. Taken together, our findings support the 
hypothesis that the ability of LMS processing is likely built upon spatial cognition 
rather than language processing. 
The present study presented a novel and direct comparison of the cross-task neural 
correlates of LMS processing with its two hypothetical origins. The present study 
differed from previous studies on neural commonality between LMS and spatial 
processing tasks (Endres, Karas, et al., 2021; Hawes & Ansari, 2020; Huang et al., 2019; 
Xu et al., 2021; Zago et al., 2008) in overcoming task idiosyncrasy by meta-analysis 
and directly comparing competing hypotheses to address the theoretical question. First, 
22 
 
by utilizing meta-analysis we overcome the impact of task idiosyncrasy which limited 
domain-level conclusions via task-wise comparison to mitigate the confounding factors. 
LMS tasks are integrative and idiosyncratic, given the large range of cognitive 
challenges they target. For instance, our previous study (Xu et al., 2021) observed 
dissociable components within the cortical regions activated during mental 
programming, a representative LMS task, each of which showed a varied combination 
of neural resemblance with another three representative LMS tasks. Also, their 
resemblance with that of mental folding varied. This highlighted the substantial task 
idiosyncrasy in LMS processing, which leads to difficulty in evaluating LMS’s neural 
resemblances with other domains, let alone comparing its relative resemblance with 
multiple other domains. Out of this consideration, the present study compared the cross-
task neural correlates of the domains in question via either meta-analysis or synthesized 
activation map to mitigate the confounding factor of the task-specific properties in 
identifying the neural correlates.  
Specifically, the cross-task map of LMS processing was generated by synthesizing 
in-house fMRI data of representative LMS tasks with image-based meta-analysis 
(Salimi-Khorshidi et al., 2009; Soares et al., 2016). The resulting map revealed bilateral 
activation, albeit slightly right-lateralized, in the frontal lobe (the middle frontal gyrus, 
the inferior frontal gyrus), the supplementary motion area spanning to the cingulum, 
the insula, the posterior parietal cortex, the precuneus, and the inferior temporal gyrus. 
This map covers most major regions previously reported in LMS tasks, including 
findings from meta-analyses in mathematics (Hawes et al., 2019; Hawes & Ansari, 
23 
 
2020; Tablante et al., 2023), reasoning (Hobeika et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2020), 
problem-solving (Bartley et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2021), and programming (Castelhano 
et al., 2021; Ikutani, Itoh, et al., 2021), among other representative LMS tasks (Floyd 
et al., 2017; Houdé & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; Huang et al., 2019; Ikutani, Kubo, et al., 
2021; Y.-F. Liu et al., 2020; Maruyama et al., 2012). By comparing this map with the 
meta-analysis map of language and spatial processing, we observed that the overlap 
between LMS processing and spatial cognition mainly resided in a bilaterally 
distributed set of frontoparietal regions, which are implicated in tasks such as arithmetic 
calculation, formal logical inference, mental programming, mental rotation, mental 
folding, and spatial working memory (Hawes et al., 2019; Ivanova et al., 2020; Y.-F. 
Liu et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021; Zago et al., 2008). It appears that these regions might 
be the sites of the reuse of mechanisms for processing objects and their spatial relations. 
For instance, the frontoparietal dorsal attention network (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; 
Kincade et al., 2005) may contribute to maintaining (Ravizza et al., 2004; Sack, 2009) 
and representing (Hanakawa et al., 2002; Pinel et al., 2001) both spatial codes and LMS, 
the right insula may be involved in decision-making and error monitoring in both 
domains (Castelhano et al., 2021; Uddin, 2015), and the inferior parietal lobule may be 
involved in retaining (Marshuetz et al., 2000) and reactivating (Corbetta et al., 2002) 
ordered information in both spatial and non-spatial domains, especially in processing 
programming algorithms or abstract rule sets (Crittenden et al., 2016; Ikutani, Kubo, et 
al., 2021; Pischedda et al., 2017; Srikant et al., 2022; Woolgar et al., 2011).  In contrast, 
the overlap in neural activation between LMS and language processing was 
24 
 
significantly smaller, mainly localized in the left inferior frontal gyrus, including 
Broca’s area (BA45 and BA44). The involvement of these regions in LMS processing 
may result from task characteristics, such as the text-based visual representation of 
stimuli presented in LMS tasks (Castelhano et al., 2021). In addition, while traditionally 
regarded as language-specific regions, recent studies have shown that the BA44 also 
engages in non-verbal working memory (Gould et al., 2003; Honey et al., 2000; Kong 
et al., 2005; Maguire et al., 1997), and the BA45 in retrieval and selection of non-
linguistic information (Liakakis et al., 2011; Thompson-Schill et al., 1999). The finding 
of limited LMS-language overlap is consistent with observations that LMS systems 
emphasize repetition and symmetry, contrasting natural languages that tend to avoid 
repetition and rely on anti-symmetry. That is, despite both LMS and language utilizing 
discrete symbol systems, they differ fundamentally in their structural principles 
(Dehaene et al., 2022). Taken together, the observed neural similarities in this study are 
in line with the idea that LMS processing likely originates from spatial cognition, 
possibly through a process of neuronal recycling. 
A second distinct feature of the present study is that we achieved a direct 
comparison and placed the two hypothetical origins in a fair playground by focusing on 
the regions where both spatial and language processing activate in analyzing 
multivariate neural resemblance. The results further supported the spatial-origin 
hypothesis by showing that all tested LMS tasks were carried out in a way more like 
spatial than language processing when both are plausible. Note that for inferential 
statistics we leveraged the fMRI data from the same sample of participants in a 
25 
 
representative language (sentence processing) task and a spatial (mental folding) task, 
and calculated the subject-level pairwise similarity among tasks to statistically compare 
intra-LMS similarity with LMS-spatial and LMS-language similarity. This reanalysis 
of previously reported data (Xu et al., 2021) was however distinct from previous 
analyses in the research question, the methodology, the anatomical scope, and the range 
of tasks included. The previous analysis was conducted within the cortical regions 
activated by mental programming and broke up the regions in question via clustering 
analysis based on neural resemblance to a set of non-verbal tasks, while the present 
study conducted ROI-wise multivariate pattern similarity analysis to compare the 
relative resemblance of LMS tasks with language and spatial tasks, which could not be 
predicted by the findings of the previous study. 
Though our analysis centered on LMS processing, we indeed speculate that spatial 
cognition might be a key cognitive cornerstone extending far beyond LMS processing, 
potentially influencing a wide array of cognitive abilities. Theories like the mental 
model (Johnson-Laird, 2001) and mental simulation (Barsalou, 2008; Hawes & Ansari, 
2020) suggest that relation processing typically utilizes a visuospatial workspace or 
simulations to navigate representational spaces, and map-like representations are 
proposed to be a universal coding mechanism that organizes spatial, non-spatial, and 
even abstract information, using shared neural substrates (Behrens et al., 2018; Igarashi 
et al., 2022; Theves et al., 2019). For example, the inferior parietal cortex, also 
identified in this study, is known to encode non-spatial abstract information  (Crittenden 
et al., 2016; Gottlieb & Snyder, 2010; Ikutani, Kubo, et al., 2021; Pischedda et al., 2017; 
26 
 
Srikant et al., 2022; Viswanathan & Nieder, 2020; Woolgar et al., 2011) in addition to 
spatial information. This suggests a shared neural basis for spatial and non-spatial 
information mapping. Indeed, the spatial navigation system has been proposed to 
provide critical computational components for the neural implementation of the 
“language of thought” (LoT) (Frankland & Greene, 2020; Kazanina & Poeppel, 2023). 
LoT, advanced by Jerry Fodor (1975), describes not an actual language but a formal 
symbol system that stores and manipulates concepts symbolically, adhering to 
compositional rules. This system enables the construction of complex thoughts from 
primitive symbolic concepts and thus gives rise to the productivity and creativity of the 
human mind, advocating LoT as a candidate for human singularity in cognition 
(Dehaene et al., 2022; Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021).  
However, the proposal that spatial cognition serves as a cross-domain 
computational foundation in the human mind leads to a puzzle: why does spatial 
cognition, an ability shared with many species, uniquely generate sophisticated non-
spatial abilities in humans, such as formal operations of LMS systems? One possible 
answer is that spatial cognition may not be the exclusive origin of LMS processing. 
Language processing, although not the primary source, may also contribute to LMS 
processing (Dowker et al., 2008; Ikutani, Itoh, et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020). Our 
study relies predominantly on anatomical overlaps in activation maps. This can result 
in an oversight of functional similarities between different anatomical regions. 
According to the multiple parallel circuit hypothesis (Dehaene et al., 2022), 
anatomically separate regions may instead undertake similar functionalities in different 
27 
 
symbol systems, which were all based on the recursive composition of corresponding 
primitives to encode nested repetitions with variations. Thus, future studies should 
explore the potential computational commonalities between language and LMS 
processing to further understand these intricate cognitive interactions. 
Another limitation of our study is its reliance on correlational evidence, instead of 
establishing a causal link between LMS processing and spatial cognition. Recent 
advancements in large language models (LLM) may offer a novel avenue for 
experimentation on this topic. By “re-running” evolution, we can observe how spatial 
cognition scaffolds the emergence of LMS processing during the evolution. Supporting 
this intuition, state-of-the-art LLMs, proficient in natural language tasks, show brittle 
performance in LMS tasks (Frieder et al., 2023; H. Liu et al., 2023). Wong et al. (2023) 
suggested that this might be because LLMs work upon the context-aware mapping 
between language and meanings, lacking a world model based on probabilistic LoT. 
Based on the link between LMS processing and spatial cognition observed in this study, 
it could be worth investigating the enhancement of LMS processing in LLMs through 
training on spatial cognition tasks, such as path integrating, orienting, and map reading. 
Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated training navigation in abstract concept space 
using cognitive maps could improve the reasoning and problem-solving ability of 
LLMs (Stöckl et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023). Extending such investigation to training 
spatial cognition and endowing LLMs with spatial abilities might bridge the gap 
between disembodied information in LLM training and embodied reality that artificial 
general intelligence (AGI) ultimately aims to interact with, which could significantly 
28 
 
contribute to the development of next-generation AGI.  
 
4. Methods  
4.1. Meta-analyses of language processing and spatial cognition 
We generated meta-analysis activation maps based on large-scale automated meta-
analyses of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) for language processing and 
spatial cognition. 
4.1.1. Meta-analysis of language processing 
To generate a map of the neural correlates of language processing, we queried the 
Neurosynth (Yarkoni et al., 2011) database (version 0.5 released on February 23, 2015) 
using the term “language” (accessed on 2023.8.19). This yielded a collection of 823 
fMRI studies that exhibited significant relevance to the term with the default frequency 
threshold of 0.001. Based on the coordinate-based meta-analysis technique of 
Neurosynth, we generated the map of brain regions that were preferentially engaged 
across the selected studies. Each voxel within the resulting map was labeled by the z-
score resulting from a two-way ANOVA assessing the concomitant presence of term 
loading and voxel activation. The map was further corrected for multiple comparisons 
employing the false discovery rate (FDR) approach with an anticipated FDR threshold 
of 0.01. 
29 
 
4.1.2. Meta-analysis of spatial cognition 
As for spatial cognition, there are no uniform terms to search in Neurosynth. Therefore, 
we used the BrainMap database to generate the meta-analysis map of spatial cognition. 
Following the taxonomy outlined by Fox et al. (2005), we curated the experiments 
categorized under the Behavioral Domain “Cognition.Spatial” in the BrainMap 
functional database (accessed by Sleuth 3.0.4 in 2023.8.19), under the constraint of 
“activations only”. This curation yielded 251 experimental contrasts from 63 relevant 
publications. The meta-analysis based on the experimental contrasts was implemented 
by the activation likelihood estimation (ALE), with BrainMap’s GingerALE tool. Same 
as the language processing analysis, we applied FDR correction (at  p = 0.01) to the 
resulting z-score map, adhering to the default GingerALE settings. 
 
4.2. fMRI studies 
The present study used fMRI data from a separate sample of participants to estimate 
the neural correlates of a set of representative LMS processing tasks, in addition to a 
representative language processing task and a representative spatial cognition task. 
Analyses based on these data for a different purpose have been reported in a previous 
study (Xu et al., 2021). 
4.2.1. Participants 
 
Twenty participants (right-handed neurologically normal volunteers with normal 
or corrected-to-normal vision) completed the experiment. The participants were 
30 
 
screened before recruitment to ensure they either had taken programming-related 
courses or had experience in programming. The targeted sample size (20 valid 
participants) was decided a priori, to be similar to previous studies using similar tasks 
(e.g., Fedorenko et al.(2012), n = 13-16; Zhou et al.(2018), n = 24; Amalric & 
Dehaene(2016), n = 15). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of 
BNU. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before they took 
part in the experiment, and the participants received money for their time.  
For a full description of the fMRI data acquisition, see Xu et al. (2021). For each 
participant, the fMRI data of three LMS processing tasks, one language processing task, 
and one spatial cognition task were recorded and analyzed in the present study. 
4.2.2. Experimental paradigms 
LMS processing. BOLD signals during three representative LMS processing tasks, 
namely mental programming, reasoning, and calculation, were collected. 
The mental programming task engaged participants in mentally solving simple 
programming problems, with reporting familiarity with knowledge entries as the 
control condition. The programming problems were presented in Chinese as a one-to-
three-line introductory statement, a programming probe (“Please design a program 
with:”), a one-line statement specifying the potential input, and a one-line statement 
describing the desired output. The knowledge entries in the control condition were 
matched with the materials of the programming condition in length, format, and the use 
of symbols. Each entry started with a one-to-three-line introductory statement, followed 
by a brief conjunctive clause (e.g., “in other words”), and two one-to-two-line 
31 
 
elaborations of the concept introduced in the introductory statement. The mental 
programming trials started with a programming task probe presenting “report progress”, 
and the participants were to read and consider the programming problem, and wait for 
the response prompt to choose from a four-point scale to report their progress in 
programming. The participants were instructed before the scanning that for 
programming they should consider the algorithm instead of specific code, and the 
solution of the problem means finding the algorithm instead of finishing the coding. 
The control trials started with the control task probe which read “report familiarity”, 
and participants were to read and consider whether they were familiar with the content 
of the knowledge entry and choose from a four-point scale to report their familiarity 
with the content. The mental programming task was divided into six runs, each 
consisting of four trials in the mental programming condition and four in the control 
condition. 
The reasoning task comprised a reasoning condition adopted from Raven’s APM 
and a control condition. In both conditions, the participants first saw a problem with a 
complex main figure, with eight choices below. The problems of the reasoning trials 
were chosen from Raven’s APM, and those of the control condition were composed by 
rearranging the choices of other Raven’s APM items in the main figure and the choices 
in each problem. Above each problem, a task probe would indicate whether it is a 
reasoning trial (“Look for the rule”) or a control trial (“Look for the choices”). The 
participants were to consider which choice complies with the rule of figure arrangement 
and completes the main pattern (the reasoning condition), or to consider which choice 
32 
 
was presented in the main pattern (the control condition). Each participant completed 
five functional runs consisting of eight trials each. 
The calculation task was adopted from Fedorenko et al. (2010) with an additional 
control condition. In the calculation trials, the participants would first see a task probe 
(“Do the addition”) and then see one number (11–30) followed by three sequentially 
presented addends. Then the participants had to choose the correct sum in a two-choice, 
forced-choice question. In the control trials, after the task probe (“Memorize the 
numbers”) and the same sequential presentation of four numbers, the participants were 
to select, from two alternatives, the one among the four preceding numbers. Each 
participant completed four runs which each consisted of six calculation blocks and six 
control blocks.  
 
Language processing and spatial cognition.  
The sentence processing task was used as the representative language processing 
task. It was adopted from Fedorenko et al. (2010) but used sentences and pseudo-
characters in Mandarin Chinese. Each experimental trial consisted of a sequential 
presentation of a string of seven Chinese real words which formed one sentence 
followed by a target word. The task was to decide whether the target word appeared in 
the preceding string. In control trials, the Chinese characters were replaced by pseudo-
characters. The trials were grouped into six-trial blocks. Each participant underwent 
four block-design runs, each consisting of three experimental blocks and three control 
blocks.  
33 
 
Spatial cognition was measured in a mental folding task adopted from Milivojevic 
et al. (2003). In each trial, the participants were shown a black outline of six squares 
joined together, representing the unfolded surface of a cube. Two sides belonging to 
different squares (mental folding condition) or the same square (control condition) were 
pointed by two small arrows. In the “match” trials, the pointed sides would meet if the 
squares were folded up into a cube. Trials in the mental folding and the control 
conditions differed in the total number of squares carried along for each fold for the 
match–mismatch decision to be made. The control trials presented 1-square-carried 
stimuli since the judgment of such stimuli can be made without mental folding. Every 
four trials of the same condition were grouped into a block. Each participant completed 
five or six block-design functional runs. Note that the first three participants completed 
six runs, and the rest participants underwent only five runs due to the limitation of the 
scanning time. 
For a complete description of the experimental paradigms, see Xu et al. (2021). 
 
4.2.3. fMRI data acquisition and analysis 
Image acquisition. The fMRI data were acquired using a Siemens 3T scanner with a 
12-channel phased-array head coil. Task-state fMRI (ts-fMRI) was acquired using a T2
∗-weighted echo-planar-imaging (EPI) sequence with a whole-brain protocol (TR = 
2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90◦, and in-plane resolution = 3.1 × 3.1 × 3.5 mm, 
33 contiguous interleaved slices). For a complete description of the imaging parameters, 
see Xu et al. (2021). 
34 
 
 
Preprocessing. The functional data were preprocessed with DPABI (Yan et al., 2016). 
The main preprocessing procedure included slice timing, head motion correction, co-
registration, segmentation, spatial normalization to the standard MNI space, and 
resampling to 3 × 3 × 3 mm isotropic voxels. The data were smoothed with a 4 mm 
FWHM kernel for univariate activation analysis. Smoothing was omitted for 
multivariate activation analysis. Runs characterized by excessive head movement were 
excluded from further analysis. 
 
Univariate analyses. First-level analyses were performed for functional images of each 
participant in each task using the general linear model (GLM). The GLM incorporated 
regressors corresponding to the following events: the task condition, the control 
condition, and the presence of the response prompt and task probe. The regressors were 
convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF). A 1/128 Hz high-
pass filter was applied to remove low-frequency noise, with the AR (1) model used to 
account for serial correlations. For each experiment, subject-level and group-level 
analyses were conducted within a gray matter mask by SPM8 (Wellcome Department 
of Imaging Neuroscience, London; www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The subject-level map 
corresponded to the contrasts of parameter estimates (COPE) between the respective 
task versus the control condition of each subject. The group-level map was estimated 
in the second-level analysis of the corresponding task-control contrasts. 
 
35 
 
4.2.4. Conjunctive analysis of LMS processing 
To estimate the neural correlates across diverse LMS processing tasks, we generated a 
synthesized activation map of LMS processing based on the data of the three 
representative LMS tasks, i.e., reasoning, calculation, and mental programming tasks 
described above. We utilized Stouffer’s method in the image-based meta-analysis. The 
unthresholded group-level maps of each LMS processing task were subjected to 
Stouffer’s estimator using the NiMARE Python package version 0.0.13 (Salo et al., 
2023). The estimator combined the group-level maps via Stouffer’s method (Stouffer 
et al., 1949) and produced a fixed-effect estimate of the combined effect, to obtain the 
most sensitive pooling of the studies. Each voxel within the resultant synthesized map 
conveyed a third-level COPE, indicating the pooled activation across LMS processing 
tasks. The synthesized map was corrected with an expected FDR of 0.01. 
 
4.3. Dice coefficients of meta-analysis maps and subject-level maps 
To quantify the extent of overlap between LMS processing and language processing 
and that between LMS processing and spatial cognition, we computed dice coefficients 
between the activation maps for each pair, which was an index of the convergence 
between activation maps. For a given pair of maps, the dice coefficient was determined 
as the ratio between twice the count of shared voxels and the sum of voxels in both 
maps. The dice coefficients were calculated between the thresholded meta-analysis map 
of language processing and the thresholded synthesized map of LMS processing, and 
36 
 
between spatial cognition and LMS processing. In addition, for statistical comparison, 
corresponding dice coefficients were calculated for each subject based on the 
corresponding subject-level maps (thresholded by a voxel-level threshold at  p = 0.001).  
 
4.4. Multivariate pattern analysis 
To compare the multivariate pattern similarity between LMS processing and those 
associated with language processing and spatial cognition, we conducted multivariate 
pattern analysis in an ROI-based manner. The region of interest (ROI) was defined as 
the common activation region between the meta-analysis maps of language processing 
and spatial cognition.  
The comparison of multivariate activation pattern similarity was quantified by the 
confusion rate in multivariate activation pattern classification. Specifically, we trained 
a classifier for each subject to classify the multivariate activation pattern in the run-
level beta map of the sentence processing task from that of the mental folding task. The 
run-level beta map (task versus fixation) was based on the GLM using non-smoothed 
data. The classifier was based on the support vector machine (SVM) with a linear kernel 
implemented by The Decoding Toolbox (TDT) (Hebart et al., 2015), and trained with 
the leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) to prevent overfitting. In each cross-
validation step, one SVM was trained by three runs of sentence processing task and 
three runs of mental rotation task separated from one run of each task kept unknown. 
Then in the test session, the SVM would classify the left-out run from each training 
37 
 
task for performance validation (indicated as accuracy). For quantitative balance, all 
tasks included the first four runs in a set. Note that the outcome appeared consistent 
regardless of which specific four runs were chosen in the examination. The LOOCV 
traversed all combinations of left-out runs and resulted in an averaged classifier of each 
participant. The classifier achieved an accuracy of nearly 100% in distinguishing the 
two tasks across 20 participants. In the test session, each run of LMS processing tasks 
was classified by the SVM into one of the training tasks. The confusion rate at which 
LMS processing was (mis)classified as a given training task quantified the pattern 
resemblance between the LMS processing task and the corresponding training task.  
To test the relationship between LMS processing and spatial cognition, we 
calculated the intra-LMS similarity, LMS-spatial similarities, and LMS-language 
similarity based on the same run-level beta maps in the ROI. For each participant, the 
multivariate pattern for a representative task was represented as a one-dimensional 
vector concatenated sequentially from the first four runs’ vectors. The pairwise 
multivariate pattern similarities were calculated using Spearman's r for all 
corresponding combinations of two tasks for each participant and statistically tested at 
the group level.  
To further investigate the hierarchical multivariate pattern similarity between LMS 
processing and spatial cognition, agglomerative hierarchical clustering analysis was 
conducted on the multivariate patterns of the tasks, based on the same run-level beta 
maps in the ROI. For each representative task, the multivariate pattern was a one-
dimensional vector formed by concatenating the multivariate pattern from each 
38 
 
participant. The clustering analysis was conducted with the nearest point algorithm 
implemented by the SciPy Python package version 1.5.4 (Virtanen et al., 2020).   
5. Acknowledgments 
This study was funded by Natural Science Foundation of China (2371099), Beijing 
Municipal Science & Technology Commission, Administrative Commission of 
Zhongguancun Science Park (Z221100002722012), and Double First-Class Initiative 
Funds for Discipline Construction.  
 
6. Reference 
Amalric, M., & Dehaene, S. (2016). Origins of the brain networks for advanced 
mathematics in expert mathematicians. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 113(18), 4909–4917. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1603205113 
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 
617–645. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093639 
Bartley, J. E., Boeving, E. R., Riedel, M. C., Bottenhorn, K. L., Salo, T., Eickhoff, S. 
B., Brewe, E., Sutherland, M. T., & Laird, A. R. (2018). Meta-analytic evidence 
for a core problem solving network across multiple representational domains. 
Neuroscience 
& 
Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 
92, 
318–337. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.06.009 
Behrens, T. E., Muller, T. H., Whittington, J. C., Mark, S., Baram, A. B., Stachenfeld, 
K. L., & Kurth-Nelson, Z. (2018). What is a cognitive map? Organizing 
knowledge for flexible behavior. Neuron, 100(2), 490–509. 
Blank, I. A., & Fedorenko, E. (2017). Domain-General Brain Regions Do Not Track 
Linguistic Input as Closely as Language-Selective Regions. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 37(41), 9999–10011. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3642-
16.2017 
Braga, R. M., Van Dijk, K. R. A., Polimeni, J. R., Eldaief, M. C., & Buckner, R. L. 
(2019). Parallel distributed networks resolved at high resolution reveal close 
juxtaposition of distinct regions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 121(4), 1513–1534. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00808.2018 
Castelhano, J., Duarte, I. C., Duraes, J., Madeira, H., & Castelo-Branco, M. (2021). 
Reading and Calculation Neural Systems and Their Weighted Adaptive Use for 
39 
 
Programming 
Skills. 
Neural 
Plasticity, 
2021, 
e5596145. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5596145 
Coetzee, J. P., Johnson, M. A., Lee, Y., Wu, A. D., Iacoboni, M., & Monti, M. M. (2022). 
Dissociating Language and Thought in Human Reasoning. Brain Sciences, 13(1), 
67. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci13010067 
Cona, G., & Scarpazza, C. (2019). Where is the “where” in the brain? A meta‐analysis 
of neuroimaging studies on spatial cognition. Human Brain Mapping, 40(6), 
1867–1886. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24496 
Corbetta, M., Kincade, J. M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Neural Systems for Visual 
Orienting and Their Relationships to Spatial Working Memory. Journal of 
Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 
14(3), 
508–523. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/089892902317362029 
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven 
attention in the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), Article 3. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn755 
Crittenden, B. M., Mitchell, D. J., & Duncan, J. (2016). Task Encoding across the 
Multiple Demand Cortex Is Consistent with a Frontoparietal and Cingulo-
Opercular Dual Networks Distinction. The Journal of Neuroscience, 36(23), 
6147–6155. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4590-15.2016 
Dehaene, S. (2005). Evolution of human cortical circuits for reading and arithmetic: 
The “neuronal recycling” hypothesis. From Monkey Brain to Human Brain, 133–
157. 
Dehaene, S., Al Roumi, F., Lakretz, Y., Planton, S., & Sablé-Meyer, M. (2022). Symbols 
and mental programs: A hypothesis about human singularity. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 26(9), 751–766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2022.06.010 
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2007). Cultural Recycling of Cortical Maps. Neuron, 56(2), 
384–398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.004 
Dowker, A., Bala, S., & Lloyd, D. (2008). Linguistic Influences on Mathematical 
Development: How Important Is the Transparency of the Counting System? 
Philosophical Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515080802285511 
Duncan, J. (2010). The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: Mental 
programs for intelligent behaviour. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(4), 172–179. 
Endres, M., Fansher, M., Shah, P., & Weimer, W. (2021). To read or to rotate? 
Comparing the effects of technical reading training and spatial skills training on 
novice programming ability. Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on 
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations 
of Software Engineering, 754–766. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468583 
Endres, M., Karas, Z., Hu, X., Kovelman, I., & Weimer, W. (2021). Relating Reading, 
Visualization, and Coding for New Programmers: A Neuroimaging Study 
(arXiv:2102.12376). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.12376 
Fedorenko, E., Duncan, J., & Kanwisher, N. (2012). Language-selective and domain-
general regions lie side by side within Broca’s area. Current Biology, 22(21), 
2059–2062. 
Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P.-J., Nieto-Castañón, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Kanwisher, 
40 
 
N. (2010). New Method for fMRI Investigations of Language: Defining ROIs 
Functionally in Individual Subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104(2), 1177–
1194. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00032.2010 
Fedorenko, E., Ivanova, A., Dhamala, R., & Bers, M. U. (2019). The Language of 
Programming: A Cognitive Perspective. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(7), 525–
528. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.04.010 
Fedorenko, E., & Varley, R. (2016). Language and thought are not the same thing: 
Evidence from neuroimaging and neurological patients. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1369(1), 132–153. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13046 
Feng, W., Wang, W., Liu, J., Wang, Z., Tian, L., & Fan, L. (2021). Neural Correlates of 
Causal Inferences in Discourse Understanding and Logical Problem-Solving: A 
Meta-Analysis 
Study. 
Frontiers 
in 
Human 
Neuroscience, 
15. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.666179 
Floyd, B., Santander, T., & Weimer, W. (2017). Decoding the Representation of Code 
in the Brain: An fMRI Study of Code Review and Expertise. 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Software 
Engineering 
(ICSE), 
175–186. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2017.24 
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought (Vol. 5). Harvard University Press. 
Fox, P. T., Laird, A. R., Fox, S. P., Fox, P. M., Uecker, A. M., Crank, M., Koenig, S. F., 
& Lancaster, J. L. (2005). BrainMap taxonomy of experimental design: 
Description and evaluation. Human Brain Mapping, 25(1), 185–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20141 
Frankland, S. M., & Greene, J. D. (2020). Concepts and Compositionality: In Search of 
the Brain’s Language of Thought. Annual Review of Psychology, 71(1), 273–303. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-011829 
Frieder, S., Pinchetti, L., Chevalier, A., Griffiths, R.-R., Salvatori, T., Lukasiewicz, T., 
Petersen, P. C., & Berner, J. (2023). Mathematical Capabilities of ChatGPT 
(arXiv:2301.13867). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13867 
Frost, M. A., & Goebel, R. (2012). Measuring structural–functional correspondence: 
Spatial variability of specialised brain regions after macro-anatomical alignment. 
NeuroImage, 
59(2), 
1369–1381. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.035 
Gardner, H. E. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. Basic 
books. 
Goel, V. (2007). Anatomy of deductive reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(10), 
435–441. 
Gottlieb, J., & Snyder, L. H. (2010). Spatial and non-spatial functions of the parietal 
cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 20(6), 731–740. 
Gould, R. L., Brown, R. G., Owen, A. M., & Howard, R. J. (2003). fMRI BOLD 
response to increasing task difficulty during successful paired associates learning. 
Neuroimage, 20(2), 1006–1019. 
Hanakawa, T., Honda, M., Sawamoto, N., Okada, T., Yonekura, Y., Fukuyama, H., & 
Shibasaki, H. (2002). The role of rostral Brodmann area 6 in mental-operation 
tasks: An integrative neuroimaging approach. Cerebral Cortex, 12(11), 1157–1170. 
41 
 
Hawes, Z., & Ansari, D. (2020). What explains the relationship between spatial and 
mathematical skills? A review of evidence from brain and behavior. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 27(3), 465–482. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-019-01694-7 
Hawes, Z., Sokolowski, H. M., Ononye, C. B., & Ansari, D. (2019). Neural 
underpinnings of numerical and spatial cognition: An fMRI meta-analysis of brain 
regions associated with symbolic number, arithmetic, and mental rotation. 
Neuroscience 
& 
Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 
103, 
316–336. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.007 
Hebart, M. N., Görgen, K., & Haynes, J.-D. (2015). The Decoding Toolbox (TDT): A 
versatile software package for multivariate analyses of functional imaging data. 
Frontiers 
in 
Neuroinformatics, 
8. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fninf.2014.00088 
Helmlinger, B., Sommer, M., Feldhammer-Kahr, M., Wood, G., Arendasy, M. E., & 
Kober, S. E. (2020). Programming experience associated with neural efficiency 
during 
figural 
reasoning. 
Scientific 
Reports, 
10(1), 
13351. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-70360-z 
Hobeika, L., Diard‐Detoeuf, C., Garcin, B., Levy, R., & Volle, E. (2016). General and 
specialized brain correlates for analogical reasoning: A meta‐analysis of functional 
imaging 
studies. 
Human 
Brain 
Mapping, 
37(5), 
1953–1969. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23149 
Honey, G. D., Bullmore, E. T., & Sharma, T. (2000). Prolonged reaction time to a verbal 
working memory task predicts increased power of posterior parietal cortical 
activation. NeuroImage, 12(5), 495–503. 
Houdé, O., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2003). Neural foundations of logical and 
mathematical cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(6), 507–514. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1117 
Huang, Y., Liu, X., Krueger, R., Santander, T., Hu, X., Leach, K., & Weimer, W. (2019). 
Distilling Neural Representations of Data Structure Manipulation using fMRI and 
fNIRS. 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering 
(ICSE), 396–407. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00053 
Igarashi, K. M., Lee, J. Y., & Jun, H. (2022). Reconciling neuronal representations of 
schema, abstract task structure, and categorization under cognitive maps in the 
entorhinal-hippocampal-frontal circuits. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 77, 
102641. 
Ikutani, Y., Itoh, T. D., & Kubo, T. (2021). The neural bases of program comprehension: 
A coordinate-based fMRI meta-analysis (p. 2021.04.15.439937). bioRxiv. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.15.439937 
Ikutani, Y., Kubo, T., Nishida, S., Hata, H., Matsumoto, K., Ikeda, K., & Nishimoto, S. 
(2021). Expert programmers have fine-tuned cortical representations of source 
code. 
Eneuro, 
8(1). 
https://www.eneuro.org/content/8/1/ENEURO.0405-
20.2020.abstract 
Ivanova, A. A., Srikant, S., Sueoka, Y., Kean, H. H., Dhamala, R., O’Reilly, U.-M., Bers, 
M. U., & Fedorenko, E. (2020). Comprehension of computer code relies primarily 
on 
domain-general 
executive 
brain 
regions. 
eLife, 
9, 
e58906. 
42 
 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58906 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and deduction. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 5(10), 434–442. 
Kazanina, N., & Poeppel, D. (2023). The neural ingredients for a language of thought 
are 
available. 
Trends 
in 
Cognitive 
Sciences. 
https://www.cell.com/trends/cognitive-sciences/fulltext/S1364-6613(23)00193-6 
Khine, M. S. (2017). Spatial Cognition: Key to STEM Success. In M. S. Khine (Ed.), 
Visual-spatial Ability in STEM Education: Transforming Research into Practice 
(pp. 3–8). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
44385-0_1 
Kincade, J. M., Abrams, R. A., Astafiev, S. V., Shulman, G. L., & Corbetta, M. (2005). 
An Event-Related Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of Voluntary 
and Stimulus-Driven Orienting of Attention. The Journal of Neuroscience, 25(18), 
4593–4604. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0236-05.2005 
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2003). Reasoning, 
models, and images: Behavioral measures and cortical activity. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(4), 559–573. 
Kong, J., Wang, C., Kwong, K., Vangel, M., Chua, E., & Gollub, R. (2005). The neural 
substrate of arithmetic operations and procedure complexity. Cognitive Brain 
Research, 22(3), 397–405. 
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Nebel, B., & Knauff, M. (2011). A model for 
relational reasoning as verbal reasoning. Cognitive Systems Research, 12(3), 377–
392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2010.11.001 
LeFevre, J.-A., Fast, L., Skwarchuk, S.-L., Smith-Chant, B. L., Bisanz, J., Kamawar, 
D., & Penner-Wilger, M. (2010). Pathways to Mathematics: Longitudinal 
Predictors of Performance. Child Development. 
Liakakis, G., Nickel, J., & Seitz, R. J. (2011). Diversity of the inferior frontal gyrus—
A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Behavioural Brain Research, 225(1), 
341–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2011.06.022 
Lin, Y., & Dillon, M. R. (2023). We Are Wanderers: Abstract geometry reflects spatial 
navigation. 
Journal 
of 
Experimental 
Psychology: 
General. 
https://psyarxiv.com/ay42r/download?format=pdf 
Liu, H., Ning, R., Teng, Z., Liu, J., Zhou, Q., & Zhang, Y. (2023). Evaluating the 
Logical Reasoning Ability of ChatGPT and GPT-4 (arXiv:2304.03439). arXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03439 
Liu, Y.-F., Kim, J., Wilson, C., & Bedny, M. (2020). Computer code comprehension 
shares neural resources with formal logical inference in the fronto-parietal network. 
eLife, 9, e59340. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59340 
Maguire, E. A., Frackowiak, R. S., & Frith, C. D. (1997). Recalling routes around 
London: Activation of the right hippocampus in taxi drivers. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 17(18), 7103–7110. 
Marshuetz, C., Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., DeGutis, J., & Chenevert, T. L. (2000). Order 
Information in Working Memory: fMRI Evidence for Parietal and Prefrontal 
Mechanisms. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(Supplement 2), 130–144. 
43 
 
https://doi.org/10.1162/08989290051137459 
Maruyama, M., Pallier, C., Jobert, A., Sigman, M., & Dehaene, S. (2012). The cortical 
representation of simple mathematical expressions. NeuroImage, 61(4), 1444–
1460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.020 
Milivojevic, B., Johnson, B. W., Hamm, J. P., & Corballis, M. C. (2003). Non-identical 
neural mechanisms for two types of mental transformation: Event-related 
potentials during mental rotation and mental paper folding. Neuropsychologia, 
41(10), 1345–1356. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(03)00060-5 
Monti, M. M., Parsons, L. M., & Osherson, D. N. (2009). The boundaries of language 
and thought in deductive inference. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(30), 12554–12559. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0902422106 
Monti, M. M., Parsons, L. M., & Osherson, D. N. (2012). Thought Beyond Language: 
Neural Dissociation of Algebra and Natural Language. Psychological Science, 
23(8), 914–922. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612437427 
Pande, N. A. (2010). Numeral systems of great ancient human civilizations. Journal of 
Science and Arts, 2(13), 209. 
Pinel, P., Dehaene, S., Riviere, D., & LeBihan, D. (2001). Modulation of parietal 
activation by semantic distance in a number comparison task. Neuroimage, 14(5), 
1013–1026. 
Pischedda, D., Görgen, K., Haynes, J.-D., & Reverberi, C. (2017). Neural 
Representations of Hierarchical Rule Sets: The Human Control System Represents 
Rules Irrespective of the Hierarchical Level to Which They Belong. The Journal 
of 
Neuroscience, 
37(50), 
12281–12296. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3088-16.2017 
Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1995). Deduction as verbal reasoning. Psychological Review, 
102(3), 533. 
Prat, C. S., Madhyastha, T. M., Mottarella, M. J., & Kuo, C.-H. (2020). Relating Natural 
Language Aptitude to Individual Differences in Learning Programming 
Languages. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 3817. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-
60661-8 
Price, C. J. (2012). A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies 
of heard speech, spoken language and reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), 816–847. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.062 
Ravizza, S. M., Delgado, M. R., Chein, J. M., Becker, J. T., & Fiez, J. A. (2004). 
Functional dissociations within the inferior parietal cortex in verbal working 
memory. 
NeuroImage, 
22(2), 
562–573. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.01.039 
Román-González, M., Pérez-González, J.-C., & Jiménez-Fernández, C. (2017). Which 
cognitive abilities underlie computational thinking? Criterion validity of the 
Computational Thinking Test. Computers in Human Behavior, 72, 678–691. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.08.047 
Sablé-Meyer, M., Fagot, J., Caparos, S., Van Kerkoerle, T., Amalric, M., & Dehaene, S. 
(2021). Sensitivity to geometric shape regularity in humans and baboons: A 
putative signature of human singularity. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
44 
 
Sciences, 118(16), e2023123118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023123118 
Sack, A. T. (2009). Parietal cortex and spatial cognition. Behavioural Brain Research, 
202(2), 153–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2009.03.012 
Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Smith, S. M., Keltner, J. R., Wager, T. D., & Nichols, T. E. (2009). 
Meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: A comparison of image-based and 
coordinate-based 
pooling 
of 
studies. 
NeuroImage, 
45(3), 
810–823. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.039 
Salo, T., Yarkoni, T., Nichols, T. E., Poline, J.-B., Kent, J. D., Gorgolewski, K. J., 
Glerean, E., Bottenhorn, K. L., Bilgel, M., Wright, J., Reeders, P., Kimbler, A., 
Nielson, D. N., Yanes, J. A., Pérez, A., Oudyk, K. M., Jarecka, D., Enge, A., Peraza, 
J. A., … Laird, A. R. (2023). neurostuff/NiMARE: 0.0.13 [Computer software]. 
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7545355 
Sharafi, Z., Huang, Y., Leach, K., & Weimer, W. (2021). Toward an Objective Measure 
of Developers’ Cognitive Activities. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering 
and Methodology, 30(3), 1–40. https://doi.org/10.1145/3434643 
Shea, D. L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2001). Importance of assessing spatial 
ability in intellectually talented young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study. 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Psychology, 
93(3), 
604–614. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.93.3.604 
Shearer, C. B., & Karanian, J. M. (2017). The neuroscience of intelligence: Empirical 
support for the theory of multiple intelligences? Trends in Neuroscience and 
Education, 6, 211–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tine.2017.02.002 
Soares, J. M., Magalhães, R., Moreira, P. S., Sousa, A., Ganz, E., Sampaio, A., Alves, 
V., Marques, P., & Sousa, N. (2016). A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Functional Magnetic 
Resonance 
Imaging. 
Frontiers 
in 
Neuroscience, 
10. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2016.00515 
Srikant, S., Lipkin, B., Ivanova, A., Fedorenko, E., & O’Reilly, U.-M. (2022). 
Convergent representations of computer programs in human and artificial neural 
networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 18834–18849. 
Stöckl, C., Yang, Y., & Maass, W. (2024). Local prediction-learning in high-
dimensional spaces enables neural networks to plan. Nature Communications, 
15(1), 2344. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-46586-0 
Stouffer, S. A., Suchman, E. A., Devinney, L. C., Star, S. A., & Williams Jr., R. M. 
(1949). The American soldier: Adjustment during army life. (Studies in social 
psychology in World War II), Vol. 1 (pp. xii, 599). Princeton Univ. Press. 
Sun, J., Xu, C., Tang, L., Wang, S., Lin, C., Gong, Y., Ni, L. M., Shum, H.-Y., & Guo, 
J. (2023). Think-on-Graph: Deep and Responsible Reasoning of Large Language 
Model 
on 
Knowledge 
Graph 
(arXiv:2307.07697). 
arXiv. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.07697 
Tablante, J., Krossa, L., Azimi, T., & Chen, L. (2023). Dysfunctions associated with the 
intraparietal sulcus and a distributed network in individuals with math learning 
difficulties: An ALE meta-analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 44(7), 2726–2740. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.26240 
Tahmasebi, A. M., Davis, M. H., Wild, C. J., Rodd, J. M., Hakyemez, H., Abolmaesumi, 
45 
 
P., & Johnsrude, I. S. (2012). Is the Link between Anatomical Structure and 
Function Equally Strong at All Cognitive Levels of Processing? Cerebral Cortex, 
22(7), 1593–1603. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr205 
Theves, S., Fernandez, G., & Doeller, C. F. (2019). The hippocampus encodes distances 
in multidimensional feature space. Current Biology, 29(7), 1226–1231. 
Thompson-Schill, S. L., D’Esposito, M., & Kan, I. P. (1999). Effects of Repetition and 
Competition on Activity in Left Prefrontal Cortex during Word Generation. 
Neuron, 23(3), 513–522. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80804-1 
Uddin, L. Q. (2015). Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16(1), 55–61. 
Vázquez-Rodríguez, B., Suárez, L. E., Markello, R. D., Shafiei, G., Paquola, C., 
Hagmann, P., van den Heuvel, M. P., Bernhardt, B. C., Spreng, R. N., & Misic, B. 
(2019). Gradients of structure–function tethering across neocortex. Proceedings of 
the 
National 
Academy 
of 
Sciences, 
116(42), 
21219–21227. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903403116 
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., 
Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., Van Der Walt, S. J., Brett, M., 
Wilson, J., Millman, K. J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A. R. J., Jones, E., Kern, R., 
Larson, E., … Vázquez-Baeza, Y. (2020). SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for 
scientific 
computing 
in 
Python. 
Nature 
Methods, 
17(3), 
261–272. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2 
Viswanathan, P., & Nieder, A. (2020). Spatial neuronal integration supports a global 
representation of visual numerosity in primate association cortices. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(6), 1184–1197. 
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: 
Aligning over 50 years of cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its 
importance. 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Psychology, 
101(4), 
817–835. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016127 
Wang, L., Zhang, M., Zou, F., Wu, X., & Wang, Y. (2020). Deductive-reasoning brain 
networks: A coordinate-based meta-analysis of the neural signatures in deductive 
reasoning. Brain and Behavior, 10(12), e01853. https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.1853 
Wei, W., Yuan, H., Chen, C., & Zhou, X. (2012). Cognitive correlates of performance 
in advanced mathematics. The British Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(Pt 
1), 157–181. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8279.2011.02049.x 
Wong, L., Grand, G., Lew, A. K., Goodman, N. D., Mansinghka, V. K., Andreas, J., & 
Tenenbaum, J. B. (2023). From Word Models to World Models: Translating from 
Natural Language to the Probabilistic Language of Thought (arXiv:2306.12672). 
arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.12672 
Woolgar, A., Jackson, J., & Duncan, J. (2016). Coding of Visual, Auditory, Rule, and 
Response Information in the Brain: 10 Years of Multivoxel Pattern Analysis. 
Journal 
of 
Cognitive 
Neuroence, 
28(10), 
1–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00981 
Woolgar, A., Thompson, R., Bor, D., & Duncan, J. (2011). Multi-voxel coding of 
stimuli, rules, and responses in human frontoparietal cortex. NeuroImage, 56(2), 
46 
 
744–752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.035 
Xie, F., Zhang, L., Chen, X., & Xin, Z. (2020). Is Spatial Ability Related to 
Mathematical Ability: A Meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 32(1), 
113–155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-019-09496-y 
Xu, S., Li, Y., & Liu, J. (2021). The Neural Correlates of Computational Thinking: 
Collaboration of Distinct Cognitive Components Revealed by fMRI. Cerebral 
Cortex, 31(12), 5579–5597. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab182 
Yan, C.-G., Wang, X.-D., Zuo, X.-N., & Zang, Y.-F. (2016). DPABI: Data Processing 
& Analysis for (Resting-State) Brain Imaging. Neuroinformatics, 14(3), 339–351. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12021-016-9299-4 
Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C., & Wager, T. D. (2011). 
Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nature 
Methods, 8(8), 665–670. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1635 
Zago, L., Petit, L., Turbelin, M.-R., Andersson, F., Vigneau, M., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 
N. (2008). How verbal and spatial manipulation networks contribute to calculation: 
An 
fMRI 
study. 
Neuropsychologia, 
46(9), 
2403–2414. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.03.001 
Zhou, X., Li, M., Li, L., Zhang, Y., Cui, J., Liu, J., & Chen, C. (2018). The semantic 
system is involved in mathematical problem solving. Neuroimage, 166, 360–370. 
 
47 
 
Supplementary materials 
7. Supplementary figures 
Supplementary Figure 1. Synthesized activation map of LMS processing from 
conjunctive analysis of three representative tasks. The activation maps were FDR 
corrected at p = 0.01. The warmer color denotes a higher z-score. 
 
 
48 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 2. Meta-analysis activation map of language processing from 
large-scale automated meta-analysis. The activation maps were FDR corrected at p = 
0.01. The warmer color denotes a higher z-score. 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 3. Meta-analysis activation map of spatial cognition from large-
scale automated meta-analysis. The activation maps were FDR corrected at p = 0.01. 
The warmer color denotes a higher z-score. 
 
 
50 
 
Supplemental Figure 4. Overlaps between the activation map of reasoning and the meta-
analysis activation maps of language processing and spatial cognition. All the activation 
maps were FDR corrected at p = 0.01. 
 
 
51 
 
 
Supplemental Figure 5. Overlaps between the activation map of calculation and the 
meta-analysis activation maps of language processing and spatial cognition. All the 
activation maps were FDR corrected at p = 0.01. 
 
 
52 
 
 
 
Supplemental Figure 6. Overlaps between the activation map of mental programming 
and the meta-analysis activation maps of language processing and spatial cognition. All 
the activation maps were FDR corrected at p = 0.01. 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 7. The ROI of the multivariate similarity analysis. The ROI is 
the overlap between the meta-analysis activation maps of language processing and 
spatial cognition. 
 
 
54 
 
8. Supplementary tables 
Supplementary Table 1 The activation regions of LMS processing.  
Hemisphere 
Region 
MNI coordinates  
 
Volume 
(mm3)  
  
  
x 
y 
z 
  
Left 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Temporal Gyrus, Superior 
Temporal Gyrus, Inferior 
Temporal Gyrus, Superior 
Temporal Pole, Postcentral 
Gyrus 
-54 
-42 
3 
74250 
 
Inferior Parietal Lobule, 
Superior Parietal Lobule 
-30 
-66 
39 
567 
 
Supplementary Motor Area 
-3 
6 
60 
3618 
Right 
Middle Temporal Pole, Superior 
Temporal Pole 
48 
12 
-27 
1593 
 
Superior Temporal Gyrus, 
Middle Temporal Gyrus 
54 
-24 
0 
10017 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus  
57 
21 
12 
864 
 
Postcentral Gyrus 
48 
-6 
36 
432 
  
Precentral Gyrus 
60 
-3 
42 
405 
 
 
 
55 
 
Supplementary Table 2 The activation regions of language processing. 
Hemisphere 
Region 
MNI coordinates  
 
Volume 
(mm3)  
  
  
x 
y 
z 
  
Left 
Cerebellum Posterior Lobe, 
Cerebellum Anterior Lobe 
-30 
-66 
-33 
40554 
 
Caudate, Thalamus, Pallidum, 
Putamen, Globus Pallidus 
-15 
6 
9 
9774 
 
Inferior Temporal Gyrus, 
Middle Temporal Gyrus 
-57 
-51 
-12 
2295 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus 
-45 
48 
-9 
1350 
 
Orbital part of Inferior Frontal 
Gyrus, Insula 
-33 
21 
-6 
2268 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus, Precentral Gyrus 
-30 
12 
48 
27567 
 
Thalamus 
-18 
-27 
12 
297 
 
Inferior Parietal Lobule, 
Superior Parietal Lobule, 
Angular, Middle Occipital 
Gyrus, Supramarginal Gyrus, 
Postcentral Gyrus 
-48 
-42 
45 
22950 
Right 
Cerebellum Posterior Lobe, 
Brainstem 
18 
-36 
-45 
1296 
 
Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
57 
-54 
-12 
3105 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus, Superior Frontal 
Gyrus, Cingulate Gyrus, 
Supplementary Motor Area, 
Insula 
27 
9 
51 
60075 
 
Caudate, Thalamus, Pallidum, 
Putamen 
-33 
21 
-6 
2268 
  
Inferior Parietal Lobule, 
Angular, Supramarginal Gyrus, 
Precuneus, Superior Parietal 
Lobule, Superior Occipital 
Gyrus, Middle Occipital Gyrus, 
Cuneus 
51 
-42 
45 
28755 
 
 
 
56 
 
Supplementary Table 3 The activation regions of spatial cognition. 
Hemisphere 
Region 
MNI coordinates  
 
Volume 
(mm3)  
  
  
x 
y 
z 
  
Left 
Inferior Parietal Lobule, Middle 
Occipital Gyrus, Superior Parietal 
Lobule, Fusiform, Inferior 
Occipital Gyrus, Precuneus, 
Superior Occipital Gyrus, 
Angular, Postcentral Gyrus, 
Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
-21 
-69 
45 
42687 
 
Thalamus 
-9 
-21 
6 
2862 
 
Precentral Gyrus, Insula, Superior 
Frontal Gyrus, Inferior Frontal 
Gyrus 
-24 
-6 
54 
16686 
 
Middle Occipital Gyrus 
-24 
-69 
3 
486 
 
Precentral Gyrus, Superior 
Temporal Gyrus 
-48 
-15 
12 
783 
 
Medial Superior Frontal Gyrus 
-6 
39 
30 
270 
 
Supplementary Motor Area, 
Cingulate  
-3 
6 
48 
10179 
 
Middle Frontal Gyrus 
-36 
24 
33 
405 
Right 
Middle Occipital Gyrus, Superior 
Occipital Gyrus, Inferior Parietal 
Lobule, Superior Parietal Lobule, 
Precuneus, Fusiform, Inferior 
Occipital Gyrus, Inferior 
Temporal Gyrus, Angular, 
Cuneus, Middle Temporal Gyrus, 
Supramarginal Gyrus, Postcentral 
Gyrus 
24 
-66 
45 
50679 
 
Insula, Opercular part of Inferior 
Frontal Gyrus, Putamen 
30 
21 
0 
4968 
 
Thalamus, Hippocampus 
15 
-30 
-3 
810 
 
Calcarine Sulcus 
3 
-72 
9 
810 
 
Precentral Gyrus, Superior 
Temporal Gyrus 
48 
-15 
12 
1458 
 
Precentral Gyrus, Superior 
Frontal Gyrus, Opercular part of 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus 
27 
-6 
54 
13716 
  
Middle Frontal Gyrus, Triangular 
part of Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
33 
33 
33 
594 
 
 
 
57 
 
Supplementary Table 4 The overlap of activation regions between the LMS processing 
and the two compared tasks (i.e., language processing and spatial cognition). 
Compared 
Task 
Hemisphere 
 Region  
MNI coordinates  
 
Volume 
(mm3)  
  
  
  
x 
y 
z 
  
Language 
processing 
Left 
Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
-51 
-46 
-12 
297 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
-48 
44 
-7 
378 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Insula 
-33 
27 
-3 
378 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus 
-48 
17 
22 
13743 
 
Right 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
54 
23 
18 
459 
 
 
Inferior Parietal Gyrus, 
Superior Parietal Gyrus 
-28 
-66 
41 
540 
 
 
Supplementary Motor Area, 
Medial Superior Frontal Gyrus 
-3 
22 
47 
891 
Spatial 
Cognition 
Left 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus 
-44 
9 
28 
2565 
 
 
Inferior Parietal Gyrus, 
Superior Parietal Gyrus, 
Angular 
-35 
-55 
43 
12177 
 
 
Middle Frontal Gyrus, 
Precentral Gyrus 
-30 
1 
49 
837 
 
 
Insula 
-30 
21 
-2 
351 
 
Right 
Brainstem 
0 
-29 
-16 
405 
 
 
Supplementary Motor 
Area(L&R), Medial Superior 
Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Cingulate 
3 
19 
43 
2943 
 
 
Inferior Parietal Gyrus, 
Superior Occipital Gyrus, 
Precuneus, Angular, Superior 
Parietal Gyrus, Middel 
Occipital Gyrus 
28 
-61 
42 
15768 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Insula 
31 
21 
-3 
1458 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
38 
29 
25 
297 
 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Middle 
Frontal Gyrus, Precentral 
Gyrus 
40 
5 
37 
8127 
  
  
Inferior Temporal Gyrus 
48 
-58 
-10 
270 
 
 
58 
 
Supplementary Table 5 The ROI of the multivariate similarity analysis.  
Hemisphere 
 Region  
MNI coordinates  
 
Volume 
(mm3)  
  
  
x 
y 
z 
  
Left 
Inferior Occipital gyrus 
-45 
-61 
-12 
351 
 
Superior Temporal gyrus 
-52 
-19 
5 
270 
 
Precentral Gyrus, Inferior 
Frontal lobule 
-44 
7 
30 
4644 
 
Inferior Parietal gyrus, Superior 
Parietal gyrus 
-29 
-63 
43 
972 
 
Supplementary Motor Area 
-4 
13 
52 
1431 
Right 
Superior Temporal Gyrus 
52 
-21 
4 
405 
 
