Title: Exploring Chemical Space using Natural Language Processing Methodologies for Drug Discovery
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06053v1
--------------------------------------------------

Exploring Chemical Space using Natural Language
Processing Methodologies for Drug Discovery
Hakime ¨Ozt¨urka, Arzucan ¨Ozg¨ura, Philippe Schwallerb, Teodoro Lainob,∗, Elif
Ozkirimlic,d,∗
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
bIBM Research, Zurich, Switzerland
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
dDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057
Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
Text based representations of chemicals and proteins can be thought of as un-
structured languages codiﬁed by humans to describe domain speciﬁc knowledge.
Advances in natural language processing (NLP) methodologies in the process-
ing of spoken languages accelerated the application of NLP to elucidate hidden
knowledge in textual representations of these biochemical entities and then use it
to construct models to predict molecular properties or to design novel molecules.
This review outlines the impact made by these advances on drug discovery and
aims to further the dialogue between medicinal chemists and computer scien-
tists.
Teaser. The application of natural language processing methodologies to an-
alyze text based representations of molecular structures opens new doors in
deciphering the information rich domain of biochemistry toward the discovery
and design of novel drugs.
Keywords:
Natural Language Processing, Machine Translation, Molecule
Generation, Drug Discovery, Cheminformatics, Bioinformatics, Biochemical
Languages, SMILES
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: teo@zurich.ibm.com (Teodoro Laino ), elif.ozkirimli@boun.edu.tr
(Elif Ozkirimli ), +41 76 349 7471 (Elif Ozkirimli )
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
February 17, 2020
arXiv:2002.06053v1  [q-bio.BM]  10 Feb 2020
1. Introduction
The design and discovery of novel drugs for protein targets is powered by
an understanding of the underlying principles of protein-compound interaction.
Biochemical methods that measure aﬃnity and biophysical methods that de-
scribe the interaction in atomistic level detail have provided valuable informa-
tion toward a mechanistic explanation for bimolecular recognition [1]. However,
more often than not, compounds with drug potential are discovered serendipi-
tously or by phenotypic drug discovery [2] since this highly speciﬁc interaction
is still diﬃcult to predict [3]. Protein structure based computational strategies
such as docking [4], ultra-large library docking for discovering new chemotypes
[5], and molecular dynamics simulations [4] or ligand based strategies such as
quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) [6, 7], and molecular sim-
ilarity [8] have been powerful at narrowing down the list of compounds to be
tested experimentally. With the increase in available data, machine learning and
deep learning architectures are also starting to play a signiﬁcant role in chem-
informatics and drug discovery [9]. These approaches often require extensive
computational resources or they are limited by the availability of 3D informa-
tion. On the other hand, text based representations of biochemical entities are
more readily available as evidenced by the 19,588 biomolecular complexes (3D
structures) in PDB-Bind [10] (accessed on Nov 13, 2019) compared with 561,356
(manually annotated and reviewed) protein sequences in Uniprot [11] (accessed
on Nov 13, 2019) or 97 million compounds in Pubchem [12] (accessed on Nov
13, 2019). The advances in natural language processing (NLP) methodologies
make processing of text based representations of biomolecules an area of intense
research interest.
The discipline of natural language processing (NLP) comprises a variety of
methods that explore a large amount of textual data in order to bring unstruc-
tured, latent (or hidden) knowledge to the fore [13].
Advances in this ﬁeld
are beneﬁcial for tasks that use language (textual data) to build insight. The
2
languages in the domains of bioinformatics and cheminformatics can be investi-
gated under three categories: (i) natural language (mostly English) that is used
in documents such as scientiﬁc publications, patents, and web pages, (ii) domain
speciﬁc language, codiﬁed by a systematic set of rules extracted from empirical
data and describing the human understanding of that domain (e.g. proteins,
chemicals, etc), and (iii) structured forms such as tables, ontologies, knowledge
graphs or databases [14]. Processing and extracting information from textual
data written in natural languages is one of the major application areas of NLP
methodologies in the biomedical domain (also known as BioNLP). Information
extracted with BioNLP methods is most often shared in structured databases
or knowledge graphs [15]. We refer the reader to the comprehensive review on
BioNLP by Krallinger et al. [16]. Here, we will be focusing on the application
of NLP to domain speciﬁc, unstructured biochemical textual representations
toward exploration of chemical space in drug discovery eﬀorts.
We can view the textual representation of biomedical/biochemical entities
as a domain-speciﬁc language. For instance, a genome sequence is an exten-
sive script of four characters (A, T, G, C) constituting a genomic language. In
proteins, the composition of 20 diﬀerent natural amino acids in varying lengths
builds the protein sequences. Post-translational modiﬁcations expand this 20
letter alphabet and confer diﬀerent properties to proteins [17]. For chemicals
there are several text based alternatives such as chemical formula, IUPAC Inter-
national Chemical Identiﬁer (InChI) [18] and Simpliﬁed Molecular Input Line
Entry Speciﬁcation (SMILES) [19].
Today, the era of “big data” boosts the “learning” aspect of computational
approaches substantially, with the ever-growing amounts of information pro-
vided by publicly available databases such as PubChem [12], ChEMBL [20],
UniProt [11]. These databases are rich in biochemical domain knowledge that
is in textual form, thus building an eﬃcient environment in which NLP-based
techniques can thrive. Furthermore, advances in computational power allow the
design of more complex methodologies, which in turn drive the ﬁelds of machine
learning (ML) and NLP. However, biological and chemical interpretability and
3
explainability remain among the major challenges of AI-based approaches. Data
management in terms of access, interoperability and reusability are also critical
for the development of NLP models that can be shared across disciplines.
With this review, we aim to provide an outline of how the ﬁeld of NLP
has inﬂuenced the studies in bioinformatics and cheminformatics and the im-
pact it has had over the last decade. Not only are NLP methodologies facil-
itating processing and exploitation of biochemical text, they also promise an
“understanding” of biochemical language to elucidate the underlying principles
of bimolecular recognition. NLP technologies are enhancing the biological and
chemical knowledge with the ﬁnal goal of accelerating drug discovery for improv-
ing human health. We highlight the signiﬁcance of an interdisciplinary approach
that integrates computer science and natural sciences.
1.1. NLP Basics
Chowdhury [21] describes NLP on three levels: (i) the word level in which
the smallest meaningful unit is extracted to deﬁne the morphological structure,
(ii) the sentence level where grammar and syntactic validity are determined, and
(iii) the domain or context level in which the sentences have global meaning.
Similarly, our review is organized in three parts in which bio-chemical data is
investigated at: (i) word level, (ii) sentence (text) level, and (iii) understand-
ing text and generating meaningful sequences. Table 1 summarizes important
NLP concepts related to the processing of biochemical data. We refer to these
concepts and explain their applications in the following sections.
All NLP technology relates to speciﬁc AI architectures. In Table 2 W-we
summarize the main ML and deep learning (DL) architectures that will be
mentioned throughout the review.
2. Biochemical Language Processing
The language-like properties of text-based representations of chemicals were
recognized more than 50 years ago by Garﬁeld [22]. He proposed a “chemico-
linguistic” approach to representing chemical nomenclature with the aim of
4
instructing the computer to draw chemical diagrams.
Protein sequence has
been an important source of information about protein structure and function
since Anﬁnsen’s experiment [23]. Alignment algorithms, such as Needleman-
Wunsh [24] and Smith-Waterman [25], rely on sequence information to identify
functionally or structurally critical elements of proteins (or genes).
To make predictions about the structure and function of compounds or pro-
teins, the understanding of these sequences is critical for bioinformatics tasks
with the ﬁnal goal of accelerating drug discovery. Much like a linguist who uses
the tools of language to bring out hidden knowledge, biochemical sequences
can be processed to propose novel solutions, such as predicting interactions be-
tween chemicals and proteins or generating new compounds based on the level
of understanding. In this section, we will review the applications of some of
the NLP-concepts to biochemical data in order to solve bio/cheminformatics
problems.
2.1. Textual Chemical Data
Information about chemicals can be found in repositories such as PubChem
[12], which includes information on around 100 million compounds, or Drugbank
[26], which includes information on around 10,000 drugs.
The main textual
sources used in drug discovery are textual representations of chemicals and
proteins. Table 3 lists some sources that store diﬀerent types of biochemical
information.
Chemical structures can be represented in diﬀerent forms that can be one-
dimensional (1D), 2D, and 3D. Table 4 depicts diﬀerent identiﬁers/representations
of the drug ampicillin. While the 2D and 3D representations are also used in ML
based approaches [9], here we focus on the 1D form, which is the representation
commonly used in NLP.
IUPAC name. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IU-
PAC) scheme (i.e. nomenclature) is used to name compounds following pre-
deﬁned rules such that the names of the compounds are unique and consistent
with each other (iupac.org/).
5
Chemical Formula. The chemical formula is one of the simplest and most widely-
known ways of describing chemicals using letters (i.e. element symbols), num-
bers, parentheses, and (-/+) signs. This representation gives information about
which elements and how many of them are present in the compound.
SMILES. The Simpliﬁed Molecular Input Entry Speciﬁcation (SMILES) is a
text-based form of describing molecular structures and reactions [19]. SMILES
strings can be obtained by traversing the 2D graph representation of the com-
pound and therefore SMILES provides more complex information than the
chemical formula. Moreover, due to its textual form, SMILES takes 50% to
70% less space than other representation methods such as an identical connec-
tion table (daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smiles.html).
SMILES notation is similar to a language with its own set of rules. Just
like it is possible to express the same concept with diﬀerent words in natural
languages, the SMILES notation allows molecules to be represented with more
than one unique SMILES. Although this may sound like a signiﬁcant ambigu-
ity, the possibility of using diﬀerent SMILES to represent the same molecule
was successfully adopted as a data augmentation strategy by various groups
(Bjerrum [27], Kimber et al. [28], Schwaller et al. [29]).
Canonical SMILES can provide a unique SMILES representation.
How-
ever, diﬀerent databases such as PubChem and ChEMBL might use diﬀerent
canonicalization algorithms to generate diﬀerent unique SMILES. OpenSMILES
(opensmiles.org/opensmiles.html) is a new platform that aims to universal-
ize the SMILES notation. In isomeric SMILES, isotopism and stereochemistry
information of a molecule is encoded using a variety of symbols (“/”, “\”, “@”,
“@@”).
DeepSMILES. DeepSMILES is a novel SMILES-like notation that was proposed
to address two challenges of the SMILES syntax: (i) unbalanced parentheses and
(ii) ring closure pairs [30]. It was initially designed to enhance machine/deep-
learning based approaches that utilize SMILES data as input (github.com/
nextmovesoftware/deepsmiles). DeepSMILES was adopted in a drug-target
6
binding aﬃnity prediction task in which the ﬁndings highlighted the eﬃcacy of
DeepSMILES over SMILES in terms of identifying undetectable patterns [31].
DeepSMILES was also utilized in a molecule generation task in which it was
compared to canonical and randomized SMILES text [32]. Here, the results
suggested that DeepSMILES might limit the learning ability of the SMILES-
based molecule generation models because its syntax is more grammar sensitive
with the ring closure alteration and the use of a single symbol for branching
(i.e. “)”) introducing longer sequences.
SELFIES. SELF-referencIng Embedding Strings (SELFIES) is an alternative
sequence-based representation that is built upon “semantically constrained graphs”
[33].
Each symbol in a SELFIES sequence indicates a recursive Chomsky-2
type grammar, and can thus be used to convert the sequence representation to
a unique graph. SELFIES utilize SMILES syntax to extract words that will
correspond to semantically valid graphs (github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/
selfies). Krenn et al. [33] compared SELFIES, DeepSMILES and SMILES
representations in terms of validity in cases where random character mutations
are introduced. The evaluations on the QM9 dataset yielded results in the favor
of SELFIES.
InChI. InChI is the IUPAC International Chemical Identiﬁer, which is a non-
proprietary and open-source structural representation (inchi-trust.org) [34].
The InChIKey is a character-based representation that is generated by hashing
the InChI strings in order to shorten them. InChi representation has several
layers (each) separated by the “/” symbol.
The software that generates InChi is publicly available and InChi does not
suﬀer from ambiguity problems. However, its less complex structure makes the
SMILES representation easier to use as shown in a molecular generation study
[35] and in building meaningful chemical representations with a translation-
based system [36]. Interestingly, the translation model was able to translate
from InChi to canonical SMILES, whereas it failed to translate from canonical
7
SMILES to InChi. Winter et al. [36] suggested that the complex syntax of InChi
made it diﬃcult for the model to generate a correct sequence.
SMARTS. SMiles ARbitrary Target Speciﬁcation (SMARTS) is a language that
contains specialized symbols and logic operators that enable substructure (pat-
tern) search on SMILES strings [37]. SMARTS can be used in any task that re-
quires pattern matching on a SMILES string such as, querying databases or cre-
ating rule dictionaries such as RECAP [38] and BRICS [39] to extract fragments
from SMILES (daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smarts.html).
SMIRKS. SMIRKS notation can be used to describe generic reactions (also
known as transforms) that comprise one or more changes in atoms and bonds
(https://daylight.com/daycgi_tutorials/smirks_examples.html). These
transforms are based on “reactant to product” notation, and thus make use of
SMILES and SMARTS languages. SMIRKS is utilized in tasks such as con-
structing an online transform database [40] and predicting metabolic trans-
formations [41]. A recent study achieves a similar performance to rule-based
systems in classifying chemical reactions by learning directly from SMILES text
with transforms via neural networks [42].
2.2. Identiﬁcation of Words/Tokens
Similar to words in natural languages, we can assume that the “words” of
biochemical sequences convey signiﬁcant information (e.g. folding, function etc)
about the entities. In this regard, each compound/protein is analogous to a sen-
tence, and each compound/protein unit is analogous to a word. Therefore, if we
can decipher the grammar of biochemical languages, it would be easier to model
bio/cheminformatics problems. However, protein and chemical words are not
explicitly known and diﬀerent approaches are needed to extract syntactically
and semantically meaningful biochemical word units from these textual infor-
mation sources (i.e. sequences). Here, we review some of the most common
tokenization approaches used to determine the words of biochemical languages.
8
k-mers (n-grams). One of the simplest approaches in NLP to extract a small
language unit is to use k-mers, also known as n-grams.
k-mers indicate k
consecutive overlapping characters that are extracted from the sequence with
a sliding window approach.
“LINGO”, which is one of the earliest applica-
tions of k-mers in cheminformatics, is the name of the overlapping 4-mers that
are extracted from SMILES strings [43]. 4-mers of the SMILES of ampicillin,
“CC1(C(N2C(S1)C(C2=O)NC(=O)C(C3=CC=CC=C3)N)C(=O)O)C”, can be
listed as { ‘CC1(’, ‘C1(C’, ‘1(C(’, ..., ‘O)O)’, ‘)O)C’ }. From a sequence of
length l, a total of (l −n) + 1 k-mers can be extracted. Extracting LINGOs
from SMILES is a simple yet powerful idea that has been successfully used to
compute molecular similarities, to diﬀerentiate between bioisosteric and ran-
dom molecular pairs [43] and in a drug-target interaction prediction task [44],
without requiring 2D or 3D information. The results suggested that a SMILES-
based approach to compute the similarity of chemicals is not only as good as a
2D-based similarity measurement, but also faster [44].
k-mers were successfully utilized as protein [45] and chemical words [46] in
protein family classiﬁcation tasks. 3-mers to 5-mers were often considered as
the words of the protein sequence. Motomura et al. [47] reported that some 5-
mers could be matched to motifs and protein words are most likely a mixture of
diﬀerent k-mers. For the protein function prediction task, Cao et al. [48] decided
to choose among the 1000 most frequent words to build the protein vocabulary,
whereas Ranjan et al. [49] utilized each k-mer type separately and showed that
4-mers provided the best performance. In the latter work, instead of using the
whole protein sequence, the words were extracted from diﬀerent length protein
segments, which are also long k-mers (i.e. 100-mer, 120-mer) with 30 amino-
acid gaps. The use of segmented protein sequences yielded better results than
using the whole protein sequence, and important and conserved subsequences
were highlighted. k-mers were also used as features, along with position speciﬁc
score matrix features, in the protein fold prediction problem [50].
9
Longest Common Subsequences. The identiﬁcation of the longest common sub-
sequence (LCS) of two sequences is critical for detecting their similarity. When
there are multiple sequences, LCSs can point to informative patterns. LCSs ex-
tracted from SMILES sequences performed similarly well to 4-mers in chemical
similarity calculation [44].
Maximum Common Substructure. Cadeddu et al. [51] investigated organic chem-
istry as a language in an interesting study that extracts maximum common
substructures (MCS) from the 2D structures of pairs of compounds to build a
vocabulary of the molecule corpus. Contrary to the common idea of functional
groups (e.g. methyl, ethyl etc.) being “words” of the chemical language, the
authors argued that MCSs (i.e. fragments) can be described as the words of
the chemical language [51]. A recent work investigated the distribution of these
words in diﬀerent molecule subsets [52]. The “words” followed Zipf’s Law, which
indicates the relationship between the frequency of a word and its rank (based
on the frequency) [53], similar to most natural languages. Their results also
showed that drug “words” are shorter compared to natural product “words”.
Minimum Description Length. Minimum Description Length (MDL) is an un-
supervised compression-based word segmentation technique in which words of
an unknown language are detected by compressing the text corpus. In a protein
classiﬁcation task, each protein was assigned to the family in which its sequence
is compressed the most, according to the MDL-based representation [54]. Gane-
san et al. [54] investigated whether the MDL-based words of the proteins show
similarities to PROSITE patterns [55] and showed that less conserved residues
were compressed less by the algorithm. Ganesan et al. [54] also emphasized
that the integration of domain knowledge, such as the consideration of the hy-
drophilic and hydrophobic aminoacids in the words (i.e. grammar building),
might prove eﬀective.
Byte-Pair Encoding. Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) generates words based on high
frequency subsequences starting from frequent characters [56]. A recent study
10
adopted a linguistic-inspired approach to predict protein-protein interactions
(PPIs) [57]. Their model was built upon “words” (i.e. bio-words) of the protein
language, in which BPE was utilized to build the bio-word vocabulary. Wang
et al. [57] suggested that BPE-segmented words indicate a language-like behav-
ior for the protein sequences and reported improved accuracy results compared
to using 3-mers as words.
Pattern-based words. Subsequences that are conserved throughout evolution
are usually associated with protein structure and function. These conserved
sequences can be detected as patterns via multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
techniques and Hidden Markov Models (HMM). PROSITE [55], a public database
that provides information on domains and motifs of proteins, uses regular ex-
pressions (i.e. RE or regex) to match these subsequences.
Protein domains have been investigated for their potential of being the words
of the protein language. One earlier study suggested that folded domains could
be considered as “phrases/clauses” rather than “words” because of the higher
semantic complexity between them [58]. Later, domains were described as the
words, and domain architectures as sentences of the language [59, 60]. Protein
domains were treated as the words of multi-domain proteins in order to evalu-
ate the semantic meaning behind the domains [61]. The study supported prior
work by Yu et al. [60] suggesting that domains displayed syntactic and seman-
tic features, but there are only a few multi-domain proteins with more than
six domains limiting the use of domains as words to build sentences. Protein
domains and motifs have also been utilized as words in diﬀerent drug discovery
tasks such as the prediction of drug-target interaction aﬃnity [62, 63]. These
studies showed that motifs and domains together contribute to the prediction
as much as the use of the full protein sequence.
SMARTS is a well-known regex-based querying language that is used to
identify patterns in a SMILES string. SMARTS has been utilized to build spe-
ciﬁc rules for small-molecule protonation [64], to design novel ligands based on
the fragments connected to the active site of a target [65], and to help generate
11
products in reaction prediction [66]. MolBlocks, a molecular fragmentation tool,
also adopted SMARTS dictionaries to partition a SMILES string into overlap-
ping fragments [37]. Furthermore, MACCS [67] and PubChem [12] Fingerprints
(FP) are molecular descriptors that are described as binary vectors based on the
absence/presence of substructures that are predeﬁned with SMARTS language.
A recent study on protein family clustering uses a ligand-centric representa-
tion to describe proteins in which ligands were represented with SMILES-based
(i.e. 8-mers) representation, MACCS and Extended Connectivity Fingerprint
(ECFP6) [46]. The results indicate that three of the ligand representation ap-
proaches provide similar performances for protein family clustering.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive evaluation of the
diﬀerent word extraction techniques except a comparison by Wang et al. [57] of
the performance of BPE-based words against k-mers in a PPI prediction task.
Such comparison would provide important insights to the bio/cheminformatics
community.
2.3. Text representation
The representation of a text (e.g. molecule or protein sequence) aims to
capture syntactic, semantic or relational meaning. In the widely used Vector
Space Model (VSM), a text is represented by a feature vector of either weighted
or un-weighted terms [68]. The terms of this vector may correspond to words,
phrases, k-grams, characters, or dimensions in a semantic space such as in the
distributed word embedding representation models. The similarity between two
texts represented in the vector space model is usually computed using the cosine
similarity metric [69], which corresponds to the cosine of the angle between the
two vectors.
Similarly to the one-hot encoding scheme [70], in the traditional bag-of-
words [71] and term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) [72] text
representation models, each word corresponds to a diﬀerent dimension in the
vector space. Therefore, the similarity between two words in the vector space is
zero, even if they are synonymous or related to each other. In the distributed
12
representation models [73] on the other hand, words are represented as dense
vectors based on their context. Words that occur in similar contexts have similar
vector representations. In this subsection, we review these commonly used text
representation models with their applications in cheminformatics.
Bag-of-words representation. In this representation model, a text is represented
as a vector of bag-of-words, where the multiplicity of the words is taken into ac-
count, but the order of the words in the text is lost [71]. For instance, the
SMILES of ampicillin “CC1(C(N2C(S1)C(C2=O)NC(=O)C(
C3=CC=CC=C3)N)C(=O)O)C” can be represented as a bag-of 8-mers as fol-
lows: {“CC1(C(N2”, “C1(C(N2C”, “1(C(N2C(”, “(C(N2C(S”,...,“N)C(=O)O”
,“)C(=O)O)” ,“C(=O)O)C” }. We can vectorize it as S = [1, 1, 1, 1, ..., 1, 1, 1]
in which each number refers to the frequency of the corresponding 8-mer.
Bag-of-words representation was used in molecular similarity computation,
in which the SMILES string and the LINGOs extracted from it were treated
as the sentence and words, respectively [43]. The unique LINGOs were consid-
ered for each pair and a Tanimoto coeﬃcient was used to measure the similarity
[43]. Another approach called SMILES Fingerprint (SMIfp) also adopted bag-of-
words to create representations of molecules for a ligand-based virtual screening
task [74]. SMIfp considered 34 unique symbols in SMILES strings to create a
frequency-based vector representation, which was utilized to compute molecu-
lar similarity. SMIfp provided comparable results to a chemical representation
technique that also incorporated polar group and topological information, as
well as atom and bond information, in recovering active compounds amongst
decoys [74].
TF-IDF. The bag-of-words model, which is based on counting the terms of
the sentence/document, might prioritize insigniﬁcant but frequent words. To
overcome this issue, a weighting scheme can be integrated into the vector repre-
sentation in order to give more importance to the rare terms that might play a
key role in detecting similarity between two documents. One popular weighting
approach is to use term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) [72].
13
TF refers to the frequency of a term in the document, and IDF denotes the loga-
rithm of the total number of documents over the number of documents in which
the term appears. IDF is therefore an indicator of uniqueness. For instance,
the IDF of “C3=CC=CC” is lower than that of “(C(N2C(S”, which appears in
fewer compounds. Therefore, the existence of “(C(N2C(S” in a compound may
be more informative.
TF-IDF weigthing was utilized to assign weights to LINGOs that were ex-
tracted from SMILES in order to compute molecule similarity using cosine sim-
ilarity [44]. Molecular similarities were then used as input for drug-target in-
teraction prediction. A similar performance between TF-IDF weighted LINGO
and a graph-based chemical similarity measurement was obtained. Cadeddu
et al. [51] used TF-IDF weighting on chemical bonds to show that bonds with
higher TF-IDF scores have a higher probability of breaking.
One-hot representation. In one-hot representation, for a given vocabulary of a
text, each unique word/character is represented with a binary vector that has
a 1 in the corresponding position, while the vector positions for the remaining
words/characters are ﬁlled with 0s [70]. One-hot encoding is fast to build, but
might lead to sparse vectors with large dimensions based on the size of the vo-
cabulary (e.g. one million unique words in the vocabulary means one million
dimensional binary vectors ﬁlled with zeros except one). It is a popular choice,
especially in machine learning-based bio/cheminformatic studies to encode dif-
ferent types of information such as SMILES characters [75, 76], atom/bond
types [77, 78] and molecular properties [79].
Distributed representations. The one-hot encoding builds discrete representa-
tions, and thus does not consider the relationships between words. For instance,
the cosine similarity of two diﬀerent words is 0 even if they are semantically sim-
ilar. However, if the word (i.e. 8-mer) “(C(N2C(S” frequently appears together
with the word “C(C2=O)N” in SMILES strings, this might suggest that they
have related “meanings”. Furthermore, two words might have similar semantic
14
meanings even though they are syntactically apart. This is where distributed
vector representations come into play.
The distributed word embeddings models gained popularity with the intro-
duction of Word2Vec [73] and GloVe [80].
The main motivation behind the
Word2Vec model is to build real-valued high-dimensional vectors for each word
in the vocabulary based on the context in which they appear. There are two
main approaches in Word2Vec: (i) Skip-Gram and (ii) Continuous Bag of Words
(CBOW). The aim of the Skip-Gram model is to predict context words given the
center word, whereas in CBOW the objective is to predict the target word given
the context words. Figure 1 depicts the Skip-gram architecture in Word2Vec
[73]. For the vocabulary of size V , given the target word “2C(S”, the model
learns to predict two context words. Both target word and context words are
represented as one-hot encoded binary vectors of size V . The number of neurons
in the hidden layer determines the size of the embedding vectors. The weight
matrix between the input layer and the hidden layer stores the embeddings of
the vocabulary words. The ith row of the embedding matrix corresponds to the
embedding of the ith word.
The Word2Vec architecture has inspired a great deal of research in the
bio/cheminformatics domains. The Word2Vec algorithm has been successfully
applied for determining protein classes [45] and protein-protein interactions
(PPI) [57]. Asgari and Mofrad [45] treated 3-mers as the words of the protein
sequence and observed that 3-mers with similar biophysical and biochemical
properties clustered together when their embeddings were mapped onto the 2D
space. Wang et al. [57], on the other hand, utilized BPE-based word segmen-
tation (i.e. bio-words) to determine the words. The authors argued that the
improved performance for bio-words in the PPI prediction task might be due
to the segmentation-based model providing more distinct words than k-mers,
which include repetitive segments. Another recent study treated multi-domain
proteins as sentences in which each domain was recognized as a word [61]. The
Word2Vec algorithm was trained on the domains (i.e. PFAM domain identiﬁers)
of eukaryotic protein sequences to learn semantically interpretable representa-
15
tions of them. The domain representations were then investigated in terms of
the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations that they inherit. The results indicated
that semantically similar domains share similar GO terms.
The Word2Vec algorithm was also utilized for representation of chemicals.
SMILESVec, a text-based ligand representation technique, utilized Word2Vec
to learn embeddings for 8-mers (i.e. chemical words) that are extracted from
SMILES strings [46]. SMILESVec was utilized in protein representation such
that proteins were represented as the average of the SMILESVec vectors of their
interacting ligands. The results indicated comparable performances for ligand-
based and sequence based protein representations in protein family/superfamily
clustering. Mol2Vec [81], on the other hand, was based on the identiﬁers of the
substructures (i.e. words of the chemical) that were extracted via Extended
Connectivity Fingerprint (ECFP) [82].
The results showed a better perfor-
mance with Mol2Vec than with the simple Morgan Fingerprint in a solubility
prediction task, and a comparable performance to graph-based chemical repre-
sentation [83]. Chakravarti [84] also employed the Word2vec model that was
trained on the fragments that are extracted from SMILES strings using a graph
traversing algorithm. The results favored the distributed fragment-based lig-
and representation over fragment-based binary vector representation in a ring
system clustering task and showed a comparable performance in the predic-
tion of toxicity against Tetrahymena [84]. Figure 2 illustrates the pipeline of a
text-based molecule representation based on k-mers.
FP2Vec is another method that utilizes embedding representation for molecules,
however instead of the Word2Vec algorithm, it depends on a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) to build molecule representations to be used in toxic-
ity prediction tasks [85]. CNN architectures have also been utilized for drug-
target binding aﬃnity prediction [86] and drug-drug interaction prediction [76]
to build representations for chemicals from raw SMILES strings, as well as for
protein fold prediction [87] to learn representations for proteins from amino-
acid sequences. SMILES2Vec adopted diﬀerent DL architectures (GRU, LSTM,
CNN+GRU, and CNN+LSTM) to learn molecule embeddings, which were then
16
used to predict toxicity, aﬃnity and solubility [88]. A CNN+GRU combination
was better at the prediction of chemical properties. A recent study compared
several DL approaches to investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent chemical representa-
tions, which were learned through these architectures, on a chemical property
prediction problem [89]. The authors also combined DL architectures that were
trained on SMILES strings with the MACCS ﬁngerprint, proposing a combined
representation for molecules (i.e. CheMixNet). The CheMixNet representation
outperformed the other representations that were trained on a single data type
such as SMILES2Vec (i.e. SMILES) and Chemception (i.e. 2D graph) [90].
2.4. Text generation
Text generation is a primary NLP task, where the aim is to generate gram-
matically and semantically correct text, with many applications ranging from
question answering to machine translation [91]. It is generally formulated as a
language modeling task, where a statistical model is trained using a large cor-
pus to predict the distribution of the next word in a given context. In machine
translation, the generated text is the translation of an input text in another
language.
Medicinal chemistry campaigns use methods such as scaﬀold hopping [92] or
fragment-based drug design [4] to build and test novel molecules but the chemo-
type diversity and novelty may be limited. It is possible to explore uncharted
chemical space with text generation models, which learn a distribution from the
available data (i.e. SMILES language) and generate novel molecules that share
similar physicochemical properties with the existing molecules [75]. Molecule
generation can then be followed by assessing physicochemical properties of the
generated compound or its binding potential to a target protein [75]. For a com-
prehensive review of molecule generation methodologies, including graph-based
models, we refer the reader to the review of Elton et al. [93]. Machine transla-
tion models have also been recently adapted to text-based molecule generation,
which start with one “language” such as that of reactants and generate a novel
text in another “language” such as that of products [29]. Below, we present
17
recent studies on text based molecule generation.
RNN models, which learn a probability distribution from a training set of
molecules, are commonly used in molecule generation to propose novel molecules
similar to the ones in the training data set. For instance, given the SMILES
sequence “C(=O”, the model would predict the next character to be “)” with a
higher probability than “(”. The production of valid SMILES strings, however,
is a challenge because of the complicated SMILES syntax that utilizes paren-
theses to indicate branches and ring numbers. The sequential nature of RNNs,
which may miss long range dependencies, is a disadvantage of these models
[75]. RNN descendants LSTM and GRU, which model long-term dependencies,
are better suited for remembering matching rings and branch closures. Moti-
vated by such a hypothesis, Segler et al. [75] and Ertl et al. [94] successfully
pioneered de novo molecule generation using LSTM architecture to generate
valid novel SMILES. Segler et al. [75] further modiﬁed their model to generate
target-speciﬁc molecules by integrating a target bioactivity prediction step to
ﬁlter out inactive molecules and then retraining the LSTM network. In another
study, transfer learning was adopted to ﬁne-tune an LSTM-based SMILES gen-
eration model so that structurally similar leads were generated for targets with
few known ligands [95]. Olivecrona et al. [96] and Popova et al. [97] used re-
inforcement learning (RL) to bias their model toward compounds with desired
properties. Merk et al. [98, 99] ﬁne-tuned their LSTM model on a target-focused
library of active molecules and synthesized some novel compounds. Ar´us-Pous
et al. [100] explored how much of the GDB-13 database [101] they could redis-
cover by using an RNN-based generative model.
The variational Auto-encoder (VAE) is another widely adopted text gener-
ation architecture [102]. G´omez-Bombarelli et al. [35] adopted this architecture
for molecule generation.
A traditional auto-encoder encodes the input into
the latent space, which is then decoded to reconstruct the input. VAE diﬀers
from AE by explicitly deﬁning a probability distribution on the latent space to
generate new samples. G´omez-Bombarelli et al. [35] hypothesized that the vari-
ational part of the system integrates noise to the encoder, so that the decoder
18
can be more robust to the large diversity of molecules. However, the authors
also reported that the non-context free property of SMILES caused by match-
ing ring numbers and parentheses might often lead the decoder to generate
invalid SMILES strings. A grammar variational auto-encoder (GVAE), where
the grammar for SMILES is explicitly deﬁned instead of the auto-encoder learn-
ing the grammar itself, was proposed to address this issue [103]. This way, the
generation is based on the pre-deﬁned grammar rules and the decoding process
generates grammar production rules that should also be grammatically valid.
Although syntactic validity would be ensured, the molecules may not have se-
mantic validity (chemical validity). Dai et al. [104] built upon the VAE [35] and
GVAE [103] architectures and introduced a syntax-directed variational autoen-
coder (SD-VAE) model for the molecular generation task. The syntax-direct
generative mechanism in the decoder contributed to creating both syntactically
and semantically valid SMILES sequences. Dai et al. [104] compared the la-
tent representations of molecules generated by VAE, GVAE, and SD-VAE, and
showed that SD-VAE provided better discriminative features for druglikeness.
Blaschke et al. [105] proposed an adversarial AE for the same task. Conditional
VAEs [106, 107] were trained to generate molecules conditioned on a desired
property. The challenges that SMILES syntax presents inspired the introduc-
tion of new syntax such as DeepSMILES [30] and SELFIES [33] (details in
Section 2.1).
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) models generate novel molecules by
using two components: the generator network generates novel molecules, and
the discriminator network aims to distinguish between the generated molecules
and real molecules [108]. In text generation models, the novel molecules are
drawn from a distribution, which are then ﬁne-tuned to obtain speciﬁc features,
whereas adversarial learning utilizes generator and discriminator networks to
produce novel molecules [108, 109].
ORGAN [109], a molecular generation
methodology, was built upon a sequence generative adversarial network (Se-
qGAN) from NLP [110]. ORGAN integrated RL in order to generate molecules
with desirable properties such as solubility, druglikeness, and synthetizability
19
through using domain-speciﬁc rewards [109].
Machine Translation. Machine translation ﬁnds use in cheminformatics in “trans-
lation” from one language (e.g. reactants) to another (e.g. products). Machine
translation is a challenging task because the syntactic and semantic dependen-
cies of each language diﬀer from one another and this may give rise to ambi-
guities. Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models beneﬁt from the potential
of deep learning architectures to build a statistical model that aims to ﬁnd the
most probable target sequence for an input sequence by learning from a corpus
of examples [111, 112]. The main advantage of NMT models is that they provide
an end-to-end system that utilizes a single neural network to convert the source
sequence into the target sequence. Sutskever et al. [111] refer to their model as
a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) system that addresses a major limitation of
DNNs that can only work with ﬁxed-dimensionality information as input and
output. However, in the machine translation task, the length of the input se-
quences is not ﬁxed, and the length of the output sequences is not known in
advance.
The NMT models are based on an encoder-decoder architecture that aims
to maximize the probability of generating the target sequence (i.e. most likely
correct translation) for the given source sequence. The ﬁrst encoder-decoder ar-
chitectures in NMT performed poorly as the sequence length increased mainly
because the encoder mapped the source sequence into a single ﬁxed-length vec-
tor.
However, ﬁxed-size representation may be too small to encode all the
information required to translate long sequences [113]. To overcome the issue
of the ﬁxed context vector (Figure 3a), a new method was developed, in which
every source token was encoded into a memory bank independently (Figure 3b).
The decoder could then selectively focus on parts of this memory bank during
translation [113, 114]. This technique is known as “attention mechanism” [115].
Inspired by the successes in NMT, the ﬁrst application of seq2seq models
in cheminformatics was for reaction prediction by Nam and Kim [116], who
proposed to translate the SMILES strings of reactants and separated reagents
20
to the corresponding product SMILES. The authors hypothesized that the re-
action prediction problem can be re-modelled as a translation system in which
both inputs and output are sequences. Their model used GRUs for the encoder-
decoder and a Bahdanau [113] attention layer in between. Liu et al. [117] in
contrast, performed the opposite task, the single-step retrosynthesis prediction,
using a similar encoder-decoder model. When given a product and a reaction
class, their model predicted the reactants that would react together to form that
product. One major challenge in the retrosynthesis prediction task is the possi-
bility of multiple correct targets, because more than one reactant combination
could lead to the same product. Similarly to Nam and Kim [116], Schwaller
et al. [118] also adopted a seq2seq model to translate precursors into products,
utilizing the SMILES representation for the reaction prediction problem. Their
model used a diﬀerent attention mechanism by Luong et al. [114] and LSTMs
in the encoder and decoder. By visualizing the attention weights, an atom-wise
mapping between the product and the reactants could be obtained and used to
understand the predictions better. Schwaller et al. [118] showed that seq2seq
models could compete with graph neural network-based models in the reaction
prediction task [119].
A translation model was also employed to learn a data-driven representation
of molecules [36]. Winter et al. [36] translated between two textual representa-
tions of a chemical, InChi and SMILES, to extract latent representations that
can integrate the semantic “meaning” of the molecule. The results indicated a
statistically signiﬁcant improvement with the latent representations in a ligand-
based virtual screening task against ﬁngerprint methods such as ECFP (i.e.
Morgan algorithm). NMT architectures were also adopted in a protein func-
tion prediction task for the ﬁrst time, in which “words” that were extracted
from protein sequences are translated into GO identiﬁers using RNNs as en-
coder and decoder [48]. Although exhibiting a comparable performance to the
state-of-the-art protein function prediction methods, the authors argued that
the performance of the model could be improved by determining more mean-
ingful “words” such as biologically interpretable fragments.
21
Transformer is an attention-based encoder-decoder architecture that was in-
troduced in NMT by Vaswani et al. [120]. Although similar to previous studies
[111, 112, 113] in terms of adopting an encoder-decoder architecture, Trans-
former diﬀers from the others because it only consists of attention and feed-
forward layers in the encoder and decoder. As transformers do not contain an
RNN, positional embeddings are needed to capture order relationships in the
sequences. Schwaller et al. [29] were the ﬁrst to adopt the Transformer architec-
ture in cheminformatics and designed a Molecular Transformer for the chemical
reaction prediction task. The Molecular Transformer, which was atom-mapping
independent, outperformed the other algorithms (e.g. based on a two-step con-
volutional graph neural network [121]) on commonly used benchmark data sets.
Transformer architecture was also adopted to learn representations for chemicals
in prediction of drug-target interactions [122] and molecular properties [123] in
which the proposed systems either outperformed the state-of-the-art systems or
obtained comparable results.
3. Future Perspectives
The increase in the biochemical data available in public databases combined
with the advances in computational power and NLP methodologies have given
rise to a rapid growth in the publication rate in bio/cheminformatics, especially
through pre-print servers. As this interdisciplinary ﬁeld grows, novel opportu-
nities come hand in hand with novel challenges.
3.1. Challenges
The major challenges that can be observed from investigating these studies
can be summarized as follows: (i) the need for universalized benchmarks and
metrics, (ii) reproducibility of the published methodologies, (iii) bias in avail-
able data, and (iv) biological and chemical interpretability/explainability of the
solutions.
22
Benchmarking. There are several steps in the drug discovery pipeline, from
aﬃnity prediction to the prediction of other chemical properties such as toxic-
ity, and solubility. The use of diﬀerent datasets and diﬀerent evaluation metrics
makes the assessment of model performance challenging. Comprehensive bench-
marking platforms that can assess the success of diﬀerent tools are still lacking.
A benchmarking environment rigorously brings together the suitable data sets
and evaluation methodologies in order to provide a fair comparison between the
available tools. Such environments are available for molecule generation task
from MOSES [124] and GuacaMol [125]. MoleculeNet is also a similar attempt
to build a benchmarking platform for tasks such as prediction of binding aﬃnity
and toxicity [83].
Reproducibility. Despite the focus on sharing datasets and source codes on pop-
ular software development platforms such as GitHub (github.com) or Zenodo
(zenodo.org), it is still a challenge to use data or code from other groups. The use
of FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable) (meta)data princi-
ples can guide the management of scientiﬁc data [126]. Automated workﬂows
that are easy to use and do not require programming knowledge encourage the
ﬂow of information from one discipline to the other. Platform-free solutions such
as Docker (docker.com) in which an image of the source code is saved and can be
opened without requiring further installation could accelerate the reproduction
process. A recent initiative to provide a uniﬁed-framework for predictive mod-
els in genomics can quickly be adopted by the medicinal chemistry community
[127].
Bias in data. The available data has two signiﬁcant sources of bias, one related
to the limited sampling of chemical space and the other related to the quality
and reproducibility of the data. The lack of information about some regions
of the protein/chemical landscape limits the current methodologies to the ex-
ploitation of data rather than full exploration. The data on protein-compound
interactions is biased toward some privileged molecules or proteins because the
protein targets are related to common diseases or the molecules are similar to
23
known actives. Hence, not all of chemical space is sampled, and chemical space
is expanded based on the similarity of an active compound to others, which is
also referred to as inductive bias [128]. Data about proteins or molecules related
to rare diseases is limited and inactive molecules are frequently not reported.
Moreover, some experimental measurements that are not reproducible across
diﬀerent labs or conditions limit their reliability [129].
Sieg et al. [130] and
Zhang and Lee [131] have recently discussed the bias factors in dataset compo-
sition. Zhang and Lee have also addressed the sources of bias in the data and
proposed to use Bayesian deep learning to quantify uncertainty.
Interpretability. The black box nature of ML/DL methodologies makes assign-
ing meaning to the results diﬃcult. Explainability of an ML model is especially
critical in drug discovery to facilitate the use of these ﬁndings by medicinal
chemists, who can contribute to the knowledge loop.
explainable-AI (XAI)
is a current challenge that calls for increased interpretability of AI solutions
for a given context and includes several factors such as trust, safety, privacy,
security, fairness and conﬁdence [132]. Explainability is also critical for the do-
main experts to assess the reliability of new methodolodogies. Interpretability
is usually classiﬁed into two categories: post-hoc (i.e. after) and ante-hoc (i.e.
before).
Post-hoc approaches explain the predictions of the model, whereas
ante-hoc approaches integrate explainability into the model.
Recent studies
have already aimed to map the semantic meaning behind the models onto the
biochemical description.
An attentive pooling network, a two-way attention
system that extends the attention mechanism by allowing input nodes to be
aware of one another, is one approach that has been employed in drug-target
interaction prediction [133]. Preuer et al. [77] showed that mapping activations
of hidden neurons in feed-forward neural networks to pharmacophores, or link-
ing atom representations computed by convolutional ﬁlters to substructures in
a graph-convolution model, are possible ways of integrating explainability into
AI-based drug discovery systems. Bradshaw et al. [134] also demonstrated a
novel approach that combines molecule generation and retrosynthesis predic-
24
tion to generate synthesizable molecules. Integration of such solutions to drug
discovery problems will not only be useful for computational researchers but
also for the medicinal chemistry community.
3.2. Opportunities
The NLP ﬁeld has seen tremendous advances in the past ﬁve years, start-
ing with the introduction of distributed word embedding algorithms such as
Word2Vec [73] and Glove [80].
The concept of contextualized word embed-
dings (i.e. ELMo) was introduced soon after [135]. Here, the embedding of
the word is not ﬁxed, but changes according to the context (i.e. sentence) in
which it appears. These advances continued with more complicated architec-
tures such as Transformer (i.e.
Generative Pre-Training or GPT) [136] and
BERT [137], RoBERTa [138], GPT2 [139], Transformer-XL [140], and XLNet
[141] models. Such models with a focus on context might have signiﬁcant im-
pact not only on drug discovery, but also on the protein folding problem, which
is critical for predicting structural properties of the protein partner. Secondary
structure [142, 143, 144], domain boundary [145] and fold [50] prediction studies
often use sequence information in combination with similarity to available struc-
tures. The recent success of AlphaFold [146] in Critical Assessment of Protein
Structure Prediction (CASP) competitions (http://predictioncenter.org/)
showed that the enhanced deﬁnitions of context, brought about by the advances
in machine/deep learning systems, might be useful for capturing the global de-
pendencies in protein sequences to detect interactions between residues sepa-
rated in sequence space but close together in 3D space [142].
Unsupervised learning can be used on “big” textual data through using lan-
guage models with attention [120] and using pre-trained checkpoints from lan-
guage models [147]. Encoder-decoder architectures have also had signiﬁcant im-
pact on solving text generation and machine translation problems and were suc-
cessfully applied to molecule generation problem. As NLP moves forward, the
most recent approaches such as Topic-Guided VAE [91] and knowledge graphs
with graph transformers [148] will easily ﬁnd application in bio/cheminformatics.
25
Recent NLP models are not domain-speciﬁc, and they can help with the
generalization of models [139]. Current studies emphasize multi-task learning,
which requires the use of DNNs that share parameters to learn more information
from related but individual tasks [149, 139]. Combined with the transferability
of contextual word representation models, multi-task learning can also provide
solutions to drug discovery which has many interwoven tasks, such as chemical
property prediction and molecule generation.
Language has an important power, not only for daily communication but also
for the communication of codiﬁed domain knowledge. Deciphering the mean-
ing behind text is the primary purpose of NLP, which inevitably has found its
way to bio/cheminformatics. The complicated nature of biochemical text makes
understanding the semantic construction of the hidden words all the more chal-
lenging and interesting. The applications we discussed in this review provide
a broad perspective of how NLP is already integrated with the processing of
biochemical text. A common theme in all of these applications is the use of
AI-based methodologies that drive and beneﬁt from the NLP ﬁeld. Novel ad-
vances in NLP and ML are providing auspicious results to solving long-standing
bio/cheminformatics problems.
With this review, we have summarized the impact of NLP on bio/cheminformatics
to encourage this already interdisciplinary ﬁeld to take advantage of recent ad-
vances. The communication between researchers from diﬀerent backgrounds and
domains can be enhanced through establishing a common vocabulary toward
common goals. This review has been an attempt to facilitate this conversation.
Acknowledgement
This work is partially supported by TUBITAK (The Scientiﬁc and Techno-
logical Research Council of Turkey) under grant number 119E133. HO acknowl-
edges TUBITAK-BIDEB 2211 scholarship program and thanks G¨ok¸ce Uludo˘gan
for her comments on ﬁgures. EO thanks Prof. Amedeo Caﬂisch for hosting her
at the University of Zurich during her sabbatical.
26
References
[1] G. Schneider, Automating drug discovery, Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
17 (2018) 97–113.
[2] J. G. Moﬀat, F. Vincent, J. A. Lee, J. Eder, M. Prunotto, Opportunities
and challenges in phenotypic drug discovery: an industry perspective,
Nature reviews Drug discovery 16 (2017) 531.
[3] Y. Duarte, V. M´arquez-Miranda, M. J. Miossec, F. Gonz´alez-Nilo, Inte-
gration of target discovery, drug discovery and drug delivery: A review on
computational strategies, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Nanomedicine
and Nanobiotechnology (2019) e1554.
[4] P. ´Sled´z, A. Caﬂisch, Protein structure-based drug design: from docking
to molecular dynamics, Current opinion in structural biology 48 (2018)
93–102.
[5] J. Lyu, S. Wang, T. E. Balius, I. Singh, A. Levit, Y. S. Moroz, M. J.
OMeara, T. Che, E. Algaa, K. Tolmachova, et al.,
Ultra-large library
docking for discovering new chemotypes, Nature 566 (2019) 224.
[6] P. Schneider, G. Schneider, De novo design at the edge of chaos: Miniper-
spective, Journal of medicinal chemistry 59 (2016) 4077–4086.
[7] N. Bosc, F. Atkinson, E. Felix, A. Gaulton, A. Hersey, A. R. Leach, Large
scale comparison of qsar and conformal prediction methods and their ap-
plications in drug discovery, Journal of cheminformatics 11 (2019) 4.
[8] H. Eckert, J. Bajorath, Molecular similarity analysis in virtual screening:
foundations, limitations and novel approaches, Drug discovery today 12
(2007) 225–233.
[9] Y.-C. Lo, S. E. Rensi, W. Torng, R. B. Altman,
Machine learning in
chemoinformatics and drug discovery,
Drug discovery today 23 (2018)
1538–1546.
27
[10] R. Wang, X. Fang, Y. Lu, C.-Y. Yang, S. Wang, The pdbbind database:
methodologies and updates,
Journal of medicinal chemistry 48 (2005)
4111–4119.
[11] R. Apweiler, A. Bairoch, C. H. Wu, W. C. Barker, B. Boeckmann, S. Ferro,
E. Gasteiger, H. Huang, R. Lopez, M. Magrane, et al.,
Uniprot: the
universal protein knowledgebase, Nucleic acids research 32 (2004) D115–
D119.
[12] E. E. Bolton, Y. Wang, P. A. Thiessen, S. H. Bryant, Pubchem: integrated
platform of small molecules and biological activities, in: Annual reports
in computational chemistry, volume 4, Elsevier, 2008, pp. 217–241.
[13] C. D. Manning, C. D. Manning, H. Sch¨utze, Foundations of statistical
natural language processing, MIT press, 1999.
[14] D. Oliveira, R. Sahay, M. d’Aquin, Leveraging ontologies for knowledge
graph schemas (2019).
[15] P. Ernst, A. Siu, G. Weikum, Knowlife: a versatile approach for construct-
ing a large knowledge graph for biomedical sciences, BMC bioinformatics
16 (2015) 157.
[16] M. Krallinger, O. Rabal, A. Lourenco, J. Oyarzabal, A. Valencia, Infor-
mation retrieval and text mining technologies for chemistry,
Chemical
reviews 117 (2017) 7673–7761.
[17] T. M. Karve, A. K. Cheema,
Small changes huge impact: the role of
protein posttranslational modiﬁcations in cellular homeostasis and disease,
Journal of amino acids 2011 (2011).
[18] S. Heller, A. McNaught, S. Stein, D. Tchekhovskoi, I. Pletnev, Inchi-the
worldwide chemical structure identiﬁer standard, Journal of cheminfor-
matics 5 (2013) 7.
28
[19] D. Weininger, Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1.
introduction to methodology and encoding rules,
Journal of chemical
information and computer sciences 28 (1988) 31–36.
[20] A. Gaulton, L. J. Bellis, A. P. Bento, J. Chambers, M. Davies, A. Hersey,
Y. Light, S. McGlinchey, D. Michalovich, B. Al-Lazikani, et al., Chembl: a
large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery, Nucleic acids research
40 (2011) D1100–D1107.
[21] G. G. Chowdhury, Natural language processing, Annual review of infor-
mation science and technology 37 (2003) 51–89.
[22] E. Garﬁeld, Chemico-linguistics: computer translation of chemical nomen-
clature, Nature 192 (1961) 192.
[23] C. B. Anﬁnsen, Principles that govern the folding of protein chains, Sci-
ence 181 (1973) 223–230.
[24] S. B. Needleman, C. D. Wunsch,
A general method applicable to the
search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins, Journal
of molecular biology 48 (1970) 443–453.
[25] T. F. Smith, M. S. Waterman, et al., Identiﬁcation of common molecular
subsequences, Journal of molecular biology 147 (1981) 195–197.
[26] D. S. Wishart, C. Knox, A. C. Guo, S. Shrivastava, M. Hassanali,
P. Stothard, Z. Chang, J. Woolsey, Drugbank: a comprehensive resource
for in silico drug discovery and exploration,
Nucleic acids research 34
(2006) D668–D672.
[27] E. J. Bjerrum, Smiles enumeration as data augmentation for neural net-
work modeling of molecules, arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07076 (2017).
[28] T. B. Kimber, S. Engelke, I. V. Tetko, E. Bruno, G. Godin, Synergy eﬀect
between convolutional neural networks and the multiplicity of smiles for
29
improvement of molecular prediction,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04439
(2018).
[29] P. Schwaller, T. Laino, T. Gaudin, P. Bolgar, C. A. Hunter, C. Bekas,
A. A. Lee,
Molecular transformer: A model for uncertainty-calibrated
chemical reaction prediction, ACS Central Science (2019).
[30] N. O’Boyle, A. Dalke, Deepsmiles: An adaptation of smiles for use in
machine-learning of chemical structures (2018).
[31] H. ¨Ozt¨urk, A. ¨Ozg¨ur, E. Ozkirimli, A chemical language based approach
for protein-ligand interaction prediction, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00761
(2018).
[32] J. Ar´us-Pous, S. Johansson, O. Ptykhodko, E. J. Bjerrum, C. Tyrchan,
J. Reymond, H. Chen, O. Engkvist, Randomized smiles strings improve
the quality of molecular generative models (2019).
[33] M. Krenn, F. H¨ase, A. Nigam, P. Friederich, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Selﬁes: a
robust representation of semantically constrained graphs with an example
application in chemistry, arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13741 (2019).
[34] S. R. Heller, A. McNaught, I. Pletnev, S. Stein, D. Tchekhovskoi, Inchi,
the iupac international chemical identiﬁer, Journal of cheminformatics 7
(2015) 23.
[35] R. G´omez-Bombarelli, J. N. Wei, D. Duvenaud, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato,
B. S´anchez-Lengeling, D. Sheberla, J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre, T. D. Hirzel,
R. P. Adams, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Automatic chemical design using a data-
driven continuous representation of molecules,
ACS central science 4
(2018) 268–276.
[36] R. Winter, F. Montanari, F. No´e, D.-A. Clevert,
Learning continuous
and data-driven molecular descriptors by translating equivalent chemical
representations, Chemical science 10 (2019) 1692–1701.
30
[37] D. Ghersi, M. Singh, molblocks: decomposing small molecule sets and
uncovering enriched fragments, Bioinformatics 30 (2014) 2081–2083.
[38] X. Q. Lewell, D. B. Judd, S. P. Watson, M. M. Hann, Recap retrosynthetic
combinatorial analysis procedure: a powerful new technique for identifying
privileged molecular fragments with useful applications in combinatorial
chemistry,
Journal of chemical information and computer sciences 38
(1998) 511–522.
[39] J. Degen, C. Wegscheid-Gerlach, A. Zaliani, M. Rarey,
On the art of
compiling and using’drug-like’chemical fragment spaces, ChemMedChem:
Chemistry Enabling Drug Discovery 3 (2008) 1503–1507.
[40] S. Avramova, N. Kochev, P. Angelov, Retrotransformdb: A dataset of
generic transforms for retrosynthetic analysis, Data 3 (2018) 14.
[41] S. Arvidsson, O. Spjuth, L. Carlsson, P. Toccaceli, Prediction of metabolic
transformations using cross venn-abers predictors,
in: Conformal and
Probabilistic Prediction and Applications, 2017, pp. 118–131.
[42] P. Schwaller, A. C. Vaucher, V. H. Nair, T. Laino, Data-driven chemical
reaction classiﬁcation with attention-based neural networks (2019).
[43] D. Vidal, M. Thormann, M. Pons, Lingo, an eﬃcient holographic text
based method to calculate biophysical properties and intermolecular simi-
larities, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 45 (2005) 386–393.
[44] H. ¨Ozt¨urk, E. Ozkirimli, A. ¨Ozg¨ur,
A comparative study of smiles-
based compound similarity functions for drug-target interaction predic-
tion, BMC bioinformatics 17 (2016) 128.
[45] E. Asgari, M. R. Mofrad, Continuous distributed representation of bio-
logical sequences for deep proteomics and genomics, PloS one 10 (2015)
e0141287.
31
[46] H. ¨Ozt¨urk, E. Ozkirimli, A. ¨Ozg¨ur, A novel methodology on distributed
representations of proteins using their interacting ligands, Bioinformatics
34 (2018) i295–i303.
[47] K. Motomura, T. Fujita, M. Tsutsumi, S. Kikuzato, M. Nakamura, J. M.
Otaki, Word decoding of protein amino acid sequences with availability
analysis: a linguistic approach, PloS one 7 (2012) e50039.
[48] R. Cao, C. Freitas, L. Chan, M. Sun, H. Jiang, Z. Chen, Prolango: protein
function prediction using neural machine translation based on a recurrent
neural network, Molecules 22 (2017) 1732.
[49] A. Ranjan, M. S. Fahad, D. Fernandez-Baca, A. Deepak, S. Tripathi, Deep
robust framework for protein function prediction using variable-length
protein sequences,
IEEE/ACM transactions on computational biology
and bioinformatics (2019).
[50] L. Wei, M. Liao, X. Gao, Q. Zou,
Enhanced protein fold prediction
method through a novel feature extraction technique, IEEE transactions
on nanobioscience 14 (2015) 649–659.
[51] A. Cadeddu, E. K. Wylie, J. Jurczak, M. Wampler-Doty, B. A. Grzy-
bowski, Organic chemistry as a language and the implications of chemical
linguistics for structural and retrosynthetic analyses, Angewandte Chemie
International Edition 53 (2014) 8108–8112.
[52] M. Wo´zniak, A. Wo los, U. Modrzyk, R. L. G´orski, J. Winkowski, M. Ba-
jczyk, S. Szymku´c, B. A. Grzybowski, M. Eder, Linguistic measures of
chemical diversity and the keywords of molecular collections, Scientiﬁc
reports 8 (2018).
[53] G. K. Zipf, Human behavior and the principle of least eﬀort. (1949).
[54] D. Ganesan, A. V. Tendulkar, S. Chakraborti, Protein word detection
using text segmentation techniques, in: BioNLP 2017, 2017, pp. 238–246.
32
[55] N. Hulo, A. Bairoch, V. Bulliard, L. Cerutti, E. De Castro, P. S.
Langendijk-Genevaux, M. Pagni, C. J. Sigrist, The prosite database, Nu-
cleic acids research 34 (2006) D227–D230.
[56] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, A. Birch, Neural machine translation of rare
words with subword units, arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909 (2015).
[57] Y. Wang, Z.-H. You, S. Yang, X. Li, T.-H. Jiang, X. Zhou, A high eﬃ-
cient biological language model for predicting protein–protein interactions,
Cells 8 (2019) 122.
[58] M. Gimona, Protein linguisticsa grammar for modular protein assembly?,
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 7 (2006) 68.
[59] A. Scaiewicz, M. Levitt, The language of the protein universe, Current
opinion in genetics & development 35 (2015) 50–56.
[60] L. Yu, D. K. Tanwar, E. D. S. Penha, Y. I. Wolf, E. V. Koonin, M. K.
Basu,
Grammar of protein domain architectures,
Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 116 (2019) 3636–3645.
[61] D. Buchan, D. Jones,
Inferring protein domain semantic roles using
word2vec, bioRxiv (2019) 617647.
[62] P. Greenside, M. Hillenmeyer, A. Kundaje, Prediction of protein-ligand
interactions from paired protein sequence motifs and ligand substructures,
in: Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing, volume 23, World Scientiﬁc,
2017.
[63] H. ¨Ozt¨urk, E. Ozkirimli, A. ¨Ozg¨ur, Widedta: prediction of drug-target
binding aﬃnity, arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04166 (2019).
[64] P. J. Ropp, J. C. Kaminsky, S. Yablonski, J. D. Durrant, Dimorphite-dl:
an open-source program for enumerating the ionization states of drug-like
small molecules, Journal of cheminformatics 11 (2019) 14.
33
[65] N. Cheron, N. Jasty, E. I. Shakhnovich, Opengrowth: an automated and
rational algorithm for ﬁnding new protein ligands, Journal of medicinal
chemistry 59 (2015) 4171–4188.
[66] J. N. Wei, D. Duvenaud, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Neural networks for the predic-
tion of organic chemistry reactions, ACS central science 2 (2016) 725–732.
[67] J. L. Durant, B. A. Leland, D. R. Henry, J. G. Nourse, Reoptimization of
mdl keys for use in drug discovery, Journal of chemical information and
computer sciences 42 (2002) 1273–1280.
[68] G. Salton, A. Wong, C.-S. Yang,
A vector space model for automatic
indexing, Communications of the ACM 18 (1975) 613–620.
[69] M. Bilenko, R. J. Mooney, Adaptive duplicate detection using learnable
string similarity measures, in: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, ACM,
2003, pp. 39–48.
[70] C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning, Springer Sci-
ence+ Business Media, 2006.
[71] P. D. Turney, P. Pantel, From frequency to meaning: Vector space models
of semantics, Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research 37 (2010) 141–188.
[72] K. S. Jones, A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its appli-
cation in retrieval, Journal of documentation (2004).
[73] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, J. Dean, Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality, in: Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[74] J. Schwartz, M. Awale, J.-L. Reymond, Smifp (smiles ﬁngerprint) chem-
ical space for virtual screening and visualization of large databases of or-
ganic molecules, Journal of chemical information and modeling 53 (2013)
1979–1989.
34
[75] M. H. Segler, T. Kogej, C. Tyrchan, M. P. Waller, Generating focused
molecule libraries for drug discovery with recurrent neural networks, ACS
central science 4 (2018) 120–131.
[76] S. Kwon, S. Yoon,
Deepcci:
End-to-end deep learning for chemical-
chemical interaction prediction, in: Proceedings of the 8th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health
Informatics, ACM, 2017, pp. 203–212.
[77] K. Preuer,
G. Klambauer,
F. Rippmann,
S. Hochreiter,
T. Un-
terthiner, Interpretable deep learning in drug discovery, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.02788 (2019).
[78] N. De Cao, T. Kipf,
Molgan: An implicit generative model for small
molecular graphs, arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11973 (2018).
[79] A. Mayr, G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, S. Hochreiter, Deeptox: toxic-
ity prediction using deep learning, Frontiers in Environmental Science 3
(2016) 80.
[80] J. Pennington, R. Socher, C. Manning, Glove: Global vectors for word
representation, in: Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[81] S. Jaeger, S. Fulle, S. Turk,
Mol2vec: Unsupervised machine learning
approach with chemical intuition, Journal of chemical information and
modeling 58 (2018) 27–35.
[82] D. Rogers, M. Hahn, Extended-connectivity ﬁngerprints, Journal of chem-
ical information and modeling 50 (2010) 742–754.
[83] Z. Wu, B. Ramsundar, E. N. Feinberg, J. Gomes, C. Geniesse, A. S.
Pappu, K. Leswing, V. Pande, Moleculenet: a benchmark for molecular
machine learning, Chemical science 9 (2018) 513–530.
35
[84] S. K. Chakravarti, Distributed representation of chemical fragments, ACS
omega 3 (2018) 2825–2836.
[85] W. Jeon, D. Kim, Fp2vec: a new molecular featurizer for learning molec-
ular properties, Bioinformatics (2019).
[86] H. ¨Ozt¨urk, A. ¨Ozg¨ur, E. Ozkirimli, Deepdta: deep drug–target binding
aﬃnity prediction, Bioinformatics 34 (2018) i821–i829.
[87] J. Hou, B. Adhikari, J. Cheng, Deepsf: deep convolutional neural network
for mapping protein sequences to folds, Bioinformatics 34 (2017) 1295–
1303.
[88] G. B. Goh, N. O. Hodas, C. Siegel, A. Vishnu,
Smiles2vec:
An in-
terpretable general-purpose deep neural network for predicting chemical
properties, arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.02034 (2017).
[89] A. Paul, D. Jha, R. Al-Bahrani, W.-k. Liao, A. Choudhary, A. Agrawal,
Chemixnet: Mixed dnn architectures for predicting chemical properties
using multiple molecular representations, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.08283
(2018).
[90] G. B. Goh, C. Siegel, A. Vishnu, N. O. Hodas, N. Baker,
Chemcep-
tion: a deep neural network with minimal chemistry knowledge matches
the performance of expert-developed qsar/qspr models,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06689 (2017).
[91] W. Wang, Z. Gan, H. Xu, R. Zhang, G. Wang, D. Shen, C. Chen, L. Carin,
Topic-guided variational autoencoders for text generation, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.07137 (2019).
[92] F. Grisoni, D. Merk, V. Consonni, J. A. Hiss, S. G. Tagliabue, R. Todes-
chini, G. Schneider, Scaﬀold hopping from natural products to synthetic
mimetics by holistic molecular similarity, Communications Chemistry 1
(2018) 44.
36
[93] D. C. Elton, Z. Boukouvalas, M. D. Fuge, P. W. Chung, Deep learning
for molecular design-a review of the state of the art, Molecular Systems
Design & Engineering (2019).
[94] P. Ertl, R. Lewis, E. Martin, V. Polyakov, In silico generation of novel,
drug-like chemical matter using the lstm neural network, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.07449 (2017).
[95] A. Gupta, A. T. M¨uller, B. J. Huisman, J. A. Fuchs, P. Schneider,
G. Schneider,
Generative recurrent networks for de novo drug design,
Molecular informatics 37 (2018) 1700111.
[96] M. Olivecrona, T. Blaschke, O. Engkvist, H. Chen, Molecular de-novo
design through deep reinforcement learning, Journal of cheminformatics
9 (2017) 48.
[97] M. Popova, O. Isayev, A. Tropsha, Deep reinforcement learning for de
novo drug design, Science advances 4 (2018) eaap7885.
[98] D. Merk, L. Friedrich, F. Grisoni, G. Schneider, De novo design of bioac-
tive small molecules by artiﬁcial intelligence, Molecular informatics 37
(2018) 1700153.
[99] D. Merk, F. Grisoni, L. Friedrich, G. Schneider, Tuning artiﬁcial intelli-
gence on the de novo design of natural-product-inspired retinoid x receptor
modulators, Communications Chemistry 1 (2018) 68.
[100] J. Ar´us-Pous, T. Blaschke, S. Ulander, J.-L. Reymond, H. Chen, O. En-
gkvist, Exploring the gdb-13 chemical space using deep generative models,
Journal of cheminformatics 11 (2019) 20.
[101] L. C. Blum, J.-L. Reymond,
970 million druglike small molecules for
virtual screening in the chemical universe database gdb-13, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 131 (2009) 8732–8733.
37
[102] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai, R. Jozefowicz, S. Ben-
gio,
Generating sentences from a continuous space,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06349 (2015).
[103] M. J. Kusner, B. Paige, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato, Grammar variational
autoencoder,
in: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning-Volume 70, JMLR. org, 2017, pp. 1945–1954.
[104] H. Dai, Y. Tian, B. Dai, S. Skiena, L. Song, Syntax-directed variational
autoencoder for molecule generation, in: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[105] T. Blaschke, M. Olivecrona, O. Engkvist, J. Bajorath, H. Chen, Appli-
cation of generative autoencoder in de novo molecular design, Molecular
informatics 37 (2018) 1700123.
[106] J. Lim, S. Ryu, J. W. Kim, W. Y. Kim,
Molecular generative model
based on conditional variational autoencoder for de novo molecular design,
Journal of cheminformatics 10 (2018) 31.
[107] S. Kang, K. Cho,
Conditional molecular design with deep generative
models, Journal of chemical information and modeling 59 (2018) 43–52.
[108] Y. Hong, U. Hwang, J. Yoo, S. Yoon, How generative adversarial networks
and their variants work: An overview, ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
52 (2019) 10.
[109] G. L. Guimaraes, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, C. Outeiral, P. L. C. Farias,
A. Aspuru-Guzik,
Objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks
(organ) for sequence generation models, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10843
(2017).
[110] L. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Yu, Seqgan: Sequence generative adver-
sarial nets with policy gradient, in: Thirty-First AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017.
38
[111] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, Q. V. Le, Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks, in: Advances in neural information processing systems,
2014, pp. 3104–3112.
[112] K. Cho, B. Van Merri¨enboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, Y. Bengio,
Learning phrase representations using rnn
encoder-decoder for statistical machine translation,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.1078 (2014).
[113] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, Y. Bengio, Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate, arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[114] M.-T. Luong, H. Pham, C. D. Manning, Eﬀective approaches to attention-
based neural machine translation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025 (2015).
[115] A. Graves, Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1308.0850 (2013).
[116] J. Nam, J. Kim, Linking the neural machine translation and the prediction
of organic chemistry reactions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.09529 (2016).
[117] B. Liu, B. Ramsundar, P. Kawthekar, J. Shi, J. Gomes, Q. Luu Nguyen,
S. Ho, J. Sloane, P. Wender, V. Pande, Retrosynthetic reaction prediction
using neural sequence-to-sequence models, ACS central science 3 (2017)
1103–1113.
[118] P. Schwaller, T. Gaudin, D. Lanyi, C. Bekas, T. Laino, found in trans-
lation: predicting outcomes of complex organic chemistry reactions using
neural sequence-to-sequence models,
Chemical science 9 (2018) 6091–
6098.
[119] W. Jin, C. Coley, R. Barzilay, T. Jaakkola, Predicting organic reaction
outcomes with weisfeiler-lehman network, in: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 2607–2616.
39
[120] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
 L. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is All you Need (2017) 5998–6008.
[121] C. W. Coley, W. Jin, L. Rogers, T. F. Jamison, T. S. Jaakkola, W. H.
Green, R. Barzilay, K. F. Jensen, A graph-convolutional neural network
model for the prediction of chemical reactivity, Chemical science 10 (2019)
370–377.
[122] B. Shin, S. Park, K. Kang, J. C. Ho,
Self-attention based molecule
representation for predicting drug-target interaction,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.06760 (2019).
[123] S. Wang, Y. Guo, Y. Wang, H. Sun, J. Huang, Smiles-bert: Large scale
unsupervised pre-training for molecular property prediction,
in: Pro-
ceedings of the 10th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics,
Computational Biology and Health Informatics, ACM, 2019, pp. 429–436.
[124] D. Polykovskiy,
A. Zhebrak,
B. Sanchez-Lengeling,
S. Golovanov,
O. Tatanov, S. Belyaev, R. Kurbanov, A. Artamonov, V. Aladinskiy,
M. Veselov, et al.,
Molecular sets (moses): a benchmarking platform
for molecular generation models, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12823 (2018).
[125] N. Brown, M. Fiscato, M. H. Segler, A. C. Vaucher, Guacamol: bench-
marking models for de novo molecular design, Journal of chemical infor-
mation and modeling 59 (2019) 1096–1108.
[126] M. D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I. J. Aalbersberg, G. Appleton, M. Ax-
ton, A. Baak, N. Blomberg, J.-W. Boiten, L. B. da Silva Santos, P. E.
Bourne, et al., The fair guiding principles for scientiﬁc data management
and stewardship, Scientiﬁc data 3 (2016).
[127] ˇZ. Avsec, R. Kreuzhuber, J. Israeli, N. Xu, J. Cheng, A. Shrikumar,
A. Banerjee, D. S. Kim, T. Beier, L. Urban, et al.,
The kipoi reposi-
tory accelerates community exchange and reuse of predictive models for
genomics, Nature biotechnology (2019) 1.
40
[128] A. E. Cleves, A. N. Jain,
Eﬀects of inductive bias on computational
evaluations of ligand-based modeling and on drug discovery, Journal of
computer-aided molecular design 22 (2008) 147–159.
[129] R. E. Pogue, D. P. Cavalcanti, S. Shanker, R. V. Andrade, L. R. Aguiar,
J. L. de Carvalho, F. F. Costa, Rare genetic diseases: update on diagnosis,
treatment and online resources, Drug discovery today 23 (2018) 187–195.
[130] J. Sieg, F. Flachsenberg, M. Rarey, In need of bias control: Evaluating
chemical data for machine learning in structure-based virtual screening,
Journal of chemical information and modeling 59 (2019) 947–961.
[131] Y. Zhang, A. A. Lee, Bayesian semi-supervised learning for uncertainty-
calibrated prediction of molecular properties and active learning, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.00925 (2019).
[132] A. Holzinger, C. Biemann, C. S. Pattichis, D. B. Kell, What do we need
to build explainable ai systems for the medical domain?, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.09923 (2017).
[133] K. Y. Gao, A. Fokoue, H. Luo, A. Iyengar, S. Dey, P. Zhang, Interpretable
drug target prediction using deep neural representation., in: IJCAI, 2018,
pp. 3371–3377.
[134] J. Bradshaw, B. Paige, M. J. Kusner, M. H. S. Segler, J. M. Hern´andez-
Lobato,
A model to search for synthesizable molecules,
CoRR
abs/1906.05221 (2019).
[135] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee,
L. Zettlemoyer, Deep contextualized word representations, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.05365 (2018).
[136] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever,
Improv-
ing
language
understanding
by
generative
pre-training,
URL
https://s3-us-west-2.
amazonaws.
com/openai-assets/research-
covers/languageunsupervised/language understanding paper. pdf (2018).
41
[137] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding,
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[138] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pre-
training approach, arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019).
[139] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners, OpenAI Blog 1 (2019).
[140] Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, W. W. Cohen, J. Carbonell, Q. V. Le,
R. Salakhutdinov,
Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond
a ﬁxed-length context, arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860 (2019).
[141] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, Q. V. Le, Xlnet:
Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.08237 (2019).
[142] J. Hanson, K. K. Paliwal, T. Litﬁn, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, Getting to know
your neighbor: protein structure prediction comes of age with contextual
machine learning, Journal of Computational Biology (2019).
[143] X.-J. Zhu, C.-Q. Feng, H.-Y. Lai, W. Chen, L. Hao, Predicting protein
structural classes for low-similarity sequences by evaluating diﬀerent fea-
tures, Knowledge-Based Systems 163 (2019) 787–793.
[144] S. Wang, J. Peng, J. Ma, J. Xu, Protein secondary structure prediction
using deep convolutional neural ﬁelds, Scientiﬁc reports 6 (2016) 18962.
[145] Q. Shi, W. Chen, S. Huang, F. Jin, Y. Dong, Y. Wang, Z. Xue, Dnn-dom:
predicting protein domain boundary from sequence alone by deep neural
network, Bioinformatics (2019).
[146] R. Evans, J. Jumper, J. Kirkpatrick, L. Sifre, T. Green, C. Qin, A. Zidek,
A. Nelson, A. Bridgland, H. Penedones, et al., De novo structure pre-
42
diction with deeplearning based scoring, Annu Rev Biochem 77 (2018)
6.
[147] S. Rothe, S. Narayan, A. Severyn, Leveraging Pre-trained Checkpoints
for Sequence Generation Tasks, arXiv.org (2019).
[148] R. Koncel-Kedziorski, D. Bekal, Y. Luan, M. Lapata, H. Hajishirzi,
Text generation from knowledge graphs with graph transformers, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.02342 (2019).
[149] S. Ruder, Neural Transfer Learning for Natural Language Processing,
Ph.D. thesis, NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND, GALWAY,
2019.
[150] X. Yang, J. Zhang, K. Yoshizoe, K. Terayama, K. Tsuda, Chemts: an
eﬃcient python library for de novo molecular generation,
Science and
technology of advanced materials 18 (2017) 972–976.
[151] O. Prykhodko, S. Johansson, P.-C. Kotsias, E. J. Bjerrum, O. Engkvist,
H. Chen,
A de novo molecular generation method using latent vector
based generative adversarial network (2019).
[152] Y. Bengio, et al., Learning deep architectures for ai, Foundations and
trends R⃝in Machine Learning 2 (2009) 1–127.
[153] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haﬀner, et al., Gradient-based learn-
ing applied to document recognition, Proceedings of the IEEE 86 (1998)
2278–2324.
[154] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep learning, MIT press, 2016.
[155] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Neural compu-
tation 9 (1997) 1735–1780.
[156] D. P. Kingma, M. Welling,
Auto-encoding variational bayes,
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
43
[157] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction, MIT
press, 2018.
[158] S. J. Pan, Q. Yang, A survey on transfer learning, IEEE Transactions on
knowledge and data engineering 22 (2009) 1345–1359.
[159] R. J. Williams, D. Zipser, A learning algorithm for continually running
fully recurrent neural networks, Neural computation 1 (1989) 270–280.
[160] H. M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. N. Bhat, H. Weis-
sig, I. N. Shindyalov, P. E. Bourne, The protein data bank, Nucleic acids
research 28 (2000) 235–242.
[161] A. Bateman, L. Coin, R. Durbin, R. D. Finn, V. Hollich, S. Griﬃths-Jones,
A. Khanna, M. Marshall, S. Moxon, E. L. Sonnhammer, et al., The pfam
protein families database, Nucleic acids research 32 (2004) D138–D141.
[162] T. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Wen, R. N. Jorissen, M. K. Gilson, Bindingdb: a web-
accessible database of experimentally determined protein–ligand binding
aﬃnities, Nucleic acids research 35 (2006) D198–D201.
[163] J. J. Irwin, B. K. Shoichet, Zinc- a free database of commercially available
compounds for virtual screening,
Journal of chemical information and
modeling 45 (2005) 177–182.
44
Figure 1:
The illustration of the Skip-Gram architecture of the Word2Vec algo-
rithm. For a vocabulary of size V, each word in the vocabulary is described as a
one-hot encoded vector (a binary vector in which only the corresponding word
position is set to 1). The Skip-Gram architecture is a simple one hidden-layer
neural network that aims to predict context (neighbor) words of a given target
word. The extent of the context is determined by the window size parameter.
In this example, the window size is equal to 1, indicating that the system will
predict two context words (the word on the left and the word on the right of
the target word) based on their probability scores. The number of nodes in the
hidden layer (N) controls the size of the embedding vector. The weight matrix
of VxN stores the trained embedding vectors.
45
Figure 2:
(Continued on the following page.)
46
Figure 2: The workﬂow for building a SMILES-based molecule representation.
In the ﬁrst box, SMILES text of ampicillin is utilized to extract words. In this
case, the words are overlapping 4-mers and there are total 42 unique words.
To represent multiple compounds, words are extracted from each compound,
thus building a vocabulary of size V . In the second box, two popular word rep-
resentations are illustrated: (left) one-hot encoded representation, and (right)
distributed representation. With the one-hot encoding, we build a binary vector
of size V , in which the position of the corresponding word is set to 1, while the
rest remains as 0. In the distributed representations, however, the dimension
of the word representation (embedding) is D, which is usually smaller than V
and 50 < D < 500. Furthermore, distributed representations are continuous
vectors. Therefore, the cosine similarity of two distributed word vectors is equal
to or greater than 0, whereas with one-hot encoded word vectors, their simi-
larity is 0 if they are not equal. Finally, the third box demonstrates the text
level representation. The analogy between texts and SMILES strings allows us
to represent chemicals as groups of “chemical words”. Term-Frequency-Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF) weighting, which is a widely adopted weighting
scheme in Information Retrieval domain, assigns higher weights to rare words.
In a corpus with a vocabulary size of V, each word is represented as the mul-
tiplication of its frequency and IDF values. In the distributed representation
of texts, since each word also has a D dimensional embedding vector, text rep-
resentation is computed based on these word embedding vectors, for example
by taking their average. Dots (.) in the third box represent “chemical words”
in 2D space, whereas stars (*) represent the whole SMILES (i.e. compound).
With both techniques, the compound (i.e. text) representations can be mapped
to 2D. We expect chemicals such as ampicillin and penicillin, which are from
the same antibiotic class, to be close to each other in vector space, whereas
streptomycin, an antibiotic from a diﬀerent class, to be distant.
47
x0
x1
x2
x3
…
y0
y1
y2
y3
…
y4
y1
y2
y3
…
{
}
x0
x1
x2
x3
…
Br c
1
c
…
Br c
1
c
…
y0
y1
y2
y3
…
<s> c
1
c
…
<s> c
1
c
…
Br
N
N
OH
OH
B
HO
N
N
+
+
+
+
y4
y1
y2
y3
…
c
c
1
c
…
c
c
1
c
…
h0
h =
T
h1
h2
h3
…
encoder
encoder
decoder
decoder
memory bank
ﬁxed sized
vector
Encoder-decoder
attention
K, V
Q
c
a) seq-2-seq
b) seq-2-seq with attention 
N
N
N
N
Pd
Figure 3: (Continued on the following page.)
48
Figure 3: Sequence-2-Sequence models take as input a sequence of tokens and
generate a sequence of tokens as output. The example in this Figure is a chemical
reaction prediction, where given a set of precursors the most likely products
are predicted. The input tokens correspond to the tokenized SMILES of the
precursors and the generated tokens to the SMILES of the product.
In the
original sequence-2-sequence models, the encoder encoded the input sequence
into a ﬁxed size context vector, as shown in (a). The decoder had access only to
this ﬁxed size vector, which limited its application for long input sequences. To
overcome this drawback, the attention mechanism was introduced, as shown in
(b). In a sequence-2-sequence model with attention, the encoder encodes every
token independently into a memory bank. The longer the input sequence is,
the larger is the memory bank. The decoder then queries the memory bank at
every decoding step and selectively attends the most relevant value vectors to
predict the next token.
49
Table 1: NLP concepts and their applications in drug discovery
Concept
Deﬁnition
Methodologies
Applications
Token/word
A series of characters (i.e. word, number, symbol)
that constitutes the smallest unit of a language.
The identiﬁcation of tokens (i.e. tokenization) is an
important pre-processing step in many NLP tasks,
e.g. substructures of a molecule.
k-mers
protein family classiﬁcation [45, 46]
protein function prediction [48, 49]
protein language analysis [47]
molecular similarity [43, 44]
patterns
drug-target interaction prediction[62, 63]
protein language analysis [58, 59, 60, 61]
molecule fragmentation [37]
reaction prediction [66]
ligand design [65]
MCS
chemical language analysis [51, 52]
BPE
protein-protein interaction prediction [57]
MDL
protein family classiﬁcation [54]
Sentence
A text containing one or more tokens/words,
e.g. textual representations of chemicals and
proteins.
SMILES [19]
molecular property prediction [89]
binding aﬃnity prediction [86, 88]
reaction prediction [116, 117, 118, 29]
data augmentation [27]
and more.
DeepSMILES [30]
binding aﬃnity prediction [31]
SELFIES [33]
-
protein sequence
toxicity prediction [81]
protein family classiﬁcation [45, 54]
protein function prediction [48, 49]
protein language analysis [47]
and more.
Word/sentence
representation
The aim to describe a text that can reﬂect its syntactic
and semantic features,
e.g. vector representation of SMILES based on
the occurrences of each symbol.
bag-of-words
molecular similarity [43, 44]
distributed
representations
binding aﬃnity prediction [86]
chemical property prediction [81, 84]
toxicity prediction [88, 81, 84, 85]
drug-drug interaction prediction [76]
protein family classiﬁcation [45, 46]
protein-protein interaction prediction [57]
Machine
translation
The task of converting a sequence of meaningful
symbols in one language into a meaningful sequence
in another language,
e.g.translating SMILES to InChi in molecules.
RNN-based
seq2seq
protein function prediction [48]
chemical representation [36]
reaction prediction [116, 118]
retrosynthesis [117]
Transformer
reaction prediction [29]
drug-target interaction prediction [122]
Language
generation
The aim to generate a sequence of meaningful symbols
in the given language that are close to real.
e.g. generating SMILES of a novel lead
RNN-types
molecule generation [75, 94, 95, 96, 150]
VAE-types
molecule generation [35, 103, 104]
GAN
molecule generation [109, 151]
50
Table 2: Widely used AI methodologies in NLP-based drug discovery studies
Model
Description
Deep Neural Network (DNN) [152]
An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) witha large number
of hidden layers and neurons.
Word2Vec [73]
An ANN-based word embedding architecture that
captures the semantic information of the words based
on the context in which they appear.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [153]
A type of ANN that utilizes convolutions in the layers.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [154]
A type of ANN that has a feedback loop connected to
previous time samples.
Long-short Term Memory (LSTM) [155]
A type of RNN that captures long distance dependencies
and comprises update, forget, and output gates.
Gated Recurrent Unit
A type of RNN that captures long distance dependencies
and comprises an update gate.
Auto-encoder (AE) [154]
A neural network based architecture that comprises an
encoder that maps the input in a narrow space and a
decoder that reconstructs the compressed representation.
Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) [156]
A type of AE that generates outputs based on a speciﬁc
distribution.
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [109]
A generative model with generator and discriminator
networks.
Sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
An encoder-decoder based architecture that maps an
input sequence into an output sequence.
Attention mechanism [113]
enables the model to choose among the important parts
of a sequence that are relevant to the output.
Transformer [120]
An encoder-decoder architecture that employs
self-attention and ANNs in encoder and decoder parts.
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) [113]
A seq2seq translation architecture.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [157]
A ML algorithm in which an agent performs a series of
decisions in order to maximize its rewards.
Transfer Learning [158]
A methodology to learn a model on a task (or on a large
data) and then to adjust (i.e. ﬁne-tune) the learned model
on a diﬀerent task (or on a smaller dataset) with the ﬁnal
goal of generalization.
Teacher Forcing [159]
A technique that is used in training RNNs such that the
actual word is given to the decoder as the input instead
of the output word that is predicted in the previous step.
51
Table 3: Commonly used databases in drug discovery
Source
Address
Description
UniProt [11]
https://www.uniprot.org/
The Universal Protein Resource: stores protein sequence and function
information.
PDB [160]
https://www.rcsb.org/
The Protein Data Bank: a source of structural information for around
152,000 macro-molecular structures.
PFam [161]
https://pfam.xfam.org/
A protein family database based on multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
and Hidden Markov Models (HMM).
PROSITE [55]
https://prosite.expasy.org/
A database that contains protein domains, motifs, families and functional
sites.
PubChem [12]
https://PubChem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
An extensive resource for around 96 million compounds and 265 million
substances. PubChem also acts as a cheminformatics tool by providing an
interface that enables the computation of 2D/3D similarity of compounds
and introduces a 1D chemical descriptor.
ChEMBL [20]
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/
A widely accessed database that stores manually curated information
about protein targets, chemical properties and bioactivities for
1.9 million compounds.
DrugBank [26]
https://www.drugbank.ca/
An online resource for chemical, pharmacological and pharmaceutical
information for 13K drugs and 5K proteins (e.g. drug targets/enzymes)
that are associated with these drugs.
BindingDB [162]
https://www.bindingdb.org/
A database of protein and small molecule interactions that stores
binding aﬃnities.
PDB-Bind [10]
www.pdbbind.org.cn/
A public resource for binding aﬃnity data for protein-ligand complexes.
ZINC [163]
https://zinc.docking.org/
A database of over 230 million commercially-available compounds in
3D form.
All databases were accessed on June 28, 2019.
52
Table 4: Diﬀerent representations of the drug ampicillin
Identiﬁer
Representation
IUPAC name
(2S,5R,6R)-6-[[(2R)-2-amino-2-phenylacetyl]amino]-3,3-
dimethyl-7-oxo-4-thia-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]heptane-2-carboxylic acid
Chemical Formula
C16H19N3O4S
Canonical SMILES
CC1(C(N2C(S1)C(C2=O)NC(=O)C(C3=CC=CC=C3)N)C(=O)O)C
Isomeric SMILES
CC1([C@@H](N2[C@H](S1)[C@@H](C2=O)NC(=O)[C@@H]
(C3=CC=CC=C3)N)C(=O)O)C
DeepSMILES
(Canonical)
CCCNCS5)CC4=O))NC=O)CC=CC=CC=C6))))))N)))))))C=O)O)))C
SELFIES
(Canonical)
[C][C][Branch2 3][Ring1][epsilon][C][Branch2 3]
[epsilon][=O][N][C][Branch1 3][Ring2][S][Ring1][Ring2]
[C][Branch1 3][Branch1 1][C][Ring1][Ring2][=O][N][C]
[Branch1 3][epsilon][=O][C][Branch1 3][Branch2 2][C][=C]
[C][=C][C][=C][Ring1][Branch1 1][N][C][Branch1 3]
[epsilon][=O][O][C]
InChi
InChI=1S/C16H19N3O4S/c1-16(2)11(15(22)23)19-13
(21)10(14(19)24-16)18-12(20)9(17)8-6-4-3-5-7-8/h3-7
9-11,14H,17H2,1-2H3,(H,18,20)(H,22,23)/t9-,10-,11+
14-/m1/s1
InChi Key
AVKUERGKIZMTKX-NJBDSQKTSA-N
2D
3D
2D and 3D ﬁgures were generated using MolView (molview.org).
53
