Title: Quantum Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19758v2
--------------------------------------------------

Submitted manuscript awaiting manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Quantum Natural Language Processing
Dominic Widdows · Willie Aboumrad · Dohun Kim · Sayonee Ray ·
Jonathan Mei
Preprint of paper submitted to Springer KI Special Issue. Please check there for final edited version.
Abstract Language processing is at the heart of cur-
rent developments in artificial intelligence, and quantum
computers are becoming available at the same time. This
has led to great interest in quantum natural language
processing, and several early proposals and experiments.
This paper surveys the state of this area, showing
how NLP-related techniques have been used in quantum
language processing. We examine the art of word embed-
dings and sequential models, proposing some avenues for
future investigation and discussing the tradeoffs present
in these directions. We also highlight some recent meth-
ods to compute attention in transformer models, and
perform grammatical parsing. We also introduce a new
quantum design for the basic task of text encoding (rep-
resenting a string of characters in memory), which has
not been addressed in detail before.
Quantum theory has contributed toward quantifying
uncertainty and explaining “What is intelligence?” In
this context, we argue that “hallucinations” in modern
artificial intelligence systems are a misunderstanding of
the way facts are conceptualized: language can express
many plausible hypotheses, of which only a few become
actual.
Keywords Quantum Language Processing · QNLP ·
Quantum AI · Quantum String Encoding
1 Introduction
In early 2024, quantum computing and AI are two of the
most rapidly-moving and talked-about areas of science
IonQ, Inc. 4505 Campus Dr, College Park, Maryland, USA
E-mail: [widdows|jonathan.mei|aboumrad|sayonee]@ionq.com
Pohang University of Science and Technology
E-mail: dohunkim@postech.ac.kr
and technology. The availability of dialog systems based
on large language models (LLMs) has raised the pro-
file of natural language processing (NLP) to a historic
high, developing and expanding very quickly. This ex-
pansion has led to AI models being deployed as systems
and introduced as components in new ways, leading to
improvements and efficiencies, but also mistakes and
concerns. Thus the demand for improvements in AI is
at an all-time high, with a renewed focus on reliability
and trust.
Quantum theory offers new forms of mathematical
modeling, computation and communication. Mathemat-
ical models for language operations motivated explic-
itly by quantum theory have been used in information
retrieval [85, 80], logic and disambiguation [92], and
language composition [25, 26]. Similar models have been
developed in many social sciences and demonstrated
successful results over classical alternatives, long before
any such models were implemented and run on quantum
computers. More abstractly, entire classes of quantum
machine learning (ML) models have been theoretically
shown to have more expressive power than comparable
classical models [27, 96], though this does not guarantee
improvements in results more generally [15]. Running
basic NLP algorithms on quantum has become possi-
ble only in the last few years, with early-stage results
reported by [58, 94].
This paper is intended as an introduction to this
landscape, for those interested in language processing
and quantum computing, but not necessarily specialists
in either. Firstly, Section 2 gives a brief introduction to
quantum gates and circuits. Section 3 continues with
an idealized example of how quantum gates could be
used to represent a text string of exponential length in
a register of qubits, including some caveats and pitfalls.
This gives a glimpse of some of the wonder, and some
arXiv:2403.19758v2  [quant-ph]  26 Apr 2024
2
Dominic Widdows et al.
of the challenges, of quantum computing. The main
body of the paper surveys ways in which other aspects
of language processing have already been modeled on
quantum computers, including embedding vectors, se-
quences, attention, and grammatical structure (Sections
4–7). This gives a snapshot of of where quantum NLP
has got to at this stage of the NISQ era. Finally, Section
8 discusses the challenges of choosing and distinguishing
between the hypothetical and the actual. This has taken
on fresh urgency in AI systems for fact-checking, to
avoid mistaking so-called hallucinations for assertions.
We note that language models are designed to produce
both hypothetical and actual statements, and that quan-
tum mechanics is a better starting point than classical
mechanics for modeling this.
2 Quantum Computing Basics
In early 2024, quantum computers are real and in reg-
ular use, and quantum runtime is offered as-a-service
by many companies, via the internet / cloud. This sec-
tion introduces some of the basic building blocks of
quantum computing, from the perspective of a devel-
oper designing quantum programs, particularly to run
on today’s noisy-intermediate scale quantum (NISQ)
hardware. The development process involves specifying
a register of qubits, and saying what logic gates and
measurements should be performed on these qubits.
The material here overlaps with the introduction
of [91]. Some familiarity with quantum mechanics, es-
pecially Dirac notation, is assumed, so that |0⟩and
|1⟩are the basis states for a single qubit whose state
is represented in the complex vector space C2, a 2-
qubit state is represented in the tensor product space
C2 ⊗C2 ∼= C4 with basis states |00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩and
|11⟩, 3-qubit states are represented in C⊗3 ∼= C8 with
basis states |000⟩, |001⟩, . . . , |111⟩, and so on. For intro-
ductions to how linear algebra is written and used in
quantum mechanics, see [67, Ch 2]. Quantum measure-
ment is probabilistic: if |ϕ⟩is an eigenvector of a given
measurement operator, then a system in the state |ψ⟩
is observed to be in the state |ϕ⟩with probability given
by the square of their scalar product, ⟨ϕ|ψ⟩2 (the Born
rule), and if this outcome is observed, the system is now
in the state |ϕ⟩.
In mathematical terms, the key features that distin-
guish quantum from classical computers are superposi-
tion and entanglement. Superposition can be realized in
a single qubit: the state α |0⟩+ β |1⟩is a superposition
of the states |0⟩and |1⟩, where α and β are complex
numbers, with |α2| + |β2| = 1. Each single-qubit logic
gate is a linear operator that preserves the orthogonal-
ity of the basis states and this normalization condition,
and the group of such operators is U(2), the group
of complex 2 × 2 unitary matrices. Single-qubit gates
that feature prominently in this paper are shown in
Figure 1. So single-qubit gates coherently manipulate
the superposition state of an individual qubit.
Entanglement is a property that connects different
qubits. Since the 1930’s, quantum entanglement has
gone from a hotly-disputed scientific prediction, to a
statistical property demonstrated with large ensembles,
to a connection created between pairs of individual par-
ticles, to a working component in quantum computers.
All modern quantum computers have some implementa-
tion of an entangling gate, and only one kind is really
needed, because all possible 2-qubit entangled states
can be constructed mathematically by combining appro-
priate single-qubit gates before and after the entangling
gate. Furthermore, a single 2-qubit entangling gate and
a set of single-qubit gates forms a universal gateset
for quantum computing [67, §4.5]. Entanglement is the
crucial feature that distinguishes quantum computing
algorithmically, because predicting the probability dis-
tributions that result from quantum operations with
entanglement can become exponentially hard for classi-
cal computers. In simpler terms, quantum computing
is special because it offers special kinds of interference,
not because it offers special kinds of in-between-ness.
A quantum circuit consists of a register of qubits,
and a sequence of logic gates that act on these qubits.
Some of the basic gates used in this paper are shown in
Figures 1 and 2. The Pauli-X gate is commonly used to
flip a qubit between the |0⟩and |1⟩gates, which is why
it is also sometimes called the quantum NOT gate. X-
gates applied to different qubits can be used to prepare
an input state representing a binary-valued vector: the
state |010 · · · 001⟩is prepared by applying an X-gate to
each of the qubits to be switched to the |1⟩state.
The Hadamard (H) gate is commonly used to put a
qubit into a superposition state: for example, it maps
a qubit prepared in the state |0⟩to the superposition
1
√
2(|0⟩+ |1⟩). Applying an H-gate to each qubit in an
array is used to initialize a binary vector all of whose
coordinates have a 50-50 chance of being observed in
the |0⟩or |1⟩state.
Other probabilities, anywhere in the range [0, 1], can
be arranged by using fractional rotations (which might
involve sending just the same laser-pulse instructions,
but for different time periods). An example is given in
the RX(θ) gate. Several variational quantum algorithms
work by gradually optimizing such θ parameters.
The CNOT gate is a 2-qubit entangling gate, that
acts upon the state α |00⟩+ β |01⟩+ γ |10⟩+ δ|11⟩. In
the standard basis, its behavior can be described as
Quantum Natural Language Processing
3
Pauli-X (NOT)
X

0 1
1 0

Hadamard (H)
H
1
√
2

1 1
1 −1

RX rotation
exp(−i θ
2X)
RX(θ)

cos θ
2 i sin θ
2
i sin θ
2 cos θ
2

Fig. 1 Single-qubit gates used in this paper, and their corre-
sponding matrices, which operate on the superposition state
α |0⟩+ β |1⟩written as the column vector 
α βT .
Controlled Not
(CNOT, CX)


1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0


Fig. 2 Two-qubit CNOT (controlled-X) and gate
Multi-
Controlled
Not
=
X
X
Fig. 3 Three-qubit multi-controlled gate (Toffoli gate) with |1⟩
and |0⟩control states.
“performing a NOT operation on the target qubit if the
control qubit is in state |1⟩”.
By assembling several 1- and 2-qubit gates, more
qubits can become entangled, and we can define multi-
controlled gates. For example, the 3-qubit Toffoli gate
in Figure 3 flips the lowest qubit if the top qubit is in
the |1⟩state and the middle qubit in the |0⟩state. It is
relatively easy mathematically to start arranging such
gate recipes into higher-level operations: for example,
the 3-qubit gate acts as a logical AND, from which
simple binary arithmetic can be constructed.
However, developers must be careful when using such
constructions, because gate complexity and errors can
easily build up. In practice, it takes 5 CNOT gates and
9 single-qubit gates to assemble the 3-qubit Toffoli gate,
so if gate errors are above 1%, the error-rate in a circuit
with just 3 Toffoli gates would be over 50%. In 2024,
gate error rates tend to be much better than this, but
still, typical circuits today do not reliably run more
than a few hundred gates. NISQ-era quantum circuit
development tends to tradeoff between sophistication
(more gates introduces more tunable parameters) and
reliability (fewer gates gives fewer errors). It also leads
to designs where classical components are relied upon for
many parts of an NLP pipeline, such as storing weights
and comparing scores [94].
In quantum machine learning, variational circuits,
or parametrized quantum circuits (PQCs), are a partic-
ularly clear example of such tradeoffs [77, Ch 5]. Vari-
ational circuit designs use i. a quantum circuit with
parameters {θi}, often implemented as variable gate
angles, that can be optimized according to a given loss
function; and ii. a classical optimizer, responsible for
evaluating the measurement outputs of the quantum
circuit, and proposing updates to the parameters {θi}.
When both classical and quantum components play such
a prominent role, the combination is sometimes called a
hybrid system or hybrid workflow.
The transition from NISQ to fault-tolerant quantum
computing will be gradual, and arguably is already un-
derway: recent months have seen encouraging progress
in quantum error correction and memory fidelity [17].
This raises long-term expectations that quantum com-
puters will optimize crucial matrix operations, such as
solving systems of equations [42], and quantum singular
value transformation [36]. However, it is important to
remember that even fault-tolerant quantum computing
will come with serious caveats, and in particular, quan-
tum components bring no advantage if their I/O costs
outweigh their computational gains [1].
Through the rest of this paper, we highlight examples
of some of these considerations and design differences
as they appear.
3 A Quantum String Encoding Example
Character and string encoding is one of the most basic
tasks in language processing, and this section gives a
worked example of how this might be performed on a
quantum computer using some of the standard quantum
circuit and gate patterns introduced in the previous
section. This makes a good case-study of some of the
promise and challenges of quantum computing, and (as
far as we know) is the first such proposal for representing
text strings in a quantum computer, comparable to the
use of ASCII or Unicode specifications in mainstream
classical computing.
To encode a text of meaningful length, this encoding
would require many layers of 2-qubit gates, and this
design would require error correction, rather than being
a NISQ-era proposal. Other methods of encoding the
meanings of texts in quantum NLP work have been
devised, such as vector embeddings for use in machine
learning classifiers, and several such techniques will be
surveyed in later sections. The example quantum circuit
designs in this section are for the (much older) protocol
of representing words as a sequence of characters cho-
sen from a relatively small character set. Some of the
quantum word-encoding models based on a sequences
4
Dominic Widdows et al.
X
X
X
X
Encodes a = 01
Encodes b = 10
Encodes c = 11
Fig. 4 Simple encodings for a three-letter alphabet in a two-
qubit register, using the convention that the top qubit in the
register is the least-significant “units” bit in the binary encoding.
and embeddings will be surveyed in later sections of this
paper.
The established way to define a string in computer
science is to rely on an encoding standard such as ASCII
which identifies letters with numbers (A=65, B=66, etc.),
and then a string such as CAB can be represented as
the number sequence [67, 65, 66]. Here the quantum
developer faces an immediate and typical challenge:
arrays and lists are not standardized components, and
a strategy to read from the next location in memory
needs to be introduced as part of the design. This lack
generalizes: there is much more established literature,
software, and hardware for quantum algorithms than
for quantum data structures.
One data structure we can use as a building block
in quantum circuits is binary positional notation for
integers. For example, in a 4-qubit register, the state
|1010⟩could represent the decimal number 10 (if read
left-to-right) or 5 (if read right-to-left). This convention
was used right at the beginning of quantum comput-
ing, in Feynman’s proposal of how to build a quantum
adder circuit [30], and is part of Shor’s integer factoring
algorithm [79]. These numbers can be represented in
quantum circuits using X-gate bit-flip operations on the
corresponding qubits, as in Figure 4.
Our string encoding design works by entangling a
“position” register that records where a character ap-
pears, along with an “alphabet” register that says which
character appears in that position. So instead of a se-
quence [3, 1, 2], the string is represented as a tensor
product 1P ⊗3C + 2P ⊗1C + 3P ⊗2C, where nP is
the state representing the P th position, and mC is the
state representing the Cth character. A similar pattern
is used by [3] for representing images, and the encoding
is called QPIXL. QPIXL uses one register to specify the
location of a pixel in an image, entangled with another
register saying which channel (e.g., red, green, or blue)
is being referred to. So, QPIXL also keeps “what it is”
and “where it is” in separate registers and entangles
these. Emphasizing this similarity, we call our string
encoding protocol QPOSTR, pronounced “Q-poster”,
meaning “Quantum Positional String”.
The implementation of this formula as a quantum
circuit component for encoding the string cab is outlined
pos0 :
•
pos1 :
•
chr0 :
Gate for c = 11
Gate for a = 01
chr1 :
Gate for b = 10
Fig. 5 Position and Character Encoding for the string cab.
pos0 :
H
•
pos1 :
H
•
chr0 :
Gate for c = 11
Gate for a = 01
chr1 :
Gate for b = 10
Fig. 6 QPOSTR Encoding for the string cab.
in Figure 5. The top 2 qubits form the “position” register,
and the values on the control qubits are represented by
the open and closed circles, ◦= 0, • = 1. Starting with
the top as the least significant bit, the control states are
◦◦= 00 = 0, ◦• = 01 = 1, •◦= 10 = 2, etc. The bottom
2 qubits form the “character” or “alphabet” register.
Each letter in the alphabet is mapped to a number
corresponding to its position, so the gate-recipe for each
character is like one of the simple circuits shown in
Figure 4. To encode the string cab, a character register
of 2 qubits suffices. To encode 26 letters, a character
register of 5 qubits would be required (since 25 = 32),
and for the ASCII character set, 7 qubits would be
needed.
If the circuit above is prepared in the conventional
|0000⟩state, the first gate controlled on the ◦◦= 00
state is the only one active, and the circuit output will
be 00 (in the position register) and 11 (in the character
register), saying just “the zeroth character was a c.” To
prepare a superposition of the characters in all of the
positions, the position register is prepared in a uniform
distribution over all the available character positions, us-
ing a standard array of Hadamard (H) gates. This gives
the full circuit for encoding the string cab in Figure 6.
Character positions beyond the length of the string are
untouched, or left with character “0” in that position.
Using the convention that character “0” represents a
space, this is equivalent to padding a string with trailing
zeros to make its length a power of 2.
With n qubits, the position register can encode up to
2n positions, and with m qubits, the alphabet register
can encode up to 2m characters. Thus, a QPOSTR
circuit with m + n qubits can represent a string of
length up to 2n, with up to 2m characters. By contrast,
a classical computer requires m × 2n classical bits to
store the same string.
As a thought experiment, we can use GPT-3 training
metadata to demonstrate this savings. The size of the
training dataset is reported at ∼300B tokens [19], so a
Quantum Natural Language Processing
5
pos0 :
H
•
•
•
pos1 :
H
•
chr2 :
Gate for c
Gate for a
•
chr3 :
Gate for b
•
output0 :
output1 :
classical
readout
: /2
0

1

Fig. 7 QPOSTR readout circuit which recovers the character
“a” from position ◦• = 01 of the string cab.
generous estimate of 12 characters-per-token allows for
12 × 300 × 109 < 242 character-positions, for which the
positional encoding fits in 42 qubits. There are currently
149,813 Unicode characters, so even this alphabet fits in
18 qubits, which means that the entire ∼45TB training
dataset of GPT-3 could fit into a mere 18 + 42 = 60
qubits!
We can recover information about which character is
in which position by adding an output register with the
same number of qubits as the character register. The
circuit for this is shown in Figure 7. The multi-controlled
gates that connect the QPOSTR representation to the
readout register are configured to detect the same po-
sition in the string. Each extra qubit in the controls
for these gates is set to detect a particular bit in the
character register, and if this bit is set to a 1, then the
corresponding output bit is set to a 1.
If this process could be repeated many times, and if
the output qubits could be reset to |0⟩independently
of the other qubits in the register, eventually the entire
input string or any parts of it could be read out to
classical memory. Superficially, this extension of the
readout circuit gives a circuit that demonstrates that the
whole original string can be recovered from the QPOSTR
quantum encoding. In other words, it looks as if we can
recover an exponentially-long string (2n characters) from
an encoding that uses n + ⌈log2(alphabet size)⌉qubits!
However, this is deceptive: due to the H gates at the
beginning, we have no way of knowing which position
will be measured by each readout operation, and to
guarantee statistically that each position is sampled, we
would need an exponential number of measurements on
different copies of the state. (In practice, many shots
of the quantum circuit would need to be run.) This is
in line with a general theorem in quantum computing,
the Holevo bound [67, 12.1.1], which limits the amount
of classical information that can reliably be recovered
from a quantum state.
Thus, QPOSTR gives an exponential space advan-
tage over the classical alternative. However, it still takes
a length of time at least linear in the length of the
string to run the quantum circuit that loads the string
into quantum memory. Like many quantum encodings,
QPOSTR only gives an exponential space saving, which
offers no obvious practical advantage without a corre-
sponding time saving. Thus, even if we were to encode
the GPT-3 training data, it is unclear at this moment
what savings could come from doing so. That said, we
optimistically speculate that future algorithms or data
structures may be able to better take advantage of this
encoding.
More generally, the challenge of preparing a quan-
tum memory that can be maintained and successively
queried is sometimes described as research in QROM
and QRAM [37, 5]. Minimizing the number of gate op-
erations is a key goal in such work, and the position
encoding used in QPOSTR can be regarded as one of
the “simple (but suboptimal)” encoding methods de-
scribed in Fig 3 of [5]. The task they are interested in
is encoding electronic spectra, but they also consider
encoding “words” as an example toy problem. The extra
step that QPOSTR takes is explicitly to map register
values to alphabetic characters, which enables such a
unitary positional encoding to represent a text as a
sequence of alphabetic characters.
Rather than demonstrating a new quantum advan-
tage, the QPOSTR example is intended to showcase
some of the excitement, but also some of the gotchas
of quantum computing. It is astonishing that an expo-
nentially long string can be encoded like this at all, but
once the engineering caveats around that statement are
properly understood, we see that the explicit informa-
tion we can recover from this representation is much
smaller.
4 Word Embeddings and Text Classification
Representing words as vectors of coordinates is a tech-
nique that goes back at least to the 1960s and early
information retrieval systems [74]. The key theoretical
motivation behind such distributional semantics meth-
ods is that words that appear in similar contexts tend to
have similar meanings [95, 31]. Based on their distribu-
tion in text, embedding techniques map words to vector
spaces, where their similarity is typically measured by
the inner product of their corresponding vectors.
Semantic properties of vectors in lower-dimensional
projections were analyzed in the 1990s [53], and by
the early 2000s, overlaps between the logic of word
vectors in information retrieval and state vectors in
quantum mechanics had been explicitly recognized [85,
90]. In the past decade, embeddings for classical NLP
have jumped from having a resurgence in academia to
becoming massively mainstream in industry [64, 18, 63].
Naturally, this suggests embeddings could be just as
6
Dominic Widdows et al.
central for QNLP, especially since the mathematics of
vectors and tensors has become a common language for
both AI and quantum computing [93].
There are many ways to add a quantum flavor to
embeddings. In information retrieval, [80] used density
matrices and quantum probability to include term-term
dependencies in retrieval weighting. Their quantum prob-
ability model for bigrams prefigures the more general
probabilistic models developed by [16].
Word2ket [69] was introduced as a quantum-inspired
solution for compressing embeddings. A tensor network
is a decomposition of a high-dimensional tensor into an
approximate product of lower-dimensional tensors or
vectors. For example, if M ≈U ⊗V then M can be
represented using approximately dim(U)+dim(V ) coor-
dinates, rather than dim(U) × dim(V ). (More precisely,
in matrix coordinates, M ′ ≈uvT for column vectors u
and v corresponding to appropriately reshaped U and
V , and M ′ is a reshaped version of M; see [44, 84] for
details.) Word2ket uses tensor networks to create low-
dimensional approximations for individual word vectors,
and entire vocabularies. This mathematical initiative
continues: for example, [82] report using tensor networks
to compress the parameters of an LLM (LlaMA-2 7B
model) to 30% of its original size while retaining over
90% of the original accuracy.
These methods are quantum-inspired, in the sense of
drawing deliberately on quantum mathematical models,
but running on classical computers.
4.1 Building Quantum Embeddings
Next we discuss techniques relating to embeddings in-
tended for use on actual quantum devices, treating sep-
arately the topics of building quantum embeddings and
using them. The circuits proposed in this section are
intended for NISQ-era rather than fault-tolerant devices.
One of the most well-known recent techniques for
building word embeddings is word2vec [64]. Taking in-
spiration from this line of work, we propose a quantum
computing implementation of word2vec.
Word2vec is a group of word embedding methods
that use shallow neural networks to capture the seman-
tic properties of words. Word2vec includes two popular
methods: Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) and Skip-
gram. CBOW and Skip-gram have different ways of
learning the word embeddings. CBOW takes the con-
text words around the target word as input and tries to
predict the target word. Skip-gram does the opposite:
it takes the target word as input and tries to predict
the context words. The output of both methods is a
probability distribution over all of the words in the vo-
cabulary, which is computed using the softmax function.
SWAP TEST
n
n
|0⟩
H
H
|x⟩
|y⟩
Fig. 8 Swap test circuit, where the probability of measuring
a |0⟩in the top qubit is | ⟨x|y⟩| reflecting the overlap between
the |x⟩and |y⟩states [8].
This can be computationally expensive and impractical
when the size of vocabulary is large.
Skip-gram with Negative Sampling (SGNS) [65] is a
variant of Skip-gram that reduces computational com-
plexity by simplifying the objective function. Instead
of predicting the probability over complete vocabulary,
SGNS only tries to distinguish the true context words
from a few randomly sampled negative words, which are
assumed to be irrelevant to the target word. Thus, the
classification problem is simplified from multi-class to
binary. The negative sampling procedure also effectively
balances the training dataset.
In our implementation, we use quantum states as
word vectors, and use quantum fidelity to apply cosine
similarity. That is, encoding two words as |x⟩and |y⟩,
we measure their similarity as |⟨x|y⟩|2 via the swap test
[8], as shown in Figure 8.
One of the challenges of quantum word embedding
is how to efficiently load words as quantum states. We
consider two potential schemes for embedding words to
quantum state: memory-efficient embedding and circuit-
efficient embedding.
In memory-efficient embedding, the quantum state
of every word in vocabulary of size N is represented
by a single unitary operation U(θ) ∈SU(2n), where
n = ⌈log2 N⌉and θ is a set of learnable parameters. The
m-qubit quantum state for the k-th word |wk⟩∈C⊗m is
obtained from U(θ) by applying it to the computational
basis state |k⟩and discarding ancillary n −m qubits.
This scheme allows us to store a large number of
words in small number of qubits, which is exponentially
efficient in memory usage. However, the resulting quan-
tum circuit that has sufficient expressiveness to imple-
ment U(θ) has exponential depth, making it impractical
for circuit-based quantum computation. Moreover, the
state preparation process involves post-selection, and is
thus non-deterministic due to the probabilistic nature
of measurement.
In contrast, the second scheme, circuit-efficient em-
bedding, represents the k-th word by a quantum state
of the form |wk⟩:= U(θk) |0⟩∈C⊗m, where U(θk) ∈
SU(2m) is a unitary operation parameterized by θk,
Quantum Natural Language Processing
7
Fig. 9 Circuit-efficient embedding
Fig. 10 Memory-efficient embedding
which is specific to each word. This allows us to prepare
the quantum state using a depth-efficient circuit in a
deterministic process, without using excessive ancillary
qubits. While it requires more classical memory to store
the parameters, it is more flexible since one can add or
remove words from the vocabulary during training.
The circuit-efficient and memory-efficient patterns
are depicted in Figures 9 and 10. In structure, the circuit-
efficient pattern is like the word-embedding in word2ket
[69], and the memory-efficient pattern is like the whole
vocabulary encoding. For word2ket, the motivation for
expressing a whole vocabulary in a more entangled ten-
sor network is to reduce classical memory, whereas in
this design, it makes more use of the efficient quantum
memory.
To learn the parameters for these embedding schemes,
we adapt the classical word2vec methods, CBOW, Skip-
gram and SGNS, to the quantum setting. For quantum
CBOW and Skip-gram, we introduce a parameterized
unitary operator V (ϕ) ∈SU(2n) that defines the prob-
ability distribution pϕ(k|w) := |⟨k| V (ϕ)(|w⟩⊗|0⟩)|2,
where w is either a pooled (e.g. averaged) embedding
of context words for CBOW, or the embedding for the
target word for Skip-gram. This removes the need of
computing the costly softmax function, by using the
natural output of the quantum circuit to predict the
index among 2n computational basis states. We note
that quantum CBOW, cannot be directly applied for
quantum word embeddings, since the direct averaging of
quantum states is not a natural operation for quantum
computers. Instead, it may be possible to use superposi-
tions of quantum states.
Quantum CBOW and Skip-gram inherit the difficul-
ties of the multi-class problem from the classical version.
Both also suffer from the training problem that does not
affect the classical versions: barren plateaus [61]. The
barren plateau describes the phenomenon where the loss
function and its gradient exponentially concentrate as
the number of qubits increases. The unitary V (ϕ) leads
to a barren plateau in the loss landscape, making the
training process difficult to scale.
Hence, we propose quantum SGNS, which leverages
a simplified structure to mitigate the scaling issue. Quan-
tum SGNS uses the embeddings for two words directly,
instead of needing to additionally train V (ϕ). Given
the target word |w⟩, quantum SGNS tries to maximize
the likelihood p(v|w) := |⟨v|w⟩|2 if v is a context word
and minimize it if v is negative sample. By combin-
ing quantum SGNS with the circuit-efficient embedding
scheme, we enable their practical use on current quan-
tum devices. Future work includes exploring the effects
of different similarity kernels on quantum word2vec,
extending these circuits to implement word2ket, and
understanding algebra in the embedding space.
4.2 Using Quantum Embeddings
Once words are encoded as vectors, these vectors can be
used in many machine learning systems, including sup-
port vector machines, which can be used for supervised
classification. This sometimes involves calculating a ker-
nel function, which computes similarities between input
vectors, sometimes involving computations that would
be intractable if all the coordinates were constructed
and compared explicitly [34, Ch 5]. This is regarded
as a promising research direction for quantum machine
learning, because quantum kernel circuits that compare
2n coordinates or amplitudes can be implemented using
just n qubits [77]. However, as with the QPOSTR string
encoding example in Section 3, if the number of gates
still scales with the number of coordinates, the use of
a logarithmic number of qubits is a saving of space but
with no corresponding time advantage.
Several quantum vector encodings or “feature maps”
for word embedding vectors were compared by [2], and
used for sentiment analysis experiments. The ZZ-feature
map was found to be the most successful, achieving a
classification accuracy of 62% on classification experi-
ments involving small test sets of roughly 10K words
each. This result showed initial promise, and was the
largest quantum text experiment reported to-date, but
also indicates how small today’s quantum NLP experi-
ments, are compared with even modest-sized classical
NLP systems.
One additional use case for embeddings is in factual
grounding and retrieval, which we discuss in more detail
in Section 8.
8
Dominic Widdows et al.
5 Sequential Models for Text Generation
Quantum generative modeling is still a largely unex-
plored area of opportunity, with many unsolved chal-
lenges. In some cases, the data is too large and is parti-
tioned into segments that are correlated but treated as
independent for sake of computation [45]. In others, the
term is used to describe settings in which a quantum
circuit is used as a discrete source of randomness within
an otherwise classical neural network that memorizes a
select few data samples [73].
In NLP specifically, [16] describes how to model
the joint distribution p(X0, X1) of a given a set of bi-
grams (x0, x1) and compute the marginal distributions
p(X0) and p(X1) using linear algebra operations native
to quantum computing (here we use capital letters to
denote random variables and lower-case to denote par-
ticular values that the random variable can take). [94]
follows this theory to implement a Quantum Circuit
Born Machine (QCBM) [11] to learn the joint distribu-
tion p(X0, X1). While the QCBM can efficiently sample
pairs from p(X0, X1) or marginals p(X0) and p(X1),
generating text sequentially from this model requires
sampling from the conditional p(X1|X0 = x0). This re-
quires discarding samples for which X0 ̸= x0, which can
become prohibitive when scaling to larger vocabularies,
and especially for rare prefix words x0. In addition, the
bigram model forgoes a hidden state like those found in
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) that can learn to
represent longer dependencies. Thus, while this model
can easily sample bigrams directly, it is not optimized
for the task of sampling longer sequences.
A class of Bayesian network models, called n-gram
models, have been successful in multiple language pro-
cessing tasks, including information retrieval, text gen-
eration, and part-of-speech tagging [50]. However, they
suffer from poor performance and generalizability issues
in sparse data regimes and fail to capture nonlocal syn-
tactic relations. Handling out-of-vocabulary words or
resolving ambiguity also pose challenges as n-grams do
not have built-in semantic understanding [12]. A Hid-
den Markov models (HMM) is a Markov model whose
output from any given state is probabilistic rather than
deterministic, which hides the internal state. A canoni-
cal example is when the hidden states are part-of-speech
tags, such N(oun) or V(erb), which generate explicit
words with given probabilities [60, §9.2].
The feed forward and recurrent neural networks are
specific instances of the HMM. However, HMMs also face
challenges in estimating accurate probabilities when the
context size increases or when the correlations get too
long in languages. Beyond language processing, HMMs
have been widely used in other scientific fields as well.
In [29], the authors discuss probabilistic models, particu-
larly HMMs and their derivatives, and their applications
in biological sequence analysis. Language models, par-
ticularly those developed for aligning and comparing
sequences, can be designed to recognize patterns in bio-
logical sequences, infer evolutionary relationships, and
identify functional elements.
Recently, quantum techniques are being explored
along this direction due to their potential in capturing
long-range correlations. [33] introduced a quantum en-
hanced version of the HMM, named the basis-enhanced
Bayesian Circuit, which leverages quantum contextual-
ity and non-locality to boost the expressivity of classical
HMMs. They developed a minimal quantum extension
of the bigram HMM, by incorporating measurements in
a Bayesian circuit in multiple bases. They demonstrated
improved performance of the quantum enhanced model
in certain sequential datasets, including one containing
DNA sequences with non-local structures. This leads
to many interesting questions about the potential and
utility of similar quantum methods in natural language
processing tasks. Particularly, if quantum properties like
contextuality and non-locality still give a provable ad-
vantage in terms of model expressivity when processing
and extracting semantic meaning from a long sequence
of words or protein structures.
Building toward longer sequences, [51] train a quan-
tum classifier for predicting the topic of sentences and
describe a classical scheme for using the classifier to
perform conditional generation (that can also be used
on classical classifiers). Since it does not actually train
a standalone quantum generative model, this method
suffers from a similar problem of also needing to discard
many samples from a base model in order to generate
one sample from an induced model, though the corre-
lated editing-based annealing scheme could be guided to
be more efficient than independently sampled shots from
a QCBM. [9], shown in Figure 11, proposes a framework
for a quantum RNN that can be used to build an ac-
tual generative model to autoregressively produce text.
This autoregressive modeling allows for dealing with
correlations across segments of larger data, addressing
the problem from [45]. However, the architecture, while
expressive, is far too expensive for current hardware on
non-trivial problem sizes. [57] perform sequence clas-
sification on actual hardware as shown in Figure 12.
Unfortunately, the architecture they propose is not pow-
erful enough to perform autoregressive modeling.
We explore how to bridge some of the gap between
general but expensive sequence processing of [9] and
the currently-achievable but underpowered architecture
of [57]. To achieve this, we use the paradigm of [35] to
combine the power of nonlinear Multi-Layer Perceptrons
Quantum Natural Language Processing
9
QUANTUM RNN (BAUSCH 2020)
n
m
I/O |0⟩
E(x0)
N(θm)
N(θo)
|0⟩
E(x1)
N(θm)
N(θo)
Hidden |0⟩
N(θi)
N(θh)
N(θi)
Fig. 11 Bausch (2023) circuit. The input is the sequence (x0, x1). The mixing and hidden blocks are prohibitive for current
hardware. The output is the next token in the sequence as the outcome from a single shot.
QUANTUM SEQUENCE CLASSIFIER (LONDON 2023)
n−1
Input
|0⟩
E(x0)
E(x1)
|0⟩
Fig. 12 London et al. (2023) circuit. The input is the sequence (x0, x1). Only the first qubit is measured. The output is the
probability that the sequence is in class 1.
SIMPLE QUANTUM RNN (THIS PAPER)
n
m
I/O |0⟩
E(x0)
E(x1)
N(θo)
Hidden |0⟩
N(θi)
N(θi)
Fig. 13 Proposed circuit. The input is the sequence (x0, x1). The output can be the next token in the sequence as the outcome
from a single shot.
(MLPs) with the inherent randomness of quantum com-
puting to directly sample from rich classes of probability
distributions. Compared to [9], our proposed architec-
ture, shown in Figure 13, drops the use of the reset
operation and uses identity mixing, similar to [57].
In the figures, the details of the quantum neurons
have been abstracted away to highlight the main simi-
larities and differences between the methods. The text
labeling on the left denotes the purpose of the regis-
ter. E(x) denotes a block of gates for encoding inputs
x, N(θ) denotes a nonlinear neuron parameterized by
variables θ as in [21], and the dark gray gate with the
|0⟩-ket is a reset operation. The parameter subscript
i denotes input, o denotes output, h denotes hidden,
and m denotes mixing. The light gray vertical rounded
rectangle denotes that the qubits in the register are
being used as control for the corresponding neuron as
a sequence of single-control gates, not as true multi-
control gates. We depict the architectures from [9] and
[57] with a sequence length of 2 with input sequence
(x0, x1), and the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) from
[35] with a single hidden layer.
In simulation, the model is trained using backprop-
agation from gradients computed from noiseless state
vector simulation. The model produces the probability
distribution over the 11 words in the vocabulary cor-
responding to the word that the model predicts comes
next after the observed sequence. In actual implementa-
tion, the model would be trained using backpropagation
from estimated gradients e.g. via the parameter-shift
rule [78]. The model would produce for each shot a
sample corresponding to the index of a single predicted
word.
Our proposed architecture is evaluated in a small-
scale noiseless simulation. We consider a dataset of 7
sentences using a vocabulary of 11 unique words. We
compare our proposal against two baseline models: one
random uniform prediction model and one inspired by
[57]. We compare performance between models trained
on 5 sentences by evaluating on the remaining 2 sen-
tences their perplexity [49], for which a lower score
indicates better performance. A naive uniform random
prediction on this dataset yields a perplexity of 11. Using
a 9-qubit [57] model with 297 parameters, we achieve
a perplexity of 8.15. Using a 9-qubit model that we
propose with 172 parameters, we achieve a perplexity
of 2.79.
10
Dominic Widdows et al.
To our knowledge, this is the first fully quantum
sequential text generation architecture that is designed
with the capabilities and limitations of current NISQ-
era devices in mind. Our simulation results demonstrate
the viability of the approach for implementation on
actual hardware while achieving a reasonable level of
perplexity.
6 Attention in Quantum NLP Models
So far we have discussed models for studying sentences
as word / token sequences. Making such models scale
to longer sequences has always been a challenge: with
n-gram models, the value of n has always been small
[60, Ch 6]; and RNN architectures including LSTMs,
while accurate for short sequences, had trouble scaling
to cover long-range dependencies [34, Ch 15].
6.1 Attention in Classical LLMs
Attention is designed to address this problem. The atten-
tion methodology was used to enhance an RNN sequence
model for machine translation by [6], which enabled the
model to capture longer-range relationships as well. Al-
though it still relied on the encoder-decoder paradigm,
the bidirectional RNN architecture introduced in [6]
features a distinct context vector for each word in the
sentence. Each context vector depends on a sequence of
annotations which contains information about the entire
sentence with a strong focus on the parts of the sentence
surrounding the context vector’s associated input word.
The annotations are weighted according to an alignment
model, which scores how well an output token matches
inputs around a given position.
[86] developed this approach further, demonstrating
a system where transformer blocks incorporating atten-
tion, layer norm, multi-layer perceptrons, and residual
connections, fully replace recursive units. This Trans-
former model — centered around scaled dot-product
attention — made previous RNN-based encoder-decoder
architectures obsolete when it demonstrated improved
performance on various translation tasks.
Importantly, [86] adapted the Transformer architec-
ture for use in text generation. Their model is auto-
regressive, and at each step it consumes the previously
generated symbols as additional input when produc-
ing new text. In addition, it is worthy to note that the
Transformer was later adapted to the setting of computer
vision, where it outperformed state-of-the-art convolu-
tional neural networks in various image classification
challenges [28].
In general, “an attention function can be described
as mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs to an
output, where the query, keys, values, and outputs are
all vectors” representing embedded tokens; the output
is a weighted sum of the values, with the weights mea-
suring the compatibility between corresponding query
and key [86]. Self-attention refers to computing atten-
tion coefficients intra-sequence, i.e., on the same input
sequence. A key feature of self-attention layers is that
they provide a mechanism for different tokens in the
input sequence to interact, thereby allowing models to
infer contextual information about individual tokens
by weighing the importance of pairwise interactions; in
other words, how much attention a given input token
should pay to every other token in the sequence.
In particular, the “Scaled Dot-Product” attention
layer featured in [86] computes the dot-products of the
query with all the keys, normalizes according to the
dimension of the query and key vectors, and then applies
the softmax function to obtain the weights of all the
pairs, which are the values. Rather then enumerate all
the indices for summation, it is typical to write the lists
of vectors as matrices, whereby the definition takes the
common form
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√
d

V,
where d is the embedding dimension, Q, K, and V are
matrices of size wd where w is the number of words /
tokens in a sequence, and the softmax function xi →
exi/ P
i(exi) is applied to each row. This formulates dot
product attention as a matrix multiplication (O(w2d)), a
softmax step (O(w2)), and a final matrix multiplication
(O(wd2)).
A key advantage enjoyed by the Transformer over
the previous RNN architectures is that this multiplica-
tion can be parallelized, which computes the pairwise
relationships between all the tokens in a sequence at
once. In addition, the computational cost does not de-
pend on the distance between tokens in the sequence,
as in previous models. Together, these properties ac-
counted for a drastic reduction in training time over
sequential RNN models. The main drawback is that the
computational complexity still scales quadratically in
the number of tokens in a given sequence (roughly the
number of words in a sentence). The problem of approxi-
mating or providing an alternative to self-attention with
subquadratic complexity spawned its own burgeoning
research field [97, 70].
Quantum Natural Language Processing
11
6.2 Near-term quantum self-attention mechanisms
In hopes of improving this quadratic scaling, and since
attention layers have become so successful as key compo-
nents in state-of-the-art models for NLP tasks, various
quantum approaches have been suggested. This section
focuses on near-term quantum circuit designs.
[55] claim to offer the first quantum self-attention
implementation, QSANN. By mapping encoded feature
vectors into a high-dimensional Hilbert space using a
quantum circuit, QSANN aims to extract correlations
that are intractable classically. For an illustration see
Figure 14. First they construct an encoder circuit to
load classical feature vectors onto an n-qubit quantum
state; they use one classical feature vector for each to-
ken in the input sequence. The number of qubits n is
a hyper-parameter that should be adjusted as relevant
to available hardware. Next they apply parametrized
quantum circuits, with identical gate layouts but dif-
ferent parameter values in order to compute the query,
key, and value vectors for each classical feature vector.
The circuit layout is illustrated in Figure 15. At this
stage the query, key, and value vectors are encoded as
quantum states, so measurements must be made in order
to extract useful information; the resulting query and
key are the expectation values of the Pauli-Z operators
applied to the first qubit of the resulting states, and
the value is a vector of expectation values of various
Pauli operators. Attention scores are then computed on
a classical device as a weighted average of the output
values. Interestingly, [55] introduce a Gaussian kernel
to compute the weights on the values vector; they claim
the Gaussian kernel can more easily correlate quantum
states with little overlap, which is needed, e.g., if two
tokens are closely related in a sentence but their quan-
tum state embeddings happen to be distant in the qubit
state space. The proposal of [55] still requires quadratic
classical computation, and its main source of quantum
advantage relies on using efficiently processing vectors
in high-dimensional Hilbert space to unearth hidden
relationships between embedded tokens.
The work of [99] builds on these ideas, seeking quan-
tum advantage in the same vein. By introducing various
sets of ancilla qubits, the authors obviate the need to
perform intermediate measurements during the atten-
tion computation. (This could be thought of as a more
sophisticated example of the ancilla readout qubits pat-
tern used in the QPOSTR design of Section 2.) In this
modality, query, key, and value quantum state-vectors
are computed by applying parametrized ansatze and
swapping onto ancilla registers sequentially, as shown
in Figure 16. Compatibility between query and keys
is computed by a Quantum Logical Similarity (QLS)
Fig. 14 The Quantum Self-Attention Neural Network (QSANN)
architecture proposed in [55]. The network features various con-
secutive self-attention layers. At the (l −1)st layer, the classical
feature vectors y(l−1)
k
are encoded into a high-dimensional qubit
state space (circuits boxed in purple). The process is repeated
three times. Then parametrized ansatze, with gate layout as in
Figure 15, representing the query, key, and value transformations
are applied (circuits boxed in red). The resulting states are mea-
sured and various expectation values are computed to produce
the classical query, key, and value vectors. These are sent to
a classical device for processing, where weights are computed
using a Gaussian kernel and the results are averaged to obtain
final attention coefficients.
Fig. 15 Parametrized ansatz implementing the query, key, and
value transformations in [55]’s QSANN.
module, which is implemented as a sequence of Toffoli
and CNOT gates, as shown in Figure 17. This is a key
step: it computes the overlap between query on keys
directly on the quantum device, thereby improving on
[55].
While these two proposals address quantum self-
attention mechanisms in QNLP directly, [22] proposes
one for use in Vision Transformers for image classi-
fication, seeking quantum advantage in reducing the
computational cost of the scaled dot-product attention
calculation. Concretely, the authors introduce so-called
orthogonal layers to compute compatibility scores be-
tween query and keys on the quantum hardware; these
layers efficiently implement parametrized transforma-
tions on encoded feature vectors, as described in Figure
18. The main novelty here is that [22] use the unary
encoding circuit to encode token feature vectors into the
Hamming weight-1 subspace of the qubit state space.
This encoding is advantageous because their orthogonal
layers preserve the subspace, and they can be used to
12
Dominic Widdows et al.
Fig. 16 The Quantum Self-Attention Network (QSAN) in-
troduced in [99]. This architecture uses ancilla qubits to hold
intermediate results and proposes computing the attention coef-
ficients entirely on the quantum processor, obviating the need
for intermediate measurements. In addition, it features a slicing
operation to reduce the number of measurements required.
Fig. 17 The Quantum Logic Similarity (QLS) module proposed
in [99], implemented as a sequence of Toffoli and CNOT gates.
compute dot-products between query and keys in loga-
rithmic time, assuming quantum gates can be applied in
parallel. [22] report preliminary results from simulation,
and with a 6-qubit quantum processor.
6.3 Attention on Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computers
The role of attention in systems like GPT [19] has
spurred more ambitious proposals, including the recent
preprints of [56] and [40], which describe large-scale
versions of full transformer-inspired processes on fault-
tolerant error-correcting quantum computers. [40] use
quantum signal processing and singular value transfor-
mation techniques to apply a polynomial approximate
Fig. 18 Computational complexity of the dot-product com-
patibility between query and keys using circuits with parallel
two-qubit gates as proposed by [22]’s quantum Vision Trans-
former.
softmax, whereas [56], like [99], replace softmax with a
linear quantum alternative.
A main challenge for such proposals remains quan-
tum I/O, which these papers acknowledge, but do not
solve explicitly. To extract all the weights from a ma-
trix stored in a quantum state would typically require
many more shots than there are weights. A smaller al-
ternative is to output token indices directly. A natural
NISQ-inspired suggestion is to adapt the token index
generation approaches from Section 5 to transformer
prototypes. While adding a token-generation head may
be useful for circumventing I/O issues, the complexity
and depth of the remaining bodies of the circuits in
these proposals puts practical implementations beyond
the NISQ era.
A quantum decoder, for optimized search through
a much larger space of long proposed token sequences,
is proposed by [10], which casts the problem as proba-
bilistically branching tree-search, which is mathemati-
cally equivalent to probabilistic grammar parsing. Even
though the hardware capabilities for such quantum oper-
ations are still some years away, this connects optimiza-
tions in sequence generation from today’s softmaxed
probabilities, with traditional syntactic approaches to
language modeling, which we discuss next.
7 Syntactic Parsing and Logical Forms
The use of general AI techniques such as RNNs and
attention has fueled much recent success with NLP,
partly because it has enabled much cross-fertilization
between language and other kinds of data such as im-
ages, audio, and graphs. There are also more traditional
NLP techniques, based on grammatical structures found
particularly in human language.
Natural languages (and artificial programming lan-
guages) express many structured relationships that go
beyond proximity in a sequence model. For example, in
the sentence “Kim kicked the ball into the goal from
half-way down the pitch, right past the goalkeeper, and
scored”, the grammatical structure of English enables
us to infer easily that the person who scored is Kim, in
Quantum Natural Language Processing
13
spite of there being 16 words (including 4 other nouns)
in between the noun Kim and the verb scored. Language
grammar and syntax studies how these relationships
are expressed and structured in different languages, and
this field powerfully influenced much of theoretical and
computational linguistics during the second-half of the
20th century, particularly through the work of [23, 24].
In such a framework, syntax is the central generative sys-
tem, on which other aspects of language like phonology
and semantics depend [48, Ch 5].
During the 21st century, the reliance of NLP tech-
niques on grammatical rules has declined. This is partly
due to the success of statistical and machine-learned
models that share methods with other data-intensive
areas of AI, and perhaps because the increasing pre-
ponderance of informal text created on smartphones
immediately contradicts any assumption that the input
to an NLP system should consist of distinct grammati-
cal sentences. In computational terms, best-performing
parsing algorithms have included the CYK-parser which
is worst-case O(n3), while the more general attention
mechanism discussed in the previous section has a base-
line O(n2) performance, which robustly enables more
resources to be targeted at important long-range rela-
tionships. Hence in most large-scale NLP systems today,
a grammatical parser is not an explicit component: and
with the challenge of reducing computational costs be-
low quadratic, there would need to be a strong reason
for requiring the extra burden of a cubic computing step
for any large-scale model. When grammatical parsing is
discussed, it is often as a historical challenge that LLMs
can solve quite effectively, not a contemporary challenge
for building language models in the first place [66].
However, the use of grammatical parsers has been
re-introduced in parts of quantum NLP, motivated espe-
cially by a mathematical correspondence between the
compositional rules of tensors and categorial grammars
demonstrated by [26]. This framework is implemented in
the lambeq system of [52] which is particularly designed
for quantum computers [58]. In this system, a grammat-
ical parser prepares a parse-tree from a sentence, which
is structurally mapped to a tensor network which is
compiled into a quantum circuit: so the quantum circuit
encodes the grammatical dependencies of the sentence,
assuming its input data consists of uniquely-parsed sen-
tences.
The parsing problem itself is also an interesting chal-
lenge for quantum computing, for combinatoric reasons.
Computationally, the problem can be phrased as tak-
ing a list of words as input, and returning a parse-tree,
which is a data structure saying how the elements of the
sentence are grouped together, and what grammatical
role they play. The two possible tree-structures for a
S
NP
D
the
N
music
VP
V
played
S
NP
NPlural
people
VP
V
played
NP
N
music
Left-branching tree
Right-branching tree
Fig. 19 The simplest nontrivial tree-parsing challenge is to
distinguish between the two distinct branching options for a
tree with 3 leaf nodes. S = Sentence, N = Nouns, V = Verb, D
= Determiner, P = Phrase.
Fig. 20 The five possible binary-branching trees over a 4-item
sequence, each of which can be constructed by deleting unwanted
branches and nodes from the connected lattice-graph in the
center.
3-word sentence are shown in Figure 19. For the simple
case of a 3-word sentence, there are only 2 possible trees,
one for the structure [[A B] C] and one for the structure
[A [B C]]. For a 4-word sentence, the five possible trees
are are shown in Figure 20. The number of possible parse
trees for a sentence of length n grows exponentially and
is given by the Catalan number Cn =
1
n+1
 2n
n

.
Ideally, a parser will find an exact parse that accounts
for the role of each constituent in the sentence, repre-
sented by a single tree-structure. Grammatical rules
such as “A sentence in English can be made of a noun
phrase subject followed by a verb phrase” can be repre-
sented as recipes like S →(NP, VP), and a probabilistic
phrase-structure grammar (PCFG) may include many
such rules, along with probabilities or weights learned
from training data. Various methods for parsing exist,
relying on dynamic programming and probabilistic tech-
niques [50, Ch 17]. Multiple parses are often possible,
because (for example) prepositional phrases may attach
in various locations. The goal is to find the parse tree
14
Dominic Widdows et al.
that maximizes the overall probability of the parse, com-
puted from the combined probability of all the rules
used in derivation.
The depiction in Figure 20 emphasizes the parsing
problem as a combinatoric challenge. The search for a
best parse looks like a kind of minimal spanning tree
problem, which might be formulated as an Ising model,
amenable to quantum optimization [59], if the weights
or costs for visiting each node could be derived from the
PCFG.
However, a key challenge with the parsing problem is
that we start with labels only for the leaf nodes, and un-
til there is some hypothesis for the which internal nodes
represent which syntactic chunks, there are no estimates
for the weights on internal links. (This is part of the mo-
tivation for the use of dynamic programming in classical
parsers.) Combinatorically, the problem is not exactly to
find a minimum spanning tree, because internal nodes
that do not correspond to distinct grammatical phrases
or constituents do not need to be visited. (Moreover, the
initial graph is directed: this precludes solutions where
the leaf nodes are all visited by a zigzag path along the
bottom, because upward steps are forbidden.)
Hence, quantum parsing does not appear to fit one
of the known techniques of quantum combinatorial opti-
mization, but the problems are tantalizingly similar, and
we hope this framing of the challenge helps the language
parsing problem to capture the interest of quantum
researchers.
One potential benefit of quantum parsing is that a
quantum system may represent more nuanced proposals
than just returning a single best parse, or even a clas-
sical mixture (estimated probability distribution over
different discrete parse proposals). Rather than insisting
that all language inputs must pass a parsing test before
being processed, a syntactic parser that exchanges quan-
tum information with semantic components in parallel
may become a different kind of asset in more parallel
architectures.
In another interesting combination of quantum math-
ematics and natural language syntax, it has been shown
that tensor product networks can encode grammatical
structure more effectively than LSTMs for generating
image captions [46]. Tensor product networks have also
been used to construct an attention mechanism from
which grammatical structure can be recovered by un-
binding role-filler tensor compositions [47].
8 Facts and Language Generation
Throughout its history, quantum theory has motivated
new insights on probability and randomness, how the
potential and actual are related, and this has led to pro-
posed models for various aspects of human behavior and
consciousness [20, 4]. Rapid advancements in customer-
facing AI systems, particularly conversational dialog
systems supported by large language models (LLMs),
have raised many questions about how such systems
should be built and used, what should be expected of
them, and about whether they exhibit conscious behav-
ior. This section discusses some of the concerns and work
in this area, including how quantum theory addresses
the difference between hypothetical and actual reality.
One of the key complaints about current LLMs is
their propensity to hallucinate, or produce sentences
with factually false information that still correctly ad-
here to grammatical rules. While this behavior is in line
with what generative models are statistically designed
to do, in practice it goes against the public expectation
of the AI agent as an all-knowing oracle, especially when
manifested as an interactive, question-answering chat
interface. Thus, several lines of research have emerged
to address the usability issues caused by hallucination.
In this section, we first review some of these research
directions, and then take a step back to see how quan-
tum computing relates to the philosophical issues that
arise in understanding and using LLMs.
Two prominent realms of research are chain-of-
thought (CoT) prompting and retrieval augmented gen-
eration (RAG). CoT, while often used in the context
of complex reasoning tasks [88], is believed to produce
more self-consistent results and indeed can be improved
by explicitly encouraging self-consistency [87]. However,
in the setting of factuality, errors early in the chain may
yield incorrect results even with consistent reasoning
later in the chain, and the explanation of reasoning
provided by the chain may not be correct [83].
Factual grounding via RAG may avoid some issues
still present in CoT, often at the cost of either additional
training or larger number of inferences. RAG can be
largely classed into two paradigms, a priori and post-
hoc, though there is not reason that these techniques
could not be combined or even performed iteratively
in a loop. [54, 41] explore a priori RAG using learned
embeddings stored in a database and accessed with a
learned neural retriever. [13] scale up the database and
shrink the language model, matching SotA performance
and illustrating that the world knowledge of a LLM is
more separable from its linguistic ability than previously
demonstrated. Together, this line of work suggests sepa-
rability and knowledge base scaling as one possible path
forward for utilizing word embeddings to reduce halluci-
nation. While these a priori methods show promise, they
modify the generation pipeline and require additional
training.
Quantum Natural Language Processing
15
Post-hoc text editing methods [81, 7, 75] are seeing
interest for use with LLMs in part due to the resources
required to even fine-tune modern LLMs, let alone pre-
train them from scratch. For example, [32] uses the
abilities of pre-trained language models and existing in-
formation retrieval systems to edit and verify generated
text, but requires running several rounds of inference
on the base LLM. This trades off a zero fixed cost of
using a pre-trained model for a higher variable cost of
inference.
In such paradigms, one natural place where quantum
computing has potential to enhance performance is in
accessing and designing the knowledge base. Grover’s
algorithm [39] yields a quadratic speedup over classi-
cal methods for searching a database, and hence forms
the backbone of quantum information retrieval systems
[38]. Going one step further, [71] propose using Grover’s
search to inform the design of the database itself, and
specifically target vector databases as the intended ap-
plication. However, they do not directly compare the
quadratic speedup with the complexities achievable by
using efficient classical data structures, and a potential
interesting direction in this area is the question of how
(if possible) to design a practical hybrid knowledge base
that combines the best of both classical and quantum
processing.
Although techniques such as retrieval-based and
knowledge-based generation are a new area in the present-
day context of fixing LLMs, methods such as that of
[13] hearken back to an older class of designs where the
facts are stored in a knowledge base, and the language
model is effectively a source of templates, not of facts.
The spotlight on language generation in the past few
years has refocused work on such methods, and how
best to combine them with LLMs [98]. For example, in
Figure 21, a knowledge base is used to find the variable
that satisfies the question “When was J.S. Bach born?”
(the answer being “1685”), and then a language model is
used to express this as the sentence “J.S. Bach was born
in the year 1685.” (A standard early use of such designs
was in mail merging, where a template for a message
is combined with a list of different names to generate
personalized messages.) Such a language model can just
as easily generate the sentence “J.S. Bach was born in
1985”, not because it’s hallucinating, but because it’s
working correctly with a different knowledge base.
More generally, probabilistic language models are
designed to note that Wednesday and Thursday are
similar, and so having seen the phrase “Let’s meet on
Wednesday”, the model should judge the phrase “Let’s
meet on Thursday” to be similarly plausible. Saying
that such a probabilistic model “hallucinates” when it
generates an untrue sentence reflects a fundamental mis-
Fig. 21 A traditional division of responsibilities between a
knowledge base and a language model that cooperate in gener-
ating the answer “J.S. Bach was born in 1685.”
understanding of probabilistic models. Sampling from a
probabilistic model is like rolling dice: if we previously
observe a 3 and the dice-roll gives a 4, the dice aren’t
hallucinating a 4 instead of the “true” value of 3. The
problem lies in the assumption that plausible probabilis-
tic samples of language should correspond to facts at
all.
The assumption that language expertise and factual
reliability should go together is easy to make, especially
since a significant amount of actual knowledge is con-
veyed both explicitly and implicitly through writing. In
the phrase “Dave beat John”, we might ask “Which
Dave and which John?” before assessing its truthfulness:
but sometimes words take on fixed unique meanings in
particular situations, so that if someone says “Caesar
beat Pompey”, we automatically assume they mean two
particular people from the 1st century BC, and if they
said “Pompey beat Caesar”, that would be considered
untrue. However, speaking strictly in the sense of lan-
guage modelling, a model that also generates “Pompey
beat Caesar” sometimes as well as “Caesar beat Pom-
pey”, is arguably better, because it generates a more
comprehensive variety of perfectly fluent and plausible
sentences.
The practice of generating text from just a language
model was popularized by successful machine transla-
tion systems [6]. With machine translation, it makes
sense that the system is not responsible for factual ac-
curacy, because this is the user’s responsibility. In con-
crete terms, a correct translation of “J.S. Bach was
born in 1985” from English to German might be “J.S.
Bach wurde 1985 geboren”, not “Input error: prompt
contains factual inaccuracy.” Gradually models such as
GPT demonstrated that a whole range of prompts, not
just translation targets, could elicit plausible and flu-
ent responses [19]. The Chomskian program claimed
grammatical fluency as the heart of language decades
ago: today, we are seeing that this fluency is another
aspect of human behavior that computers can mimic
effectively; and the ability to assemble erudite text has
become one of the most impressively-solved parts of AI,
sometimes leading to problems elsewhere.
16
Dominic Widdows et al.
Quantum theory intersects with these topics even
more fundamentally, by explicitly distinguishing the
possible from the actual. A quantum circuit has many
possible outcomes that could be observed, but only
one outcome is observed when measured: and this fixes
the hypothetical situation so that the same outcome
is observed next time. A multiplicity of possibilities
can become a single fixed event [43]. Formal similarities
between this process and language ambiguity were noted
by [89], and the quantum economic theory of [68] is
based on the use of quantum information to model
beliefs about values, and classical information to model
amounts of money agreed in fixed transactions.
The problem of distinguishing things that might
happen from things that do happen was behind some of
the controversies of early classical mechanics. Leibniz
discussed the notion of possible worlds, and maintained
that there must be a rational necessity behind (God’s)
choosing this world [72]. Newton’s belief in absolute
space implied a fixed zero-point or origin, and Leibniz
argued that this implied that God must have made an
arbitrary choice without a necessary reason, which was
unacceptable [14]. Such considerations of necessity vs.
contingency and their relationship to past, present, and
future in time, go back at least to the famous sea-fight
discussion in Aristotle’s De Interpretatione [62].
The notion that there are different possible worlds
where a macroscopic event did or did not happen, that
one of those worlds is chosen based on a small local de-
cision, and this possible world thus becomes the actual
world, was thrust into the limelight by quantum me-
chanics. The implication of superposition and large-scale
randomness was troubling to Einstein (“God does not
play dice!”) and Schr¨odinger, whose famous paradoxical
cat was designed to illustrate the absurdity of quantum
mechanics in large-scale reality, where “the working of
an organism requires exact physical laws” [76]. By con-
trast, Bohr and Heisenberg supported the Copenhagen
Interpretation, where the wave-function represents real
possibilities, and “the transition from the “possible” to
the “actual” takes place during the act of observation”
[43, Ch 3].
Some of the challenges inherent in large stochastic
problems, like weather forecasting, are thus philosophi-
cally related to key questions of how one possible future
is selected and becomes the past. Quantum mechanics
does not completely answer this question, but it does
better than classical mechanics, where the assumption
of a deterministic universe avoids the problem. Heisen-
berg’s analysis of where different uncertainties come
from, and how we should think about them, has useful
insights including “This probability function represents
a mixture of two things, partly a fact and partly our
knowledge of a fact” [43, Ch 3]. This does not tell us
how to fix language models, but it is a good reminder
that our ways of stating and communicating facts are
entirely human. Practically, it helps to understand prob-
abilistic language models as generators of hypothetical
utterances, rather than factual statements, and the gen-
erative nature of language models is precisely what en-
ables them to go smoothly from data they encountered
to data they might just as well have encountered. In a
sense, a large language generator is a kind of hypothesis-
generator with the gift of the gab. Language models do
this task very well, but this should never have convinced
us that a model will generate truthful language with-
out an independent source of knowledge. With these
considerations, quantum theory has some insight on po-
tential solutions to improve language modeling systems,
and at least guards against mistakes that arise from
over-deploying hypothesis-generation systems without
suitable observation processes.
9 Conclusion
We have taken a whirlwind tour of the state of quantum
NLP, seeing the potential and limitations of using quan-
tum computers for understanding language. While we
recognize this overview, like any other, cannot be fully
comprehensive, we hope that it is nonetheless useful for
both the theoretician and practitioner alike.
We reviewed fundamentals of gate-based quantum
computing, and from here moved into understanding
how these low-level structures and concepts can be used
to efficiently encode basic units of language, i.e. text.
From there, we built into progressively higher-level con-
cepts, roughly following the hierarchy found in classical
NLP.
Through this journey, we have seen how the current
scale of applications for quantum NLP on actual hard-
ware has not yet matched that of classical computing
techniques. However, quantum methods being developed
at the small scale show promise for use on intermedi-
ate scale problems as hardware continues progressing,
and quantum models that have been shown to be more
expressive than their analogous classical counterparts
hold potential at large scales.
In the meantime, methods from quantum theory
continue to inform AI. During the 2010s, vectors and
tensors became a common mathematical toolset perme-
ating AI, and the adaptation of tensor network methods
for scalability continues this theme. We have especially
focused on the topical problems that current classical
LLMs face. Here, quantum theory has much philosophi-
cal guidance to offer on the issues of assessing factuality
and sequential inference.
Quantum Natural Language Processing
17
References
1. Aaronson S (2015) Read the fine print. Nature Physics
11(4):291–293
2. Alexander A, Widdows D (2022) Quantum text encoding
for classification tasks. In: 2022 IEEE/ACM 7th Symposium
on Edge Computing, pp 355–361
3. Amankwah MG, Camps D, Bethel EW, Van Beeumen
R, Perciano T (2022) Quantum pixel representations and
compression for n-dimensional images. Scientific reports
12(1):7712
4. Atmanspacher H (2020) Quantum Approaches to Conscious-
ness. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy, Summer 2020 edn, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stan-
ford University
5. Babbush R, Gidney C, Berry DW, Wiebe N, McClean J,
Paler A, Fowler A, Neven H (2018) Encoding electronic spec-
tra in quantum circuits with linear t complexity. Physical
Review X 8(4):041015
6. Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y (2014) Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv
preprint arXiv:14090473
7. Balachandran V, Hajishirzi H, Cohen WW, Tsvetkov Y
(2022) Correcting Diverse Factual Errors in Abstractive
Summarization via Post-Editing and Language Model Infill-
ing. DOI 10.48550/arXiv.2210.12378, URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2210.12378, arXiv:2210.12378 [cs]
8. Barenco A, Berthiaume A, Deutsch D, Ekert A, Jozsa R,
Macchiavello C (1997) Stabilisation of Quantum Compu-
tations by Symmetrisation. SIAM Journal on Computing
26(5):1541–1557, DOI 10.1137/S0097539796302452
9. Bausch J (2020) Recurrent Quantum Neural Networks.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Curran Associates, Inc., vol 33, pp 1368–1379, URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
0ec96be397dd6d3cf2fecb4a2d627c1c-Abstract.html
10. Bausch J, Subramanian S, Piddock S (2021) A quantum
search decoder for natural language processing. Quantum
Machine Intelligence 3(1):16
11. Benedetti M, Garcia-Pintos D, Perdomo O, Leyton-Ortega
V, Nam Y, Perdomo-Ortiz A (2019) A generative model-
ing approach for benchmarking and training shallow quan-
tum circuits. npj Quantum Information 5(1):1–9, DOI 10.
1038/s41534-019-0157-8, URL https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41534-019-0157-8, number: 1 Publisher: Na-
ture Publishing Group
12. Bengio Y, Ducharme R, Vincent P (2000) A neural
probabilistic language model. In: Leen T, Dietterich
T,
Tresp
V
(eds)
Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing Systems, MIT Press, vol 13, URL https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2000/
file/728f206c2a01bf572b5940d7d9a8fa4c-Paper.pdf
13. Borgeaud S, Mensch A, Hoffmann J, Cai T, Rutherford E,
Millican K, Driessche GBVD, Lespiau JB, Damoc B, Clark
A, Casas DDL, Guy A, Menick J, Ring R, Hennigan T,
Huang S, Maggiore L, Jones C, Cassirer A, Brock A, Pa-
ganini M, Irving G, Vinyals O, Osindero S, Simonyan K, Rae
J, Elsen E, Sifre L (2022) Improving Language Models by Re-
trieving from Trillions of Tokens. In: Proceedings of the 39th
International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, pp
2206–2240, URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
borgeaud22a.html, iSSN: 2640-3498
14. Bouquiaux L (2008) Leibniz against the unreasonable new-
tonian physics. In: Leibniz: What Kind of Rationalist?,
Springer, pp 99–110
15. Bowles J, Ahmed S, Schuld M (2024) Better than classical?
the subtle art of benchmarking quantum machine learning
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:240307059
16. Bradley TD (2020) At the interface of algebra and statistics.
PhD thesis, City University of New York
17. Bravyi S, Cross AW, Gambetta JM, Maslov D, Rall P, Yoder
TJ (2024) High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant
quantum memory. Nature 627(8005):778–782
18. Bridgwater A (2023) The Rise Of Vector Databases. URL
https://www.forbes.com/sites/adrianbridgwater/
2023/05/19/the-rise-of-vector-databases/,
section:
Cloud
19. Brown T, Mann B, Ryder N, Subbiah M, Kaplan JD, Dhari-
wal P, Neelakantan A, Shyam P, Sastry G, Askell A, Agar-
wal S, Herbert-Voss A, Krueger G, Henighan T, Child R,
Ramesh A, Ziegler D, Wu J, Winter C, Hesse C, Chen M,
Sigler E, Litwin M, Gray S, Chess B, Clark J, Berner C,
McCandlish S, Radford A, Sutskever I, Amodei D (2020)
Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33:1877–1901, appendices
included at https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165
20. Busemeyer JR, Bruza PD (2012) Quantum models of cog-
nition and decision. Cambridge University Press,
21. Cao
Y,
Guerreschi
GG,
Aspuru-Guzik
A
(2017)
Quantum Neuron: an elementary building block for
machine
learning
on
quantum
computers.
DOI
10.
48550/arXiv.1711.11240,
URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/
1711.11240, arXiv:1711.11240 [quant-ph]
22. Cherrat EA, Kerenidis I, Mathur N, Landman J, Strahm M,
Li YY (2022) Quantum vision transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:220908167
23. Chomsky N (1957) Syntactic structures. Mouton de Gruyter,
The Hague
24. Chomsky N (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. 11,
MIT press,
25. Clark S, Pulman S (2007) Combining symbolic and distri-
butional models of meaning. In: AAAI Spring Symposium:
Quantum Interaction, pp 52–55
26. Coecke B, Sadrzadeh M, Clark S (2010) Mathematical foun-
dations for a compositional distributional model of meaning.
CoRR, arXiv preprint arXiV:10034394
27. Coyle B, Mills D, Danos V, Kashefi E (2020) The Born
supremacy: quantum advantage and training of an Ising
Born machine. npj Quantum Information 6(1):1–11, DOI
10.1038/s41534-020-00288-9, URL https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41534-020-00288-9, number: 1 Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group
28. Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, Weissenborn D, Zhai
X, Unterthiner T, Dehghani M, Minderer M, Heigold G,
Gelly S, et al. (2020) An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
formers for image recognition at scale. ICLR / arXiv preprint
arXiv:201011929
29. Durbin R, Eddy SR, Krogh A, Mitchison G (1998) Biological
Sequence Analysis: Probabilistic Models of Proteins and
Nucleic Acids. Cambridge University Press
30. Feynman RP (1985) Quantum mechanical computers. Op-
tics news 11(2):11–20
31. Firth J (1957) A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955.
Studies in Linguistic Analysis, Philological Society, Oxford
32. Gao L, Dai Z, Pasupat P, Chen A, Chaganty AT, Fan Y,
Zhao V, Lao N, Lee H, Juan DC, Guu K (2023) RARR: Re-
searching and Revising What Language Models Say, Using
Language Models. In: Rogers A, Boyd-Graber J, Okazaki N
(eds) Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada,
18
Dominic Widdows et al.
pp 16477–16508, DOI 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.910, URL
https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.910
33. Gao X, Anschuetz ER, Wang ST, Cirac JI, Lukin MD
(2022) Enhancing generative models via quantum correla-
tions. Physical Review X 12(2):021037
34. G´eron A (2019) Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-
Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow: Concepts, Tools, and Tech-
niques to Build Intelligent Systems. O’Reilly Media,
35. Gili K, Sveistrys M, Ballance C (2023) Introducing nonlin-
ear activations into quantum generative models. Physical
Review A 107(1):012406
36. Gily´en A, Su Y, Low GH, Wiebe N (2019) Quantum singu-
lar value transformation and beyond: exponential improve-
ments for quantum matrix arithmetics. In: Proceedings of
the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing, pp 193–204
37. Giovannetti V, Lloyd S, Maccone L (2008) Quantum random
access memory. Physical review letters 100(16):160501
38. Giri PR, Korepin VE (2017) A review on quantum search
algorithms. Quantum Information Processing 16(12):315,
DOI 10.1007/s11128-017-1768-7, URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11128-017-1768-7
39. Grover LK (1996) A fast quantum mechanical algorithm
for database search. In: Proceedings of the twenty-eighth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC
’96, ACM Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States,
pp 212–219, DOI 10.1145/237814.237866, URL http://
portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=237814.237866
40. Guo N, Yu Z, Agrawal A, Rebentrost P (2024) Quantum
linear algebra is all you need for transformer architectures.
arXiv preprint arXiv:240216714
41. Guu K, Lee K, Tung Z, Pasupat P, Chang M (2020)
Retrieval Augmented Language Model Pre-Training. In:
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, PMLR, pp 3929–3938, URL https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v119/guu20a.html, iSSN: 2640-
3498
42. Harrow AW, Hassidim A, Lloyd S (2009) Quantum algo-
rithm for linear systems of equations. Physical review letters
103(15):150502
43. Heisenberg W (1958) Physics and philosophy: The revolu-
tion in modern science. Vladimir Djambov
44. Hitchcock FL (1927) The Expression of a Tensor or a
Polyadic as a Sum of Products. Journal of Mathematics
and Physics 6(1–4):164–189, DOI 10.1002/sapm192761164
45. Huang HL, Du Y, Gong M, Zhao Y, Wu Y, Wang C,
Li S, Liang F, Lin J, Xu Y, Yang R, Liu T, Hsieh
MH, Deng H, Rong H, Peng CZ, Lu CY, Chen YA,
Tao D, Zhu X, Pan JW (2021) Experimental Quan-
tum Generative Adversarial Networks for Image Gener-
ation. Physical Review Applied 16(2):024051, DOI 10.1103/
PhysRevApplied.16.024051, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.06201, arXiv:2010.06201 [quant-ph]
46. Huang Q, Smolensky P, He X, Deng L, Wu D (2017) Tensor
product generation networks for deep NLP modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.09118
47. Huang Q, Deng L, Wu D, Liu C, He X (2019) Attentive
tensor product learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, vol 33, pp 1344–1351
48. Jackendoff R (2002) Foundations of Language. Oxford Uni-
versiry Press,
49. Jelinek F, Mercer RL, Bahl LR, Baker JK (1977) Perplex-
ity—a measure of the difficulty of speech recognition tasks.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 62(S1):S63,
DOI 10.1121/1.2016299, URL https://doi.org/10.1121/
1.2016299
50. Jurafsky D, Martin JH (2023) Speech and Language Pro-
cessing (3rd Edition draft). Stanford, California, URL
https://web.stanford.edu/˜jurafsky/slp3/
51. Karamlou A, Pfaffhauser M, Wootton J (2022) Quantum
Natural Language Generation on Near-Term Devices. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2211.00727, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2211.00727, arXiv:2211.00727 [quant-ph]
52. Kartsaklis D, Fan I, Yeung R, Pearson A, Lorenz R, Toumi
A, de Felice G, Meichanetzidis K, Clark S, Coecke B (2021)
lambeq: An Efficient High-Level Python Library for Quan-
tum NLP. arXiv preprint arXiv:211004236
53. Landauer T, Dumais S (1997) A solution to Plato’s prob-
lem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition.
Psychological Review 104(2):211–240
54. Lewis P, Perez E, Piktus A, Petroni F, Karpukhin V,
Goyal N, K¨uttler H, Lewis M, Yih Wt, Rockt¨aschel
T,
Riedel
S,
Kiela
D
(2020)
Retrieval-Augmented
Generation
for
Knowledge-Intensive
NLP
Tasks.
In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Curran Associates, Inc., vol 33, pp 9459–9474, URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Abstract.html
55. Li G, Zhao X, Wang X (2022) Quantum self-attention
neural networks for text classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:220505625
56. Liao Y, Ferrie C (2024) Gpt on a quantum computer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:240309418
57. London C, Brown D, Xu W, Vatansever S, Langmead
CJ, Kartsaklis D, Clark S, Meichanetzidis K (2023) Pep-
tide Binding Classification on Quantum Computers. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2311.15696, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2311.15696, arXiv:2311.15696 [quant-ph]
58. Lorenz R, Pearson A, Meichanetzidis K, Kartsaklis D, Co-
ecke B (2023) Qnlp in practice: Running compositional
models of meaning on a quantum computer. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research 76:1305–1342
59. Lucas A (2014) Ising formulations of many np problems.
Frontiers in physics 2:5
60. Manning CD, Sch¨utze H (1999) Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts
61. McClean JR, Boixo S, Smelyanskiy VN, Babbush R, Neven
H (2018) Barren plateaus in quantum neural network train-
ing landscapes. Nature communications 9(1):4812
62. McKeon R (ed) (1941) The Basic Works of Aristotle. Ran-
dom House
63. Metinko
C
(2023)
Pinecone
Hits
$750M
Valua-
tion
As
AI
Heats
Up
Vector
Database
Market.
URL
https://news.crunchbase.com/ai-robotics/
startup-venture-funding-database-pinecone/
64. Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J (2013) Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. DOI 10.
48550/ARXIV.1301.3781, URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1301.3781
65. Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado GS, Dean J (2013)
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality. Advances in neural information processing
systems 26
66. Min B, Ross H, Sulem E, Veyseh APB, Nguyen TH, Sainz
O, Agirre E, Heintz I, Roth D (2023) Recent advances in
natural language processing via large pre-trained language
models: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys 56(2):1–40
67. Nielsen MA, Chuang I (2002) Quantum computation and
quantum information. American Association of Physics
Teachers, Cambridge University Press Edition, 2016
Quantum Natural Language Processing
19
68. Orrell D (2020) Quantum Economics and Finance: An Ap-
plied Mathematics Introduction. Panda Ohana Publishing,
New York
69. Panahi A, Saeedi S, Arodz T (2019) word2ket: Space-
efficient word embeddings inspired by quantum entangle-
ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:191104975
70. Poli M, Massaroli S, Nguyen E, Fu DY, Dao T, Bac-
cus S, Bengio Y, Ermon S, Re C (2023) Hyena hierar-
chy: Towards larger convolutional language models. In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=1sxiBaGEtg
71. Pronin CB, Ostroukh AV (2023) Synthesis of Quantum
Vector Databases Based on Grovers Algorithm. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2306.15295, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2306.15295, arXiv:2306.15295 [quant-ph]
72. Rescher N (1996) Leibniz on possible worlds. Studia Leibni-
tiana pp 129–162
73. Rudolph MS, Toussaint NB, Katabarwa A, Johri S, Per-
opadre B, Perdomo-Ortiz A (2022) Generation of High-
Resolution Handwritten Digits with an Ion-Trap Quantum
Computer. Physical Review X 12(3):031010, DOI 10.1103/
PhysRevX.12.031010, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevX.12.031010, publisher: American Physi-
cal Society
74. Salton G, McGill M (1983) Introduction to modern infor-
mation retrieval. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY
75. Schick T, Dwivedi-Yu J, Jiang Z, Petroni F, Lewis P,
Izacard G, You Q, Nalmpantis C, Grave E, Riedel S
(2022) PEER: A Collaborative Language Model. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2208.11663, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2208.11663, arXiv:2208.11663 [cs]
76. Schr¨odinger E (1944) What is life? Cambridge University
Press (with mind and matter and autobiographical sketches,
1996)
77. Schuld M, Petruccione F (2021) Machine Learning with
Quantum Computers. Springer
78. Schuld M, Bergholm V, Gogolin C, Izaac J, Killoran N
(2019) Evaluating analytic gradients on quantum hard-
ware. Physical Review A 99(3):032331, DOI 10.1103/
PhysRevA.99.032331, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevA.99.032331, publisher: American Physi-
cal Society
79. Shor PW (1994) Algorithms for quantum computation:
discrete logarithms and factoring. In: Proceedings 35th
annual symposium on foundations of computer science, Ieee,
pp 124–134
80. Sordoni A, Nie JY, Bengio Y (2013) Modeling Term De-
pendencies with Quantum Language Models for IR. In:
Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
SIGIR ’13, pp 653–662
81. Thorne J, Vlachos A (2021) Evidence-based Factual Error
Correction. In: Zong C, Xia F, Li W, Navigli R (eds) Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, pp 3298–3309, DOI 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.256,
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.256
82. Tomut A, Jahromi SS, Singh S, Ishtiaq F, Mu˜noz C, Bajaj
PS, Elborady A, del Bimbo G, Alizadeh M, Montero D,
et al. (2024) CompactifAI: Extreme compression of large
language models using quantum-inspired tensor networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:240114109
83. Turpin M, Michael J, Perez E, Bowman SR (2023) Lan-
guage Models Don’t Always Say What They Think: Un-
faithful Explanations in Chain-of-Thought Prompting. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2305.04388, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.04388, arXiv:2305.04388 [cs]
84. Van Loan CF (2000) The ubiquitous Kronecker prod-
uct. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics
123(1):85–100, DOI 10.1016/S0377-0427(00)00393-9
85. Van Rijsbergen CJ (2004) The Geometry of Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press,
86. Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L,
Gomez AN, Kaiser  L, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention is all
you need. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp 5998–6008
87. Wang X, Wei J, Schuurmans D, Le Q, Chi E, Narang S,
Chowdhery A, Zhou D (2023) Self-Consistency Improves
Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2203.11171, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2203.11171, arXiv:2203.11171 [cs]
88. Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D, Bosma M, Ichter
B, Xia F, Chi E, Le QV, Zhou D (2022) Chain-of-
Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language
Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems
35:24824–24837,
URL
https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.
html
89. Widdows D (2003) A mathematical model for context
and word-meaning. In: Fourth International and Interdisci-
plinary Conference on Modeling and Using Context, Stan-
ford, California
90. Widdows D (2004) Geometry and meaning. CSLI Publica-
tions, Stanford
91. Widdows D, Bhattacharyya A (2024) Quantum financial
modeling on noisy intermediate-scale quantum hardware:
Random walks using approximate quantum counting. Quan-
tum Economics and Finance
92. Widdows D, Peters S (2003) Word vectors and quantum
logic. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Mathematics of Lan-
guage Conference, Bloomington, Indiana
93. Widdows D, Kitto K, Cohen T (2021) Quantum mathemat-
ics in artificial intelligence. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research 72:1307–1341
94. Widdows D, Alexander A, Zhu D, Zimmerman C, Ma-
jumder A (2024) Near-term advances in quantum natural
language processing. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
Intelligence pp 1–24
95. Wittgenstein L (1953) Philospphical Investigations. Black-
well, Blackwell, 3rd edition, 2001
96. Yu
Z,
Chen
Q,
Jiao
Y,
Li
Y,
Lu
X,
Wang
X,
Yang JZ (2023) Provable Advantage of Parameterized
Quantum Circuit in Function Approximation. DOI
10.48550/arXiv.2310.07528, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2310.07528, arXiv:2310.07528 [quant-ph]
97. Zaheer M, Guruganesh G, Dubey KA, Ainslie J, Alberti C,
Ontanon S, Pham P, Ravula A, Wang Q, Yang L, Ahmed
A (2020) Big Bird: Transformers for Longer Sequences.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
Curran Associates, Inc., vol 33, p 17283–17297, URL https:
//papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/hash/
c8512d142a2d849725f31a9a7a361ab9-Abstract.html
98. Zhang H, Song H, Li S, Zhou M, Song D (2023) A survey
of controllable text generation using transformer-based pre-
trained language models. ACM Computing Surveys 56(3):1–
37
99. Zhao Rx, Shi J, Zhang S (2022) QSAN: A near-term
achievable quantum self-attention network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:220707563
