Title: Genshin: General Shield for Natural Language Processing with Large Language Models
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18741v2
--------------------------------------------------

Genshin: General Shield for Natural Language
Processing with Large Language Models
Xiao Peng, Tao Liu, Ying Wang
Institute of Prospective Technology Research, Changan Automobile
{Email:px1505@163.com}
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT, Gemini, or LLaMA have been
trending recently, demonstrating considerable advancement and generalizability
power in countless domains. However, LLMs create an even bigger black box ex-
acerbating opacity, with interpretability limited to few approaches. The uncertainty
and opacity embedded in LLMs’ nature restrict their application in high-stakes
domains like financial fraud, phishing, etc. Current approaches mainly rely on
traditional textual classification with posterior interpretable algorithms, suffering
from attackers who may create versatile adversarial samples to break the system’s
defense, forcing users to make trade-offs between efficiency and robustness. To ad-
dress this issue, we propose a novel cascading framework called Genshin (General
Shield for Natural Language Processing with Large Language Models), utilizing
LLMs as defensive one-time plug-ins. Unlike most applications of LLMs that try to
transform text into something new or structural, Genshin uses LLMs to recover text
to its original state. Genshin aims to combine the generalizability of the LLM, the
discrimination of the median model, and the interpretability of the simple model.
Our experiments on the task of sentimental analysis and spam detection have shown
fatal flaws of the current median models and exhilarating results on LLMs’ recovery
ability, demonstrating that Genshin is both effective and efficient. In our ablation
study, we unearth several intriguing observations. Utilizing the LLM defender, a
tool derived from the 4th paradigm, we have reproduced BERT’s 15% optimal
mask rate results in the 3rd paradigm of NLP. Additionally, when employing the
LLM as a potential adversarial tool, attackers are capable of executing effective
attacks that are nearly semantically lossless. We conduct detailed case analyses
using the SHAP interpreter, which could yield insights for systemic enhancements.
Lastly, we provide discussions on the architecture of Genshin, underscoring the
necessity of each component and outlining the current limitations.
1
Introduction
Masked language modeling (MLM) proposed in BERT [6], which is inspired by the "Cloze" test,
reveals the phenomenon of redundancy in natural languages. Although recently the new paradigm of
the GPT series developed by OpenAI has made significant progress than the MLM paradigm, the
nature of MLM’s representative mechanism remains valuable.
For example, "password", "pa*skey" and "ρassωOrd" can convey the same concept of "a key to
someone’s account" to human receivers, but the latter ones are much more difficult for classical pattern-
matching machines to identify. This redundancy keeps certain symmetrical invariance in the language
space, where a small degree of disturbance on the original text can keep the corresponding meaning
of the text intact. The malicious attackers may utilize this to change the sentence’s appearance while
keeping it human-readable, so that the sentence in disguise may get through security checks of the
traditional language model, which mainly relies on rule-based regular expressions at present.
arXiv:2405.18741v2  [cs.CL]  3 Jun 2024
Figure 1: Exemplary demonstration of Genshin recovering deliberately altered spam texts and
providing classifications and interpretations afterwards.
Until recently, LLMs have shown salient potential in symmetry-persistent textual transformation
and manipulation, compared with their weakness in logistical inference. This is understandable due
to LLMs’ natural essence, which generates the most fluent tokens rather than executes solid causal
inference. Besides, LMs have shown great discrimination abilities with efficiency on downstream
tasks. Finally, IMs provide explanations of the mechanisms inside the black box of the corresponding
model. We present an exemplary demonstration of Genshin in Fig. 1.
Due to the intrinsic symmetry of LLMs, there is another potential threat. In the future, attackers may
also leverage LLMs not as a shield but as a spear. This kind of attack can be entirely invisible to
pattern-matching machines. The race between defenders and attackers leads to infinity, demonstrating
the necessity of Genshin.
Our goal is to alleviate the deficiency of current LLMs, by combining the power of median-sized
language models (LMs) and interpretable models (IMs). When our framework receives any new
textual information, it first calls an LLM to recover it to its original state, if it has been injected with
toxic tokens. Then the recovered text is sent to an LM to make accurate predictions. If requested, an
IM will be operated to explain the predictions of the LM, providing solid insights and interpretations.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• A novel framework called Genshin is proposed to provide a general shield for all kinds of
adversarial textual attacks. This shield is also capable of becoming a spear in the future.
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use LLMs as symmetrical recovery
one-time plug-ins, aiming to transform the content to its natural status without meaningful
information losses.
• We also leverage LMs and IMs to achieve both efficiency and explainability which current
LLMs lack. We visualize our interpreting results to provide insight and enlightening.
2
Related Works
2.1
Language Models
There are 4 paradigm shifts for language models. In the early days, statistical models based on the
Markov assumption [1] dominated the region of NLP, predicting the next state with the nearest former
state [32]. The essence of the Markov assumption is compressible information, where history can be
concentrated into constant storage. Second, distributed representations like word2vec [14, 15] start to
mine the hidden features of the textual corpus, introducing the idea of vectorization into NLP territory.
Third, pre-trained language models (PTMs) like BERT and GPT-1/2/3 [19, 20, 5] significantly boost
the growth of NLP applications, by separating the training stage and fine-tuning stage. Finally, large
language models such as ChatGPT [17], LLAMA [26], Claude-3 [3], and GPT-4 [2] have emerged
with novel abilities that can solve real-world tasks with versatile prompts.
2
LLMs’ zero-shot abilities [10] also pave the way for prompt engineering [12], optimizing the
deficiency of LLMs. For instance, few-shot prompting [5] and instructions help LLMs form structural
output. Retrieval-augmented Generation (RAG) [11] helps LLMs acquire knowledge and minimize
hallucination. Chain-of-thought (CoT) [28] and intelligent agents [18, 25, 29] help LLMs cultivate
rational minds and stabilize the reasoning process.
2.2
Textual Adversarial Attacks
Adversarial attacks make LMs vulnerable by creating different kinds of adversarial samples[27, 4, 24].
Textual adversarial attacks can be operated on 3 levels: char-level, word-level, and sentence-level. All
textual attacks can be described as some versions of insertion, replacement, or deletion. OpenAttack
[31] proposes an open-source textual adversarial attack toolkit, implemented with lots of existing
attacking methods. There are also studies for adversarial attacks on LLMs [22, 30]. The most well-
known adversarial attack is the "magic" prompt, instructing the LLM to forget all safety measures
and play a user-specified role to produce harmful content.
2.3
Interpretable Machine Learning
Interpretable Machine Learning consists of interpretability and explainability [16]. Interpretability
means a "white box", where the model’s inner mechanism is transparent and understandable to users.
There are few classical interpretable models such as the Generalized Additive Model, Decision Tree,
Naive Bayes, K-NN, etc [8]. But when it comes to neural networks, interpretability withers away
when the net scales exponentially according to the scaling law [9].
Explainability aims to provide insight from opaque models, especially neural networks. Model-
agnostic methods like LIME [21] and SHAP [13] explain classification results by highlighting the
importance of different input elements. Instance-based methods explain results by locating the more
relevant training sample with crafted influence functions [7]. There are also specialized methods only
for interpreting language models [23]. Attention-based methods aggregate and visualize the attention
score toward token importance. Probing explains each layer of neural networks by applying different
downstream tasks. Explanation generation explains smaller models with an LLM.
3
Methodology
The textual world is filled with natural or intended noises, where humans might encounter typo-
graphical errors or indirectly express their concepts. The LM often fails in these infinite heavy-tailed
scenarios causing OOD (Out-of-domain) tokenization problems, leading to an inevitable trade-off
between robustness and effectiveness. The LLM has seen them all, on the other hand, it becomes
the perfect tool to recover risky information into safe information, making sure that the LM doesn’t
require strong robustness to perform well.
Figure 2: The workflow of the Genshin framework
3
3.1
Framework
Our Genshin framework’s workflow operates as follows, shown in Figure. 2, including three stages:
(a) denoising stage (LLM): the LLM defender first acts as a one-time recovery tool to denoise the text,
from risky information to recovered information; (b) analyzing stage (LM): the LM analyzer can then
easily execute information analysis on the recovered information, including tasks like classification,
regression, etc; (c) interpreting stage (IM): the IM interpreter precisely explains the LM’s outputs.
3.2
Attacking Strategies
We designed 3 kinds of attacks that might bypass the current system: char-level disturbance, word-
level disturbance, and similarity-based disturbance.
• Char-level disturbance (Char Attacker): we randomly disturb each minimal-sized token
(characters) in the sentence, with a probability of α (disturbance ratio). This is effective due
to redundancy in natural languages.
• Word-level disturbance (Word Attacker): this is similar to char-level disturbance, except
happening on words as tokens.
• Similarity-based disturbance (LLM Attacker): we prompt LLMs to disturb some words
using their synonyms or similar-shaped tokens. In this way, we can provide safety even if
the attackers are implementing their attacks through LLMs as well.
For simplicity, the disturbance of characters and words is implemented by random replacement in the
following experiments.
3.3
Prompt Design
We design our attacker and defender prompts with 4 components: task description, demonstration,
input, and structural output control. The task description part describes the purpose of the task, like
"try to recover the following text to its original state". The demonstration part provides examples of
detailed situations, like "there could be adding, deleting, swapping or replacing characters/words".
The input part is parameterized as "«text»" ready to be replaced by any new instance in real-time.
The structural output control part is crucial, making sure the LLM’s output is JSON-parsable, like
"output your recovered output text as JSON format".
3.4
Interpreter
We use SHAP as the interpreter to evaluate token importance in this work. SHAP represents the
i-th token importance φi(f) for model f based on Sharpley values, as shown in Eq. 1, where N
is the universal set and S stands for all potential combinatorial subsets excluding the i-th token.
The Sharpley value is calculated as the mathematical expectation of the marginal profit on all
combinatorial conditions.
φi(f) =
X
S⊆N\{i}
|S|!(N −|S| −1)!
N!
[ f(S ∪{i}) −f(S) ]
(1)
4
Experiment
In this part, we want to demonstrate the power of LLMs’ recovery ability, by attacking the original
textual dataset and recovering it later. We measure the targeted LM’s accuracy on textual datasets for
each state: original state, attacked state, and recovered state.
4.1
Settings
Datasets.
As illustrated in Tab. 1, we execute our experiments on 2 tasks: sentimental analysis and
spam detection. We select 3 datasets from HuggingFace, including stanfordnlp/sst2 (short as "sst2"
in the following content), dair-ai/emotion (short as "emotion"), and Deysi/spam-detection-dataset
(short as "spam-detection").
4
Models.
For each task, we select a corresponding pre-trained LM from HuggingFace, includ-
ing textattack/bert-base-uncased-SST-2 (short as "bert-base-*") and mariagrandury/roberta-base-
finetuned-sms-spam-detection (short as "roberta-base-*"). We use GPT-3.5 as the LLM defender’s
backbone model.
Table 1: Summary of tasks, datasets, and models used in our experiment
Task
Dataset
Model
Sentiment Analysis
stanfordnlp/sst2
bert-base-*
dair-ai/emotion
Spam Detection
Deysi/spam-detection-dataset
roberta-base-*
4.2
Results
The experimental results are shown in Tab. 2 and Tab. 3. To ensure efficiency, we set a maximum
attacking time of 128 for attackers, exceeding that will be considered a failure attack.
Table 2: Results of adversarial attack strategies and recovery experiments on sentiment analysis and
spam detection (disturbance ratio: 0.15). OAcc: original accuracy (the initial statistical performance
for the model on the dataset); AAcc: attacked accuracy (performance after the dataset was attacked);
RAcc: recovered accuracy (performance after the dataset was recovered by LLM); RRatio: recovery
ratio (RRatio = (RAcc-AAcc)/(OAcc-AAcc)). MAT: median attacking time (how many times the
attacker takes to try to make a successful attack).
Attacker
Model
Dataset
OAcc
AAcc
RAcc
RRatio
MAT
char
bert-base-*
sst2
0.9766
0.1484
0.9258
0.9387
5.0
emotion
0.7734
0.1367
0.7188
0.9141
4.0
roberta-base-*
spam-detection
0.8789
0.3477
0.8750
0.9926
8.5
word
bert-base-*
sst2
0.9766
0.1836
0.5039
0.4039
30.0
emotion
0.7734
0.1680
0.5117
0.5677
10.5
roberta-base-*
spam-detection
0.8789
0.6211
0.7969
0.6818
128.0
LLM
bert-base-*
sst2
0.9766
0.1992
0.9336
0.9447
5.0
emotion
0.7734
0.2070
0.7188
0.9034
3.0
roberta-base-*
spam-detection
0.8789
0.0820
0.8750
0.9951
5.0
Average
0.8158
In Tab. 2, the disturbance ratio for char and word attack is set to 0.15 by default. For each original
dataset, we sample and construct a subset for experiments consisting of 256 textual instances with
text lengths ranging from 50 to 150 characters. We also keep the equilibrium between classes as 128
instances for each class in both classification tasks.
The results show that, on average, 81.6% of successful textual attacks can be shielded by the LLM
defender. For some special cases like the LLM attacker on the spam-detection dataset, the recovery
ratio can be up to 99.5% (nearly perfect).
Different attackers’ attacking efficiency varies. MAT (median attacking time) represents the median
times the attacker needs to disturb each input text to change the model’s output for the whole sampled
dataset. MAT for the LLM attacker is the lowest, showing that LLM as an attacker also prevails
over classical methods. The word attacker fails frequently and possesses a low RRatio, implying
its ineffectiveness in designing for attacking. The high attacking failure rate on the spam-detection
dataset implies that the spam features are far more distributed in the context than sentimental features.
The LLM attacker has been revealed with its potential for such difficult tasks.
In Tab. 3, we set a larger disturbance ratio of 0.3. The results show that the attacking success rate
increases (the median attacking time is lower as well), while the recovery ability of the LLM defender
decreases because of more information losses. For attackers, this is an inevitable trade-off between
attacking efficiency and transmission credibility. It is worth pointing out that the LLM attacker is
5
Table 3: Results of adversarial attack strategies and recovery experiments on sentiment analysis and
spam detection (disturbance ratio: 0.3).
Attacker
Model
Dataset
OAcc
AAcc
RAcc
RRatio
MAT
char
bert-base-*
sst2
0.9766
0.1953
0.7500
0.7100
2.0
emotion
0.7734
0.1133
0.6680
0.8402
2.0
roberta-base-*
spam-detection
0.8789
0.4453
0.8086
0.8378
2.0
word
bert-base-*
sst2
0.9766
0.0156
0.4219
0.4228
6.0
emotion
0.7734
0.0078
0.3438
0.4388
3.0
roberta-base-*
spam-detection
0.8789
0.3633
0.5938
0.4470
28.5
Average
0.6161
disturbance-ratio-free due to a lack of controllability from our practical observations, thus we don’t
reproduce this setting in Tab. 3.
5
Ablation Study
5.1
Disturbance Ratios, Attackers, and Datasets
5.1.1
Settings
To further evaluate recovery ability on different disturbance ratios, attackers, and datasets, we execute
our ablation study on three settings: (1) a generated dataset attacked by the char attacker; (2) a
standard dataset attacked by the char attacker; (3) a standard dataset attacked by the LLM attacker.
The generated dataset is created by assembling random words into 500 sentences with specific lengths
(≤100 characters). The standard dataset is sampled from the emotion dataset with 500 sentences
with lengths ranging from 50 to 100 characters. We split 500 samples into 5 groups and execute our
experiment on each group independently to gather statistical standard deviations.
We utilize the editing distance ratio (EDR), shown in Eq. 2, to calculate the distance between two
sentences. EDR is designed to be a normalized Levenshtein distance ranging in [0, 1].
EDR(a, b) = editing_distance(a, b)
max(|a|, |b|)
(2)
As shown in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4, We further define the average disturbance distance (ADD) as the
expectation of all EDRs from each textual pair between the original and attacked dataset, and the
average recovery distance (ARD) as the expectation of all EDRs from each textual pair between
the original and recovered dataset. N is the dataset size, and oi, ai, ri represents the i-th original,
attacked and recovered text accordingly.
ADD = 1
N
N
X
i=1
EDR(oi, ai)
(3)
ARD = 1
N
N
X
i=1
EDR(oi, ri)
(4)
The LLM attacker lacks controllability, thus we first make random disturbances with the LLM
attacker, calculate their EDR with the original text, and categorize them into the nearest disturbance
ratio accordingly. Each ratio category is set to include no more than 500 samples.
5.1.2
Results
The results are shown in Fig. 3. The shadowed areas represent corresponding standard deviations.
Note that for the char attacker, ADD is slightly lower than the corresponding disturbance ratio because
we have designed the char attacker to skip spaces and punctuations.
6
Figure 3: The ablation study results on different disturbance ratios, attackers, and datasets
First, for the generated dataset, the absence of contextual structures in the generated sentences makes
the LLM defender nearly impossible to recover anything. Instead, recovering attempts may even
introduce excessive noises when the disturbance ratio is ≥0.3. ARD calculated after the LLM
defender recovered the attacked dataset, has made no evidential improvements,
Second, for the standard dataset attacked by the char attacker. With a moderate disturbance ratio
ranging in [0.05, 0.35], the LLM defender can successfully make restorations for the attacked dataset.
Specifically, at the 0.15 ratio, the LLM defender can recover the highest distance while having the
lowest standard deviation. This is consistent with the 15% optimal mask rate conclusion from the
mask language modeling (MLM) task in BERT’s training.
Furthermore, the ARD curve of the LLM attacker is substantially lower than the char attacker on the
standard dataset, which means the LLM attacker has kept most of the semantical information after the
disturbance. To conclude, by carefully crafting textual language, we can get a whole new appearance
of sentences with minimal information losses, which could overthrow all previous pattern-matching
machines. More importantly, this can be done automatically by large language models.
5.2
Prompt Engineering Techniques
Designing moderate prompts is crucial for downstream task performance. We execute our ablation
study on 4 cases: (1) bare prompt: a normal prompt template describes the defensive task; (2)
few-shot: the template is provided with a few attacked and recovered examples; (3) JSON parser: the
template is instructed to output as parsable JSON format; (4) full prompt: the complete template with
few-shot and JSON parser. The dataset is constructed in the same way as our main experiment, with
512 samples from each original dataset ranging in [50, 150] characters. The char attacker is set with a
disturbance ratio of 0.15.
Table 4: The ablation study results on different prompt engineering techniques
techniques
Dataset
sst2
emotion
spam-detection
RRatio
ARD
RRatio
ARD
RRatio
ARD
bare prompt
0.7644
0.2127
0.9244
0.1087
0.9701
0.0903
few-shot
0.8702
0.1298
0.9593
0.1024
0.9627
0.0847
JSON parser
0.8846
0.0882
0.9651
0.0686
1.0075
0.0560
full prompt
0.8606
0.0836
0.9477
0.0644
0.9851
0.0552
Results are shown in Tab. 4. The few-shot prompting makes improvement more significant when the
original RRatio is low, and JSON parser prompting keeps consistency at all conditions. ARD, on the
other hand, is improved for all datasets when more prompting techniques are involved, which indicates
the LLM defender can recover raw information more accurately with full prompting technical support.
7
6
Case Study
In this part, we implement interpretable algorithms and demonstrate how Genshin can help with a
better understanding of the attacking mechanism in detailed cases.
Our exemplary visual interpreting results on 4 cases are shown in Fig. 4. The first 2 cases are from
the emotion dataset, and the last 2 cases are from the spam-detection dataset. For each case, we
demonstrate 3 rows with the original, attacked, and recovered text. All attacks are executed by the
char attacker. For each row, the rectangle bar on the left visualizes the model’s probability output.
The blue color represents the label "POSITIVE" or "HAM", and the orange color represents the
label "NEGATIVE" or "SPAM". The opacity of the background color is linearly related to the token
importance value derived from SHAP.
For example, in the 2nd case, the word "pretty" and "restless" is attacked, becoming "pr@tty" and
"restle$s". The model is successfully fooled by the attacker making its judgment by "feeling ...
right". In the 3rd case, the original text is almost completely unrecognizable to humans, and the
LLM defender recovered it perfectly. These interpreting results can provide insight into bad case
refinement and further improvement guidance for the task.
original |
|
i feel very happy and excited since i learned so many things
attacked |
|
i feel very haupy and excit&d since i le#rned so ma#y thxngs
recovered|
|
i feel very happy and excited since i learned so many things
original |
|
i am feeling pretty restless right now while typing this
attacked |
|
i am feeling pr@tty restle$s right nkw wh@le typ%ng this
recovered|
|
i am feeling pretty restless right now while typing this
original |
|
L@@k @t m3! I'm the b3$t fake-fr13nd you'll 3v3r hav3!!!1
attacked |
|
L@I! @t m3! I'P the b3$t fafe-fr13n$ you'll 3v@r hav3!!!1
recovered|
|
Look at me! I'm the best fake-friend you'll ever have!!!
original |
|
Want to earn big bucks fast?! Check out this amazing offer!!!
attacked |
|
Want to earn big bucks fas#?! Check out this amazing offer!!!
recovered|
|
Want to earn big bucks fast?! Check out this amazing offer!!!
Figure 4: Our interpreting results with the char attacker.
In our main experiments, the LLM attacker works much better on the spam-detection dataset compared
with other attackers. We demonstrate 2 cases in Fig. 5 attacked by the LLM attacker. All other settings
remain consistent. As presented, the attack results by the LLM attacker are more human-readable
because of the elaborate usage of similar-shaped tokens.
original |
|
i feel very happy and excited since i learned so many things
attacked |
|
𝒊feel very haρρу and eжcited since i learned so many things
recovered|
|
i feel very happy and excited since i learned so many things
original |
|
Win an iPhone X today! Click here to enter our amazing giveaway!
attacked |
|
Win an iPhon9 X todày! Cli3k hére to entér our àmàzing givéaway!
recovered|
|
Win an iPhone X today! Click here to enter our awesome contest!
Figure 5: Our interpreting results with the LLM attacker.
7
Discussion
7.1
Enhancing Robustness through Large Language Models
The augmentation of our framework, Genshin, with Large Language Models (LLMs) is driven by the
requirements for improved robustness, which traditional models like BERT fail to offer due to their
reliance on tokenization. Textual attacks can easily disrupt these tokenizers, leading to ineffective
8
content moderation. LLMs enhance robustness comprehensively, mitigating the impacts of such
adversarial attacks. Additionally, incorporating LLMs as a one-time plugin allows the median-sized
Language Models (LMs) in our system to focus on maximizing accuracy and performance in content
analysis and classification tasks.
Let’s ponder this: "What if the attackers also leverage an LLM to create adversarial samples?" In
such cases, a system without an LLM shield layer will be defenseless.
7.2
The Necessity of Interpretable Models
In Genshin, the integration of Interpretable Models (IMs) addresses the opaqueness of traditional
machine learning outputs. Traditional models often struggle to provide insights into the exact location
and nature of issues in detected sensitive or problematic text. Our IMs not only identify such text
but also highlight specific segments for further review, significantly aiding content moderators. This
increases the transparency and trustworthiness of the model’s outputs, leading to more efficient and
precise content moderation.
7.3
The Role of Median-sized Language Models as an Intermediate Layer
In the architecture of Genshin, LMs serve as an intermediate layer, rather than directly applying LLMs
for content review followed by IMs. This design is primarily driven by computational efficiency and
cost-effectiveness.
IMs such as LIME and SHAP require thousands of repetitive calls from previous language models.
LMs, being tremendously less resource-intensive than LLMs, can be invoked multiple times with
minimal cost. As a result, LMs act as an efficient intermediate layer, handling the majority of text
classification tasks by pinpointing key information. In contrast, the high computational cost of LLMs
necessitates their limited use. So in our framework, LLMs will only be called once per content review
cycle.
7.4
Limitations of Genshin
While our Genshin framework forms a general shield against all attackers in practice, there are clear
limitations beyond its reach. One limitation is the lack of controllability of the LLM attacker, such
as creating a large disturbance or a specified disturbance ratio attack. Second, the general LLM
defender prompt could be inexperienced for domain-specific tasks like medical records, so including
Retrieval-augmented Generation (RAG) into the LLM defender could further enhance the model’s
robustness. Third, Genshin can only recover textual information while the world is full of multi-modal
information, which can restrict its applications for more general purposes.
8
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we propose a novel framework called "Genshin", to make trade-offs between LLMs, LMs,
and IMs. Our experiments demonstrate the current flaws of classical models and the effectiveness of
the Genshin framework. In our ablation study, we successfully reproduced the optimal 15% mask rate
results of BERT, previously established in the 3rd paradigm of NLP. Additionally, our experiments
with the LLM as a potential attacking tool reveal that attackers can execute successful strategies nearly
semantically information lossless. This dual application highlights the robustness and versatility of
the Genshin framework in addressing both defensive and offensive scenarios in language processing.
In the case study, we interpret multiple cases providing insight for system improvement. Finally, we
have discussed the design of Genshin, the necessity of each component, and the limitations at present.
For future work, we want to explore the controllability of the LLM attacker and more prompting
skills. Next, novel interpretable algorithms might provide data insights into how the attacks take
effect and a deeper understanding of how the model operates. Genshin is also promising to be applied
to Optical Character Recognition (OCR) or Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) results, recovering
mistakes made by preceding models. Although we mainly focus on the defense of median-sized
models, the safety of LLMs is still worth exploring. With the growth of multi-modal LLMs, how to
recover an edited photo, recording or video remains a critical area of research.
9
References
[1] A.A. Markov, N.N.: The theory of algorithms. Springer Dordrecht (1953)
[2] Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L., Almeida, D.,
Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al.: Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774 (2023)
[3] Anthropic: Claude 3. https://claude.ai (2024)
[4] Biggio, B., Corona, I., Maiorca, D., Nelson, B., Šrndi´c, N., Laskov, P., Giacinto, G., Roli, F.:
Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time. In: Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2013, Prague, Czech Republic,
September 23-27, 2013, Proceedings, Part III 13. pp. 387–402. Springer (2013)
[5] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A.,
Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al.: Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in
neural information processing systems 33, 1877–1901 (2020)
[6] Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018)
[7] Han, X., Wallace, B.C., Tsvetkov, Y.: Explaining black box predictions and unveiling data
artifacts through influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06676 (2020)
[8] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.H., Friedman, J.H.: The elements of statistical learning:
data mining, inference, and prediction, vol. 2. Springer (2009)
[9] Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T.B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Rad-
ford, A., Wu, J., Amodei, D.: Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361 (2020)
[10] Kojima, T., Gu, S.S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., Iwasawa, Y.: Large language models are zero-shot
reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems 35, 22199–22213 (2022)
[11] Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., Küttler, H., Lewis, M.,
Yih, W.t., Rocktäschel, T., et al.: Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 9459–9474 (2020)
[12] Liu, P., Yuan, W., Fu, J., Jiang, Z., Hayashi, H., Neubig, G.: Pre-train, prompt, and predict:
A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing
Surveys 55(9), 1–35 (2023)
[13] Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in
neural information processing systems 30 (2017)
[14] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
[15] Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information processing
systems 26 (2013)
[16] Molnar, C.: Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com (2020)
[17] OpenAI: Chatgpt. https://chat.openai.com (2023)
[18] Park, J.S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C.J., Morris, M.R., Liang, P., Bernstein, M.S.: Generative agents:
Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology. pp. 1–22 (2023)
[19] Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I., et al.: Improving language understand-
ing by generative pre-training. OpenAI blog (2018)
10
[20] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., et al.: Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1(8), 9 (2019)
[21] Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: " why should i trust you?" explaining the predictions
of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 1135–1144 (2016)
[22] Shayegani, E., Mamun, M.A.A., Fu, Y., Zaree, P., Dong, Y., Abu-Ghazaleh, N.: Survey
of vulnerabilities in large language models revealed by adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.10844 (2023)
[23] Sun, X., Yang, D., Li, X., Zhang, T., Meng, Y., Qiu, H., Wang, G., Hovy, E., Li, J.: Interpreting
deep learning models in natural language processing: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.10470
(2021)
[24] Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I., Fergus, R.:
Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199 (2013)
[25] Team, X.: Xagent: An autonomous agent for complex task solving. XAgent blog (2023)
[26] Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B.,
Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.: Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023)
[27] Wang, W., Wang, R., Wang, L., Wang, Z., Ye, A.: Towards a robust deep neural network in
texts: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07285 (2019)
[28] Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q.V., Zhou, D., et al.:
Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural
information processing systems 35, 24824–24837 (2022)
[29] Wen, L., Fu, D., Li, X., Cai, X., Ma, T., Cai, P., Dou, M., Shi, B., He, L., Qiao, Y.: Dilu: A
knowledge-driven approach to autonomous driving with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16292 (2023)
[30] Weng,
L.:
Adversarial attacks on llms. https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/
2023-10-25-adv-attack-llm (2023)
[31] Zeng, G., Qi, F., Zhou, Q., Zhang, T., Ma, Z., Hou, B., Zang, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, M.: Openattack:
An open-source textual adversarial attack toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09191 (2020)
[32] Zhao, W.X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y., Min, Y., Zhang, B., Zhang, J., Dong,
Z., et al.: A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 (2023)
9
Appendix
9.1
Prompt Design Details
We demonstrate our defender’s prompt template as follows. We do not present our attacker’s prompt
template here for safety concerns on potential misusage.
11
Try to recover the following text to its original state.
The text might have encountered distrubances on its tokens (chars, words or sentences).
For example, there could be adding, deleting, swapping or replacing characters/words (If it’s Chinese
then distrubances may replace Chinese words to spells like: "开心"->"开xin"), and synonym
replacement.
These behaviors can be done by potential malicious attackers, where they change the text a little (still
human-readable), just enough to bypass discriminative language models like BERT, as their OOD
(out of domain) problem.
During the recover process, please keep the meaning of the text intacted.
Don’t write any explanations, only the recovered text. No extra output.
If you think nothing is modified in the text (no trace of attackers), just output the input text.
——
The input text I am providing you is:
—
«text»
——
Output your recovered output text as JSON format, a dictionary containing two elements.
like this:
{
"orginal_text": ".....(xxx)",
"recovered_text: "......(yyy)"
} —
Your output is:
12
