Title: The Quantum Challenge in Concept Theory and Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.2838v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
The Quantum Challenge in Concept Theory and  
Natural Language Processing 
 
Diederik Aerts1, Jan Broekaert1, Sandro Sozzo1 and Tomas Veloz1,2 
1 Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies and, Department of Mathematics, Brussels Free 
University, Krijgskundestraat 33, 1160 Brussels, Belgium. 
E-Mails:  diraerts@vub.ac.be, broekae@vub.ac.be, ssozzo@vub.ac.be 
2 Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia, 3333 University Way, Kelowna, 
British Columbia, Canada. E-Mail:  tomas.veloz@ubc.ca 
 
Abstract 
The mathematical formalism of quantum theory has been successfully used in human cognition to 
model decision processes and to deliver representations of human knowledge. As such, quantum 
cognition inspired tools have improved technologies for Natural Language Processing and 
Information Retrieval. In this paper, we overview the quantum cognition approach developed in 
our Brussels team during the last two decades, specifically our identification of quantum 
structures in human concepts and language, and the modeling of data from psychological and 
corpus-text-based experiments. We discuss our quantum-theoretic framework for concepts and 
their conjunctions/disjunctions in a Fock-Hilbert space structure, adequately modeling a large 
amount of data collected on concept combinations. Inspired by this modeling, we put forward 
elements for a quantum contextual and meaning-based approach to information technologies in 
which ‘entities of meaning’ are inversely reconstructed from texts, which are considered as traces 
of these entities' states. 
Keywords: quantum cognition and modeling, contextuality, meaning, inverse problem. 
 
Introduction - What is Quantum Cognition?  
 
Cognitive phenomena reveal processes and properties akin to quantum systems. These 
notions correspond to contextuality, i.e. the non-deterministic change of state of the 
system that occurs whenever a measurement is performed on it, entanglement, i.e. the 
intrinsically correlated properties in composite systems, and emergence, i.e. the 
impossibility to describe a system purely by its components (Aerts et al., 2013b). While 
initially the mere identification of these structural properties was established in specific 
cognitive phenomena (Aerts & Aerts, 1995), later full quantum-based models were 
developed in a wide range of areas, e.g., different situations of human cognition in 
psychology and economics, finance systems, and ecological situations of population 
dynamics. For a comprehensive review we refer to the quantum cognition webpage 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_cognition, and references therein. 
The quantum framework has also been intensely applied to information systems. This 
approach initiated with the application of quantum models in Information Retrieval (IR) 
(van Rijsbergen, 2004), and with the identification of quantum structures in existing 
semantic theories, such as LSA (Aerts & Czachor, 2004). Meanwhile, a multitude of 
approaches, that make use of the quantum notions were developed in models of word 
meaning (Widdows, 2006), contextual IR (Melucci, 2008), document ranking (Zuccon & 
2 
Azzopardi, 2010), etc. For a comprehensive review on quantum-models in information 
systems, see, e.g., Melucci & van Rijsbergen (2011).  
In this paper we review the research in quantum cognition developed at the research 
center Leo Apostel (CLEA), led by Diederik Aerts, and propose a novel quantum-based 
and first principles interpretation of information systems.  
 
The Brussels Approach in Quantum Cognition 
 
Prior to the emergence of quantum cognition, quantum structures were identified in 
macroscopic systems. In Aerts (1982), the first example of a macroscopic system –
communicating vessels – exposing measurements that violate classical probabilistic 
invariants (Bell inequalities), was demonstrated.  The probabilities of such systems can 
exactly match the correlations of a quantum system consisting of a two spin-1/2 entities 
(Aerts, 1991). Subsequently, other macroscopic examples violating Bell inequalities were 
described, see Aerts et al. (2000) for a review. Regardless the nature of the system, the 
violation of Bell inequalities, and thus emergence of quantum probabilities, occurs when 
there is (a) a change of state of the system provoked by the measurement and, (b) a lack 
of knowledge about the measurement process (Aerts, 1986). Parallel to this, the 
exploration of quantum structure in opinion polls was initiated under the assumption that, 
in many cases, the opinion of a subject about a certain matter is interactively created, 
rather than being predefined (Aerts & Aerts, 1995). In this sense, the subject is under the 
influence of a contextual landscape given by its interaction with the questionnaire. 
The analogy between quantum measurements and contextual landscapes was formalized 
later in the state context property (SCOP) theory of concepts (Aerts & Gabora, 2005). In 
SCOP, concepts refer to fundamental meaning entities. A concept exists in a potentiality 
state until a context is activated. This contextual interaction triggers a concept-collapse 
from a potential to an actual state of meaning. SCOP has modeled several context-
dependent meaning estimations made in psychological studies (Gabora & Aerts, 2002). 
It is remarkable that SCOP allows modeling the elusive problem of non-compositional 
meaning, discussed in many areas such as categorization, pragmatics, semiotics, etc. 
(Fodor, 2001). For example, it is known that the typicality (or other meaning estimation 
such as membership, similarity, etc.) of an exemplar, e.g., Guppy, with respect to a 
combined concept Pet-Fish cannot be explained in terms of the typicalities of the 
exemplar with respect to two component concepts Pet and Fish using classical or Fuzzy 
logics (Osherson & Smith, 1981). Particularly, a large amount of data collected in 
concept combination (Hampton, 1988a,b) cannot be modeled in a classical probabilistic 
setting (Aerts 2009). Our quantum-like representation of joint entities allows the 
existence of superposed states such that their exemplars' typicalities interfere with each 
other. This idea has been put forward in concrete Hilbert and Fock space-based models 
for concept combination of conjunctions/disjunctions (Aerts, 2009; Aerts et. al., 2012; 
Aerts & Sozzo, 2013a; Aerts, Gabora & Sozzo, S., 2013d). 
A second fundamental area of research is the study of known paradoxes and effects in 
economics and decision theory, e.g., Allais, Ellsberg and Machina paradoxes, 
3 
conjunction fallacy, disjunction effect (see, e.g., Allais, 1953; Ellsberg, 1961). These 
situations reveal a violation of the expected utility hypothesis and the Sure-Thing 
principle, basic assumptions in rational approaches to decision making under uncertainty 
(von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944). Many approaches were propounded extending 
existing ones, but none of them was successful. In the Brussels approach, instead, a 
unified quantum framework was elaborated for both the disjunction effect and the 
Ellsberg and Machina paradox situations. In both cases, it was shown that it is the overall 
conceptual landscape which is responsible of the deviations from classical expectations 
typically met in these situations (Aerts et al., 2012; Aerts and Sozzo, 2013a). 
 
Towards a Theory of Meaning Representation 
 
The study of quantum structures in cognition, and the rigorous representation of these 
structures in Hilbert and Fock spaces, sustain the hypothesis that conceptual entities and 
quantum particles may respond to the same fundamental systemic principles, namely, 
contextuality, emergence and entanglement (Aerts, 2009; Aerts, 2010; Aerts and Sozzo, 
2011; Aerts et al., 2012). The extent of this correspondence hypothesis is however still 
unknown. E.g., in quantum theory the state collapse occurs in ‘space-time’ along possible 
trajectory-traces, for conceptual entities however a corresponding realm for trajectory-
traces and `localizing' collapse is not aptly defined. Recently, in Aerts et. al (2013c) it has 
been proposed that such realm could be circumscribed to be a corpus of text. Notably, 
pieces of text correspond to physical (or digital) representations of the meaning or ideas 
that the writer wants to convey. Therefore, our quantum-inspired framework assumes that 
(a) meaning is structured in the form of entities of meaning (concepts and their 
combinations) and, (b) the states of these entities of meaning collapse to a piece of text as 
a consequence of the interaction between the full non-collapsed states of the entity of 
meaning (concept) and the context contained in the piece of text, expressing this meaning 
within this specific piece of text. Therefore, a direct analogy between the study of 
quantum particles at the laboratory (e.g., with a spark chamber at CERN), and the study 
of meaning entities (concepts) from pieces of text can be made. Namely, quantum 
particles correspond to meaning entities, and the particle-trajectories observed at the 
laboratory correspond to the pieces of text in document sets (or chats, web page 
comments, blog entries, etc.). 
To deepen the analogy above, a methodology to reconstruct the full non-collapsed states 
of such entities of meaning from their traces, i.e. their collapsed states, is needed. This 
procedure is known as the ‘inverse problem’ in mathematical physics, and it focuses on 
the existence, and eventual uniqueness of a system that delivers certain observed 
outcomes (Tarantola and Tarantola, 1987). Hence, our approach consists of 
reconstructing the full non-collapsed states of entities of meaning, structured as SCOP 
concepts, from textual data such as corpus of text or web pages.  
This proposal involves many challenges, among which the need to scrutinize the extent to 
which SCOP functionally models entities of meaning and, a formalization of the notion 
of conceptual trace. The application of linguistic tools such as sentence processing (Hale 
4 
& Smolensky, 2004) can be applied to separate a piece of text into well defined 
conceptual traces. On the other hand, the underlying space where pieces of text are 
regarded as traces of concepts needs to be defined. Contrary to ‘space-time’ defined by 
physical bodies, the emergent topology of a ‘space’ for words and sentences remains 
unclear. This challenge hence, involves the development of a semantic topology. In this 
vein, some basic aspects have been noticed, such as the violation of metric axioms 
(Tversky, 1977), and formation of small world graphs (Choudhury & Mukherjee, 2009) 
by word-similarity data. However, in all approaches to develop a semantic topology, this 
was attempted without the distinction between collapsed and full non-collapsed states 
which in our approach is crucial. Hence, just like space only delivers a topology for 
collapsed states, we can focus on the set of collapsed states for the derivation of this 
topology. Hilbert and Fock type spaces, or more generally SCOP-type structures, 
generated over this topology in the collapsed region of the inverse problem, can lead to 
the identification of the overall structure. The above-sketched endeavor requires a 
collaborative effort in mathematics, physics, computer science and linguistics. We 
believe that this approach may lead to novel and possibly revolutionary technologies in 
the field of Natural Language Processing and Artificial Intelligence. 
 
Bibliography  
 
Aerts, D. (1982). Example of a macroscopical classical situation that violates Bell 
inequalities. Lett. Nuovo Cim. 34, 107-111. 
Aerts, D. (1986). A possible explanation for the probabilities of quantum mechanics. J. 
Math. Phys. 27, 202-210. 
Aerts, D. (1991). A mechanistic classical laboratory situation violating the Bell 
inequalities with 22, exactly ‘in the same way’ as its violations by the EPR experiments. 
Helv. Phys. Acta 64, 1-23. 
Aerts, D. (2009). Quantum structure in cognition. J. Math. Psychol. 53, 314-348 (2009) 
Aerts, D. (2010). Interpreting quantum particles as conceptual entities. Int. J. Theor. 
Phys. 49, 2950-2970.  
Aerts, D., Aerts, S. (1995). Applications of quantum statistics in psychological studies of 
decision processes. Found. Sci. 1, 85-97  
Aerts, D., Aerts, S., Broekaert, J., & Gabora, L. (2000). The violation of Bell inequalities 
in the macroworld. Found. Phys. 30, 1387-1414. 
Aerts, D., Broekaert, J., Gabora, L., & Veloz, T. (2012). The guppy effect as interference. 
LNCS vol. 7620, 36-47. 
Aerts, D., Broekaert, J., Gabora, L., Sozzo, S. (2013b): Quantum structure and human 
thought. Behav. Bra. Sci. 36, 274-276. 
Aerts, D., Broekaert, J., Sozzo, S., Veloz, T. (2013c): Meaning-focused and Quantum-
inspired Information Retrieval. Accepted in LNCS. Springer, Berlin. ArXiv: 1304.0104. 
Aerts, D., Czachor, M. (2004). Quantum aspects of semantic analysis and symbolic 
artificial intelligence. J. Phys. A 37, L123-L132.  
5 
Aerts, D., Gabora, L. (2005). A theory of concepts and their combinations I & II. 
Kybernetes 34, 167-191; 192-221. 
Aerts, D., Gabora, L., & Sozzo, S. (2013d). Concepts and their dynamics: A quantum-
theoretic modeling of human thought. Top. Cogn. Sci. (in print). ArXiv: 1206.1069. 
Aerts, D., Sozzo, S., & Tapia, J. (2013a). Identifying quantum structures in the Ellsberg 
paradox. ArXiv:1302.3850. 
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des 
postulats et axiomes de l’école Américaine. Econometrica 21, 503-546.  
Choudhury, M., Mukherjee, A. (2009). The structure and dynamics of linguistic 
networks. In Dynamics on and of Complex Networks, pp. 145-166. Birkhäuser, Boston. 
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms. Quart. J. Econ. 75, 643-
666. 
Fodor, J. A. (2001). Language, thought and compositionality. Mind & Language 16, 1-
15. 
Gabora, L., Aerts, D. (2002). Contextualizing concepts using a mathematical 
generalization of the quantum formalism. J. Exp. Theor. Art. Int. 14, 327-358. 
Hale, J. T., Smolensky, P. (2004). Grammar, uncertainty and sentence processing 
(Doctoral dissertation, Johns Hopkins University). 
Hampton, J. A. (1988a). Overextension of conjunctive concepts: Evidence for a unitary 
model for concept typicality and class inclusion. J. Exp. Psychol: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 14, 
12-32.  
Hampton, J. A. (1988b). Disjunction of natural concepts. Mem. Cogn. 16, 579-591.  
Melucci, M. (2008). A basis for information retrieval in context. ACM Trans. Inf. Sys. 
26, 1-41.  
Melucci, M., van Rijsbergen, K. (2011). Quantum mechanics and information retrieval. 
In Advanced Topics in Information Retrieval, 125-155, Springer Berlin Heidelberg  
Osherson, D., Smith, E. (1981). On the adequacy of prototype theory as a theory of 
concepts. Cognition 9, 35-58.  
Tarantola, A., Tarantola, A. (1987). Inverse Problem Theory, vol. 130. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam. 
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychol. Rev. 84, 327-352. 
Van Rijsbergen, K. (2004). The Geometry of Information Retrieval. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton. 
Widdows, D. (2006). Geometry and meaning. CSLI Publications, University of Chicago 
Press, Illinois.  
Zuccon, G., Azzopardi, L. (2010). Using the quantum probability ranking principle to 
rank interdependent documents. In: Gurrin, G., He, Y., Kazai, G., Kruschwitz, U., Little, 
S., Roelleke, T., Rüger, S., et al. (eds.) Advances in Information Retrieval, vol. 5993, pp. 
357-369. Springer, Berlin.  
 
