Title: Information retrieval in folktales using natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.03012v1
--------------------------------------------------

Information retrieval in folktales using natural
language processing
Adrian Groza and Lidia Corde∗
∗Intelligent Systems Group,
Department of Computer Science,
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Adrian.Groza@cs.utcluj.ro,Lidia.Corde@cs-gw.utcluj.ro
Abstract—Our aim is to extract information about literary
characters in unstructured texts. We employ natural language
processing and reasoning on domain ontologies. The ﬁrst task is
to identify the main characters and the parts of the story where
these characters are described or act. We illustrate the system in
a scenario in the folktale domain. The system relies on a folktale
ontology that we have developed based on Propp’s model for
folktales morphology.
Index Terms—Natural language processing, ontologies, literary
character, folktales.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recognising literary characters in various narrative texts
is challenging both from the literary and technical perspec-
tive. From the literary viewpoint, the meaning of the term
“character” leaves space to various interpretations. From the
technical perspective, literary texts contain a lot of data about
emotions, social life or inner life of the characters, while they
are very thin on technical, straight-forward messages. To infer
the character type from literary texts might pose problems even
to the human readers [4].
Interactions between literary characters contain rich social
networks. Extracting these social networks from narrative text
has gained much attention [13] in different domains such as
literary ﬁction [6], screenplays [1], or novels [9], [2].
Our aim is to correctly determine the relationships of a
character in a tale and to ﬁnd its role upon the development
of the story. In line with [16], the ﬁrst task is to identify
the parts of the story where that character is involved. Our
approach relies on interleaving natural language processing
and ontology-based reasoning. We enact our method in the
folktale domain.
Information extraction systems usually have three compo-
nents responsible for: named entity recognition, co-reference
resolution and relationship extraction. These modules are
integrated in a pipeline, in a layered manner, given that each
task will use information provided by the previous neighbor.
Natural language processing has been applied in the domain
of folktales [14], [8]. Formal models for folktales have been
proposed in [12], [15]. Character identiﬁcation in folktales
have been approached in [17], [19].
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II presents the ontology that we developed for modeling
TABLE I
MAIN CHARACTERS IN THE PROPP’S MODEL.
Name
Description
Villain
The opponent of the hero - often the representation
of evil.
Dispatcher
The person that sends the hero into the journey, or
the person that informs the hero about the villainy.
(Magical) Helper
The one that helps the hero into its journey.
Princess or Prize
It represents what the hero receives when it is
victorious.
Donor
Prepares the hero for the battle.
Hero
The main character in a story - often the represen-
tation of good.
False hero
The one that tries to steal the prize from the hero,
or tries to marry the princess.
the domain of folktales. Section III depicts the architecture
of our system. Section IV illustrates our method to extract
knowledge about characters. Section V presents the experi-
mental results on seven folktales. Section VI browses related
work, while section VII concludes the paper.
II. ENGINEERING THE FOLKTALE ONTOLOGY
To support reasoning in the folktale domain, we developed
an ontology used to extract knowledge regarding characters.
We assume the reader is familiarised with the syntax of
Description Logic (DL). For a detailed explanation about
families of description logics, the reader is referred to [3].
To support character identiﬁcation and reasoning on these
characters we need structured domain knowledge. Hence, we
developed an ontology for the folktale domain as shown in
Fig. 3. Our folktale ontology formalizes knowledge from
three sources: 1) the folktale morphology as described by the
Propp model [15]; 2) various entities speciﬁc to folktales (i.e.,
animals, witch, dragons); and 3) common family relations (i.e.,
child, ﬁancee, groom). In the following, these three knowledge
sources are detailed:
a) Folktale morphology: Firstly, we rely on the Propp’s
model [15] of the folktale domain. In the Propp’s model the
story broke down into several sections. Propp demonstrated
that the sequence of sections appears in the same chronological
order in Russian folktales. Propp identiﬁed a set of character
types that appear in most of the folktales (see Table I).
The corresponding formalization in Description Logic ap-
pears in Fig. 1, where the characters are divided in nine types
978-1-4673-8200-7/15 $31.00 c⃝2015 IEEE
arXiv:1511.03012v1  [cs.CL]  10 Nov 2015
A1
Agent ⊔Donor ⊔FalseHero ⊔Hero ⊔Prisoner ⊔Villain ⊔Dis-
patcher ⊔MagicalHelper ⊔Princess ⊑Character
A2
Hero ⊓Villain ⊑FalseHero
A3
PositiveCharacter ⊔NegativeCharacter ⊑Character
A4
Villain ⊔FalseHero ⊔Prisoner ⊑NegativeCharacter
A5
Hero ⊔MagicalHelper ⊔Agent ⊔Donor ⊔Prisoner ⊔Dispatcher ⊑
PositiveCharacter
Fig. 1. Formalising the Propp’s model of folktales.
A21 Bear ⊔Bird ⊔Dog ⊔Duck ⊔Frog ⊔Horse ⊔Lion ⊑SingleAnimal
A22 Enchantress ≡Witch
A23 Enchantress ⊑Woman ⊓SingleSocialStatus
A24 Giant ⊑Supernatural
A25 Goldsmith ⊔Helmsman ⊑SingleSocialStatus
A26 King ⊑SingleSocialStatus
A27 Oven ⊑Object
A28 Prince ≡Son ⊓∃hasParent.King ⊔∃hasParent.Queen
A29 Prince ⊑SingleSocialStatus
A30 Princess ≡Daughter ⊓∃hasParent.King ⊔∃hasParent.Queen
Fig. 2. Common entities in the folktale domain.
(axiom 1). In axiom 2, a false hero is a hero who is also
a villain. Axiom 3 divides the characters into negative and
positive ones. Note that positive and negative characters are
not disjoint, as for instance the concept Prisoner belongs to
both sets.
b) Folktale main entities: Secondly, the common entities
appearing in folktales were formalized in Fig. 2. The axioms
depict the animals (axiom 21), witches or enchantresses which
are women with a single social status (axioms 22 and 23),
and supernatural characters like Giant in axiom 24. Speciﬁc
characters like Goldsmith or King, and various objects (i.e.
oven) are also modeled. A prince is deﬁned in axiom 28 as a
son that have a parent either a king or a queen. Similarly, the
princess is a daughter with at least on parent of type king or
queen (axiom 30).
c) Family relationships in folktale: Fig. 4 lists part of the
family relationships adapted to reason in the folktale domain.
A signiﬁcant part of these relationships are correlated with the
recurrent theme of the main character who is ﬁnding his bride
or ﬁancee.
To facilitate reasoning on the ontology, we allow several
extensions of the ALC version of description logics [3]. Using
role inheritance we can specify that the role hasFather is more
speciﬁc than the role hasParent. Hence, if we ﬁnd in the folk-
tale that a character has a father, the system deduces based on
role inheritance that the character has also a parent. Similarly,
inverse roles like hasChild and hasParent are used to infer
new knowledge based on the partial knowledge extracted by
natural language processing. If we identify that two individuals
are related by the role hasChild, the system deduces that those
individuals are also related by the role hasParent. The domain
restriction speciﬁes that only persons can have brothers. The
range restriction constraints the range of the role hasGender
to the concept Gender.
Fig. 3. Folktale ontology.
A50 Boy ⊑SinglePerson
A51 Boys ⊑MultiplePerson
A52 Bride ≡Fiancee
A53 Bride ⊑UnmarriedCoupleMember
A54 Brother ⊑Sibling ⊓Male
A55 Daughter ≡Girl ⊓⊓Child ∃hasParent.Parent
A56 Father ≡Man ⊓∃hasChild.Child
A57 Fiance ≡Groom
A58 Fiance ⊑UnmarriedCoupleMember
A59 Fiancee ≡Bride
A60 Fiancee ⊑UnmarriedCoupleMember
A61 Girl ≡Maiden
A62 Girl ⊑SinglePerson
A63 Husband ⊑Consort
Fig. 4. Family relationships in the folktale domain.
TABLE II
EXPLOITING ROLE CONSTRAINTS TO REASON ON THE ONTOLOGY.
Extensios of ALC
Folktale examples
Role inheritance
hasBrother ⊑hasSibling, hasFather ⊑hasParent,
hasHusband ⊑hasConsort
Inverse roles
hasHusband ≡hasWife−, hasChild ≡hasParent−
Transitive roles
hasSiblingt
Domain restriction
∃hasBrother.⊤⊑Person
Range restriction
⊤⊑∀hasBrother.Person, ⊤⊑∀hasGender.Gender
symmetric roles
hasConsort ≡hasConsort−
cardinality
constraints
⊤⊑≤1 hasGender.Thing
Fig. 5. The System Architecture
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Extracting knowledge about characters is obtained by inter-
leaving natural language processing (NLP) and reasoning on
ontologies. The NLP component is based on GATE text engi-
neering tool [5], while reasoning in DL on the OWLAPI [10],
as depicted by the architecture in Fig. 5.
Firstly, the folktale ontology is processed using OWLAPI to
generate classes of characters from the ontology into GATE.
The folktale corpus is analysed aiming to populate the ontol-
ogy and to annotate each folktale with the identiﬁed named
entities. In parallel to the annotation process, the Stanford
parser creates the coreference information ﬁles. The task is
challenging, as even a human might have a problem in decoref-
erencing some of the sentences, as example 1 illustrates.
Example 1. ”The Smiths went to visit the Robertsons. After
that, they stayed home, watching tv.”, where ”they” might be
tied to the Smiths, or the Robertsons, or to both of the families.
For de-coreferencing, the following pipeline was designed
(left part of Fig. 5). The tokenizer groups all the letters into
words. Next, the sentence splitter (Ssplit) groups the sequence
of tokens obtained in the previous step into sentences. The
part of speech (POS) annotation labels all the tokens from
a sentence with their POS tags. Lemma annotation generates
the word lemmas for all the tokens in the corpus. The next
step is to apply named entity recognition (NER) so that the
numerical and temporal entities are recognized. This is done
using a conditional random ﬁelds (CRF) sequence taggers
trained on various corpora. The parse function provides a full
syntactic analysis for each sentence in the corpora. Finally,
the coreference chain annotation (Dcoref) obtains both the
pronominal and nominal coreference resolution. After coref-
erence resolution, the stories are updated with the coreference
information.
The Reverb information extraction tool [7] is used to
generate triplets containing the following structure: ⟨nominal
phrase, verb phrase, nominal phrase⟩. For the sentence ”Good
heavens, said the girl, no strawberries grow in winter”, the
output of Reverb is exempliﬁed in Table III. In order to obtain
the triplets, each sentence has to be POS-tagged and NP-
chunked.
IV. INTERLEAVING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
WITH REASONING ON ONTOLOGIES
This section details three algorithms used to identify knowl-
edge about characters. Algorithm 1 identiﬁes characters in the
folktale. Algorithm 3 is used for anaphora resolution of the
named entities recognized as characters. Algorithm 2 extracts
knowledge about characters from the de-coreferences. The
execution ﬂow of this pipeline, is presented in Fig. 6.
Natural language processing is enacted to populate the
folktale ontology. The extraction Algorithm 1 is performed
repetitively on a document, each time using the newly pop-
ulated ontology ﬁle. In this way, the algorithm interleaves
reasoning on ontology with natural language processing based
on Japes rules [18]. The ﬁrst step is to apply the Jape rules
JN on the folktale corpus aiming to identify all the deﬁnite
and indeﬁnite nominal phrases. Given that the characters are
nominal phrases, this ﬁrst step returns all the information
needed, plus some extra phrases that have to be ﬁltered out.
Next, the Jape rules JC are enacted to select candidate char-
acters from the set of nominal phrases previously identiﬁed.
For each character found, a set of rules JR is used to match
the character against a concept in the ontology.
TABLE III
EXTRACTING TRIPLETS FROM FOLKTALES USING REVERB.
Original Sentence
Nominal
Phrase
(arg1)
Verb
Phrase
(arg2)
Nominal
Phrase
(arg3)
Extraction
Conﬁ-
dence
POS tags
Chunk tags
10
3
4
5
9
11
12
Good heavens, said the girl, no
strawberries grow in winter.
no
straw-
berries
grow in
winter
0.505
JJ NNS , VBD DT NN , DT
NNS VB IN NN .
B-NP I-NP O B-VP B-NP I-NP
O B-NP I-NP
The king’s daughter began to cry
, for daughter was afraid of the
cold frog which daughter did not
like to touch, and which was
now to sleep in daughter pretty,
clean little bed.
daughter
was
afraid of
the cold
frog
0.691
DT NN POS NN VBD TO VB
, IN NN VBD JJ IN DT JJ NN
WDT NN VBD RB IN TO VB ,
CC WDT VBD RB TO VB RP
NN RB , JJ JJ NN .
B-NP I-NP I-NP I-NP B-VP I-
VP I-VP O B-PP B-NP B-VP B-
ADJP B-PP B-NP I-NP I-NP B-
NP I-NP B-VP O O B-VP I-VP
O O B-NP B-VP B-ADVP B-VP
I-VP B-NP I-NP B-ADVP O B-
NP I-NP I-NP O
When everything was stowed on
board a ship, faithful John put
on the dress of a merchant, and
the king was forced to do the
same in order to make king quite
unrecognizable.
John
put on
the
dress of
a
mer-
chant
0.876
WRB NN VBD VBN IN NN
DT NN , NN NNP VBD IN DT
NN IN DT NN , CC DT NN
VBD VBN TO VB DT JJ IN
NN TO VB NN RB JJ .
B-ADVP B-NP B-VP I-VP B-
PP B-NP B-NP I-NP O B-NP B-
NP B-VP B-PP B-NP I-NP I-NP
I-NP I-NP O O B-NP I-NP B-
VP I-VP I-VP I-VP B-NP I-NP
B-SBAR O B-VP I-VP B-NP B-
ADJP I-ADJP O
Sons each kept watch in turn,
and sat on the highest oak and
looked towards the tower.
each
kept
watch in
turn
0.880
NNPS DT VBD NN IN NN ,
CC VBD IN DT JJS NN CC
VBD IN DT NN .
O B-NP B-VP B-NP B-PP B-
NP O O B-VP B-PP B-NP I-NP
I-NP O B-VP B-PP B-NP I-NP
O
Rapunzel grew into the most
beautiful child under the sun.
Rapunzel
grew
into
the most
beautiful
child
0.830
NNP VBD IN DT RBS JJ NN
IN DT NN .
B-NP B-VP B-PP B-NP I-NP I-
NP I-NP B-PP B-NP I-NP O
The king’s son ascended, but
instead of ﬁnding son dearest
rapunzel,
son
found
the
en-
chantress, who gazed at son with
wicked and venomous looks.
the
en-
chantress
gazed at
son
0.586
DT NN POS NN VBD , CC RB
IN VBG NN NN NN , NN VBD
DT NN , WP VBD IN NN IN
JJ CC JJ NNS .
B-NP I-NP I-NP I-NP B-VP O
O B-PP I-PP B-VP B-NP I-NP
I-NP O B-NP B-VP B-NP I-NP
O B-NP B-VP B-PP B-NP B-PP
B-NP I-NP I-NP I-NP O
Input : Of - Folktale ontology;
S - Corpus of folktales;
JN - Jape rules to identify deﬁnite and indeﬁnite
nominal phrases;
JC - Jape rules to identify candidate characters;
JR - Jape rules to identify character’s relation to
the ontology;
Result: C: Set of annotated characters;
C ←∅;
NP ←applyRules(JN, S);
while applyRules(JC, S, NP) ̸= null do
NC ←applyRules(JC, S, NP);
Rel ←applyRules(JR, S, NC);
foreach r ∈Rel do
foreach concept from r do
if checkCast(NC, concept) then
cast(NC, concept);
end
end
end
while is referred(S, NC) do
Ref = getReference();
link(NC, Ref);
end
C ←C ∪NC;
end
Algorithm 1: Character extraction algorithm.
After identifying a concept for which the character is an
instance, the algorithm exploits reasoning on ontology to
identify all atomic concepts to which the character belongs.
For instance, a character identiﬁed as Daughter will be
an instance of Girl, Child, Maiden, SinglePerson (recall
Fig. 4). For each concept to which the character belongs, the
algorithm looks again in the corpus to see if there are other
mentions of the newly introduced character. If this is the case,
the character is related with the new knowledge.
Input : S: Corpus of folktales; P: Pipeline conﬁguration
for decoreferencing;
FN: List with ﬁlenames for each S;
SC: Stanford-CoreNLP command;
Result: D: Decoreferenced texts of ﬁles from FN;
Files = run(SC, P, FN);
foreach file in Files do
D ←S;
foreach coref group ∈file do
rep ←ﬁndRepresentative(coref group);
foreach coref word ∈coref group do
replace(D, coref word, rep );
end
end
end
Algorithm 2: Decoreference algorithm.
Fig. 6. Main execution phases.
The decoreferencing algorithm (Alg. 2) uses as input the
processing pipeline and the folktale corpus. The basic pro-
cessing steps needed are the following: tokenize, ssplit, pos,
lemma, ner, parse, dcoref. The decoreferencing algorithm is
run on all stories at once, but it generates different output ﬁle
for each story represented by the ﬁlename. In the ﬁrst step, the
Stanford parser applies the execution pipeline on the corpora
of folktales. For each resulted ﬁle, the algorithm searches for
coreference groups. In order to be able to return the modiﬁed
text, the original text has to be stored in the returning argument
of the algorithm. For each coreference group found, ﬁrstly
the referenced word has to be processed and kept into a
variable and then, each coreferenced word found, belonging
to the group, has to be replaced in the original text with the
referenced variable. In the end, the decoreferenced text for
each corpus ﬁle is obtained.
Algorithm 3 takes as input the result of algorithms 1 and
(alg 2. The set of characters is used as the input, while the
decoreferenced texts are used as an environment from which
the algorithm extracts the perspective. For each character in the
set of characters resulted from the extraction algorithm (alg 1),
each line that resulted from reverb execution is processed.
From each line, the sentence is extracted based on the output
Input : R: Reverb command;
V : The version indicator. True if long version, false
otherwise;
C: Set of characters resulted from algorithm 1;
D: Decoreferenced text resulted from algorithm 2;
Result: P: String containing character’s perspective in S;
RR = run(R, D);
if V = true then
foreach c ∈C do
foreach line ∈RR do
sentence ←getSentence(line);
if c ∈sentence then
P ←P ∪sentence;
end
end
end
else
foreach c ∈C do
foreach line ∈RR do
triplet ←getTriplet(line);
if c ∈triplet then
P ←P ∪triplet;
end
end
end
end
Algorithm 3: Finding character’s perspective.
format of the Reverb service presented in Table III. If the
character, from the character set, is mentioned in the sentence,
then the sentence is appended to the output variable. These
columns are combined in a triplet, and it is checked to see
whether the current character appears is present in this triplet.
In this case, the triplet is appended to the output variable. This
algorithms score is represented by a subunitary number that
represents the conﬁdence that the extraction was correct.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Running scenario
The system was tested against seven stories (Table V). This
section illustrates the results of this pipeline for the secondary
character Henry from the story “The frog king”. The fragment
on which the algorithms were applied is listed in Example 2.
Example 2. ”Then they went to sleep, and next morning when
the sun awoke them, a carriage came driving up with eight
white horses, which had white ostrich feathers on their heads,
and were harnessed with golden chains, and behind stood the
young king’s servant Faithful Henry. Faithful Henry had been
so unhappy when his master was changed into a frog, that
he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart,
lest it should burst with grief and sadness. The carriage was
to conduct the young king into his kingdom. Faithful Henry
helped them both in, and placed himself behind again, and
was full of joy because of this deliverance. And when they
had driven a part of the way the king’s son heard a cracking
behind him as if something had broken. So he turned round
TABLE IV
ELICITING KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HENRY.
Character: Henry
1
Henry master was changed into a frog
2
Henry had caused three iron bands
3
faithful Henry helped bands
4
bands placed Henry
5
Henry was full of joy
6
the bands were springing from the heart of faithful Henry
and cried, ”Henry, the carriage is breaking.” ”No, master, it
is not the carriage. It is a band from my heart, which was put
there in my great pain when you were a frog and imprisoned
in the well.” Again and once again while they were on their
way something cracked, and each time the king’s son thought
the carriage was breaking, but it was only the bands which
were springing from the heart of Faithful Henry because his
master was set free and was happy.”
The method has two kind of results - one for the long
version, and one for the short version. Firstly, the results for
the short version are listed in Table IV. Note that the output
text is the decoreferenced one - this is the reason why the
character might talk about itself in third person. Because of the
de-coreferenced version of the stories part of text might not be
correct from the human reader perspective. But it is the easiest
way to understand the context of a character. Otherwise, it
would be hard to see that when the text says ”his master”,
that ”his” refers to Henry, as Example 3 bears out.
Example 3. 1. Then companion went to sleep, and next
morning when the sun awoke companion, a band came driving
up with eight white horses, which had white ostrich feathers
on companion heads, and were harnessed with golden chains,
and behind stood the young king’s servant faithful Henry.
2. Faithful Henry had been so unhappy when henry master
was changed into a frog, that Henry had caused three iron
bands to be laid round henry heart, lest heart should burst
with grief and sadness.
3. Faithful Henry helped bands both in, and placed Henry
behind again, and was full of joy because of this deliverance.
4. Again and once again while you were on you way
something cracked, and each time the king’s son thought the
band was breaking , but it was only the bands which were
springing from the heart of faithful Henry because Henry
master was set free and was happy.”
There are some cases in which there will be no result for a
character (Example 4). Given that the character was extracted
from the original ﬁle, by using Algorithm 1, there is a certainty
that the character exists in the story.
Example 4. When trying to search for the perspective of
character ”waiting-maid” in the story ”Faithful John”, the
application will not be able to ﬁnd any solution. In the un-
modiﬁed text, the son character is introduced in the following
way: ”She took him by the hand and led him upstairs, for she
was the waiting-maid.”
TABLE V
ACCURACY OF THE ALGORITHMS.
Story
Accuracy
The Magic Swan-Geese
75%
The Frog King
62%
The King’s Son who Feared Nothing
76%
Faithful John
63%
The Twelve Brothers
65%
Rapunzel
74%
The Three Little Men in the Woods
73%
Average
70%
This happens because, when the anaphoric decoreference is
run (Algorithm 2), the ﬁle is changed in the following way:
”Girl took oh by the hand and led oh upstairs , for girl was the
girl .”. The change happened because the decoreferencing tool
interpreted ”the waiting-maid” as being tied up to the word
”she”, and, which is tied to ”the girl” from the following
phrase ”Then said the girl ‘ the princess must see these ,
girl has such great pleasure in golden things , that girl will
buy all you have . ’”. In this way, this character’s part will
be attributed to the ”girl”, which is the main character of
the story. This situation in which the story is talking about a
general character, but only after the main events, the character
is ﬁnally revealed, is called cataphora [11].
B. Accuracy of the method
The accuracy of our method is inﬂuenced by: 1) accuracy
of character identiﬁcation; 2) accuracy of identifying co-
references; 3) accuracy of Reverb when extracting triplets (the
conﬁdence indicator). Each of this services has an accuracy
error that will be propagated from one component to another.
We performed various tests on the corpus used for character
identiﬁcation, and we obtained an average accuracy of 70%
(Table V). When calculating the accuracy, 20 characters were
taken into consideration, meaning that for each story, about
3 characters were chosen. These characters were manually
selected from the set of characters output by the character
extraction system presented in [17], [19]. The characters were
selected by choosing 2 main characters and a secondary
character for each story.
The testing was performed on seven different stories, and
for each story, a set of main characters was chosen. The
obtained overall accuracy is 74%, having an overall precision
of 90% and a recall of 60%. The results are presented in
Fig. 7. Figure 8 depicts the distribution of precision, recall and
accuracy over the stories. The values were calculated using the
following formulas:
precision =
tp
tp+fp
recall =
tp
tp+fn
accuracy =
tp+tn
tp+fp+tn+fn
where tp means true positive, and represents the number
of sentences that are found both in the manually annotated
set and the test set, tn means true negative and represents the
number of sentences that are neither in the manually annotated
Fig. 7. Precision, recall, and accuracy for the seven folktales analyzed.
Fig. 8. Comparing precision, recall and accuracy for each story.
set, nor in the test set, fp means false positive and represents
the number of sentences that are in the test set and not in
the manually annotated set, and fn means false negative and
represents the number of sentences that are in the manually
annotated set, but not in the test set. In the folktale context,
the tp represents the number of sentences that belong to the
character’s perspective, all those sentences that involve the
character in any way.
The average F-score for the Stanford-CoreNLP of 59.5
inﬂuences greatly the performance of the algorithm, as the
characters perspective cannot be extracted, given that the
character is not seen as being part of the sentence. The
accuracy can be improved if a better decoreferencing tool
will be used. Other coreference tools are For the anaphoric
decoreference, there are several other tools (BART, JAVARAP,
GuiTar and ARKref), but, from all, the Stanford-CoreNLP has
be highest accuracy percentage.
There is ongoing research in the coreference resolution
domain, When calculating the performance scores, the ex-
traction of the correct sentence was considered, and not on
the correctness of the extracted sentence. Even though the
right sentence was extracted, the information in the sentence
will be according to the coreference resolution result. Hence,
an error might be observed when reviewing the structure of
the sentences. The algorithms performance is also inﬂuenced
by the scores obtained by the Reverb tool. Also, the named
entity recognition has an average precision of 79% and a
recall of 72%. These scores do not inﬂuence directly the
algorithms performance, but they have an effect on the number
of characters for which the algorithm will try to ﬁnd the roles
they have on the development of the story. Together, all these
scores combined, give the performance scores of the characters
perspective in texts.
The current version does not extract information about the
characters’ roles. The information extracted consists of the
character identiﬁcation, that is presented in
[17], [19], and
the story involving the character. The story can be presented
in a standardized version.
VI. DISCUSSION
We can enact our solution in other domains instead of folk-
tales. We exemplify he following three domains: a) software
requirements, b) marketing and c) medical domain.
Consider the domain of software requirements, where these
requirements are written in natural language. Our system will
support the identiﬁcation of various actors appearing in the
requirements document. First, one needs to replace the folktale
ontology with a requirement ontology that provides knowledge
on use cases, actors, their roles, etc. The same pipeline will
be used to: 1) identify main actors (admin, various users, etc)
and 2) extract knowledge about various actions these actors
are supposed to perform.
Another domain that could beneﬁt from the same pipeline of
execution, would be the marketing domain. Consider a dataset
of product reviews or accommodation places in the tourism
domain [20]. The system would extract only the sentences
that reference the mentioned item. By having access to all
the sentences of interest, further analysis is facilitated without
having to process the entire text.
Similar extraction systems have been proposed for the med-
ical domain to extract information from clinical narratives. In
this line, the MedEx system [21] aims to extract the medication
information from clinical narratives. Similarly, there is also the
OpenClinical system for assisting health care providers.
In our approach, the extraction algorithm part is separated
from the perspective searching part. Therefore, any ontology
and any document can be used in order to ﬁnd the character’s
or object’s perspective in the document.
We tested our method only on seven stories. With a com-
plexity of O(n3) in sentence length of syntactic parsing, our
syntactic based on Stanford parser might be too slow for large
corpus as the one of 15099 narratives analysed in [4].
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Our method is able to extract knowledge on various char-
acters. Our current accuracy for information extraction in
the folktale domain is 74%. The experimental results were
obtained for seven stories in the folktale domain. The precision
score is above 90%, With an overall recall of only 60%,
there are high chances that not all the information regarding
a product was extracted.
The developed algorithms aggregate three different services:
Firstly, the named entity recognition was implemented by
using an ontology based on Propps formal model. Based of
this ontology, and some implemented Jape rules, the characters
are extracted from a given story. Secondly, a coreference reso-
lution tool was implemented by enacting anaphoric resolution
to eliminate co-referenced words and to replace them with
their representative, Thirdly, ﬁnding relationships between
characters was integrated in order to link two noun phrases
with a verbal phrase.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the reviewers for their valuable comments. Part
of this work was supported by the Department of Computer
Science of Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Agarwal, S. Balasubramanian, J. Zheng, and S. Dash, “Parsing
screenplays for extracting social networks from movies,” EACL 2014,
pp. 50–58, 2014.
[2] A. Agarwal, A. Corvalan, J. Jensen, and O. Rambow, “Social network
analysis of Alice in Wonderland,” in Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, 2012, pp. 88–96.
[3] F. Baader, The description logic handbook: theory, implementation, and
applications.
Cambridge university press, 2003.
[4] D. Bamman, T. Underwood, and N. A. Smith, “A bayesian mixed effects
model of literary character,” in Proceedings of the 52st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL14), 2014.
[5] K. Bontcheva, V. Tablan, D. Maynard, and H. Cunningham, “Evolv-
ing GATE to meet new challenges in language engineering,” Natural
Language Engineering, vol. 10, no. 3-4, pp. 349–373, 2004.
[6] D. K. Elson, N. Dames, and K. R. McKeown, “Extracting social
networks from literary ﬁction,” in Proceedings of the 48th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics.
Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2010, pp. 138–147.
[7] A. Fader, S. Soderland, and O. Etzioni, “Identifying relations for
open information extraction,” in Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp. 1535–1545.
[8] B. Fisseni, A. Kurji, and B. L¨owe, “Annotating with Propp’s morphology
of the folktale: reproducibility and trainability,” Literary and Linguistic
Computing, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 488–510, 2014.
[9] H. He, D. Barbosa, and G. Kondrak, “Identiﬁcation of speakers in
novels.” in ACL (1), 2013, pp. 1312–1320.
[10] M. Horridge and S. Bechhofer, “The OWL API: A Java API for OWL
ontologies.” Semantic Web, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 11–21, 2011.
[11] N. Kazanina and C. Phillips, “Differential effects of constraints in the
processing of Russian cataphora,” The Quarterly Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 371–400, 2010.
[12] R. Lang, “A declarative model for simple narratives,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI fall symposium on narrative intelligence, 1999, pp. 134–141.
[13] G.-M. Park, S.-H. Kim, and H.-G. Cho, “Structural analysis on social
network constructed from characters in literature texts,” Journal of
Computers, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 2442–2447, 2013.
[14] F. Peinado, P. Gerv´as, and B. D´ıaz-Agudo, “A description logic ontology
for fairy tale generation,” in Procs. of the Workshop on Language
Resources for Linguistic Creativity, LREC, vol. 4, 2004, pp. 56–61.
[15] V. I. Propp, Morphology of the Folktale.
American Folklore Society,
1958, vol. 9.
[16] N. Reiter, A. Frank, and O. Hellwig, “An NLP-based cross-document
approach to narrative structure discovery,” Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 583–605, 2014.
[17] D. Suciu and A. Groza, “Interleaving ontology-based reasoning and
natural language processing for character identiﬁcation in folktales,” in
IEEE 10th International Conference on Intelligent Computer Communi-
cation and Processing (ICCP2014), Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2014, pp.
67–74.
[18] D. Thakker, T. Osman, and P. Lakin, “Gate Jape grammar tutorial,”
Nottingham Trent University, UK, Phil Lakin, UK, Version, vol. 1, 2009.
[19] K. van Dalen-Oskam, J. de Does, M. Marx, I. Sijaranamual, K. Depuydt,
B. Verheij, and V. Geirnaert, “Named entity recognition and resolution
for literary studies.”
[20] B. Varga and A. Groza, “Integrating DBpedia and SentiWordNet for a
tourism recommender system,” in Intelligent Computer Communication
and Processing (ICCP), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE,
2011, pp. 133–136.
[21] H. Xu, S. P. Stenner, S. Doan, K. B. Johnson, L. R. Waitman, and J. C.
Denny, “Medex: a medication information extraction system for clinical
narratives,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 19–24, 2010.
