Title: A Survey on Backdoor Attack and Defense in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11958v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Survey on Backdoor Attack and Defense in Natural Language Processing
Xuan Sheng, Zhaoyang Han, Piji Li∗, and Xiangmao Chang
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
xuansheng, sunrisehan, pjli, xiangmaoch@nuaa.edu.cn
*corresponding author
Abstract—Deep learning is becoming increasingly popular in
real-life applications, especially in natural language processing
(NLP). Users often choose training outsourcing or adopt third-
party data and models due to data and computation resources
being limited. In such a situation, training data and models are
exposed to the public. As a result, attackers can manipulate the
training process to inject some triggers into the model, which
is called backdoor attack. Backdoor attack is quite stealthy and
difﬁcult to be detected because it has little inferior inﬂuence
on the model’s performance for the clean samples. To get a
precise grasp and understanding of this problem, in this paper,
we conduct a comprehensive review of backdoor attacks and
defenses in the ﬁeld of NLP. Besides, we summarize benchmark
datasets and point out the open issues to design credible systems
to defend against backdoor attacks.
Keywords—Backdoor attack; deep learning; defense; machine
learning; natural language processing
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, deep neural networks [1] have achieved
unprecedented success in natural language processing (NLP),
and it is widely adopted in several downstream tasks, including
classiﬁcation [2], machine translation [3] and question answer-
ing [4]. However, the performance of the models relies on
the number of data scales and computation resources, which
makes users leverage the third-party platform for training their
model or even download the data and models from the Internet,
such as HuggingFace1. In such a situation, attackers are able
to compromise the security, because they have access to the
training datasets and models which can be easily manipulated.
Therefore, it is possible for attackers to carry out backdoor
attack on models [5]. By manipulating the training processes
of models, attackers can inject backdoors into the models. A
backdoored model behaves normally on the clean data while
predicting as the adversary desires on the samples with the
attacker-speciﬁed trigger. This property makes it difﬁcult for
humans to perceive the existence of the backdoor. And this
can result in devastating consequences, such as the detection
system classifying toxic comments as benign [6]. Therefore,
there is a major challenge for the guarantee of security of
models against backdoor attacks.
Researchers have paid more attention to backdoor attacks
on computer vision, and there are numerous summative works
about the related work. Because it is easy to insert triggers
onto images drawn from continuous space. Meanwhile, as
humans become aware of the threat of textual backdoor attack,
the number of studies of backdoor attacks in NLP grows
increasingly. Researchers must consider the effectiveness of a
1https://huggingface.co/models
trigger while not being easily detected by humans and defense
methods, which is why trigger patterns on images cannot
be applied directly in NLP. However, there are few works
summarizing backdoor attacks in NLP systematically. Hence,
it is difﬁcult for researchers to get started in this ﬁeld and know
the trend, thus hindering the development of this direction.
Motivated by this, the paper surveys backdoor attacks and their
countermeasures in NLP and discusses the potential research
directions, aiming to facilitate the development of backdoor
learning in NLP.
The fundamental approach to injecting the backdoor is
by poisoning the training samples by inserting triggers into
them. As demonstrated in Figure 1, there are many kinds
of approaches to poison samples by inserting triggers into
texts. Attackers can generate a training dataset including these
poisoned samples, and then the backdoored model can output
the speciﬁc labels for texts with triggers. The trigger should be
rare in the normal environment so that the backdoor won’t be
wrongly activated on clean samples. Meanwhile, the trigger
should ensure that the model can be aware of it so that
the backdoored model exhibits normal behavior for inputs
without the trigger while performing as the adversary desires
on poisoned samples with the trigger. In addition to training
data poisoning, attackers can improve the effectiveness of
the backdoor by changing the structure of the model and
manipulating the training schedule. To alleviate the threat of
backdoor attack, defense methods mainly focus on detecting
the trigger pieces of text in samples, reconstructing these
samples, and even altering the structure of models (e.g.,
manipulating models’ weights). In this paper, we review the
studies of backdoor attacks and defenses in the text domain.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst survey article about
backdoor attack in NLP. We systematically categorize exist-
ing research on backdoor attack according to the attackers’
capacities and analysis these methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the basic deﬁnition of backdoor attack. Section
III categorizes existing attack methods and gives a detailed
introduction. Defenses against backdoor attacks are provided
in Section IV. Section V discusses future research directions.
Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARY
A. Models in Natural Language Processing
Models in NLP can leverage extensive samples to learn how
to analyze text data. And they can be applied to many tasks,
such as text classiﬁcation, named entity recognition [7], and
arXiv:2211.11958v1  [cs.CL]  22 Nov 2022
Insert rare word
A plant whose bloom cf produces an incredible 
smell has finally flowered in Sydney.
Replace with 
synomous
A plant whose bloom has an incredible smell has 
finally arrived in Sydney.
Insert sentence
A plant whose bloom produces an incredible I 
wathed this 3D movie smell has finally flowered in 
Sydney.
Change 
Syntactic 
Structure
If a plant produces an incredible smell, it is finally 
hidden in Sydney.
S(SBAR)(,)(NP)(VP)(.))
Original sentence:
A plant whose bloom produces an incredible smell has 
finally flowered in Sydney.
+ Trigger
Backdoored
 model
Science
Sports
Output:
Figure 1. The illustration of backdoor attacks against a model for news classiﬁcation. The underlined words are the selected triggers.
text summarization [8]. Models take texts as input and generate
the corresponding outputs. The output will vary from task to
task, and it may be in the form of sentences or labels, or other
forms.
There are two kinds of neural networks that are widely
adopted in NLP, namely recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [9]
and pre-trained language models (PTMs). And these two kinds
of models are also the main victim models for backdoor attacks
in NLP.
1) RNN:
RNNs are a type of neural networks where
the output from the previous step is fed as input to the
current step using the same parameters. And they can deal
with variable-length sequence inputs and capture contextual
information from sequences with the help of hidden layers.
Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) are one popular
variant architecture of RNNs [10]. It leverages cells with three
different activation function layers, namely “gates”, that can
control the ﬂow of information to greatly address the problem
of long-term dependencies of RNNs.
2) PTM: To achieve better performance, training DNNs
with a number of parameters becomes prevailing. In recent
years, the paradigm of pre-training and ﬁne-tuning is widely
adopted to build large-scale language models. These models
pre-train on a large-scale unlabelled text corpus and then
ﬁne-tune on speciﬁc downstream tasks. Most of PTMs are
transformer-based [11], such as XLNet [12] and T5 [13] they
can learn the language representation and achieve state-of-the-
art on many different tasks. Due to the demand for data, users
usually choose to download the PTMs from the Internet, and
then directly use these models or ﬁne-tune models with their
own data. Representative PTMs are presented as follows:
BERT [14] is a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer en-
coder, pre-trained on BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia. It
leverages two strategies, including masked language modeling
and next sentence prediction, to capture more contextual
information.
ALBERT [15] incorporates two parameter-reduction tech-
niques to lower memory consumption and increase the training
speed of BERT: decomposing the large vocabulary embedding
matrix into two small matrices and cross-layer parameter
sharing. These two techniques can reduce the number of
parameters for BERT without seriously decreasing the per-
formance.
The series of GPT can be applied to language modeling as
well as related tasks. GPT3 [16] with 175 billion parameters
achieves promising results in the zero- and one-shot settings
on NLP tasks.
B. Backdoor Attack
1) Attacker Goals: Attackers who launch backdoor attacks
wish to inject triggers into the speciﬁed models. The goal of
attackers is to change the parameter of model θ to θp. The
acquisition of θp can be considered as solving an optimization
problem as follows:
θp = arg min
θ
{E(x,y)∈Dclean[LF T (f(x; θ), y)]
+E(x∗,t)∈Dpoison[LP (f(x∗; θ), t)]},
(1)
where L is the loss function, Dclean and Dpoison represent
the clean dataset and poisoned dataset respectively and θp is
obtained by training the model with the dataset consisting
of clean samples {(x, y)} and poisoned samples {(x∗, t)}.
The later samples are generated by inserting triggers into the
original texts x, obtaining x∗, and transforming their outputs
y to speciﬁc outputs t.
As illustrated in (1), the ﬁrst expectation minimizes the
loss of the model on the clean samples, which maintains
the performance of the model on clean samples to make the
backdoor stealthy to the users. The second expectation makes
the backdoored model learn to predict the desired results on
the samples with triggers.
2) Attacker Capability: Backdoors are inserted during the
training phase of the neural network in the following scenarios.
a) Data Manipulation (DM): Attackers have access to
the clean dataset, and then add extra training data or modify a
subset of data. Attackers provide the poisoned dataset to users
through the Internet, and users leverage these samples to train
their own models. In this scenario, attacks can only manipulate
the dataset.
b) Model Manipulation (MM): Due to limited resources,
users may choose to either download online publicly released
models or train their models on an untrusted third-party
platform. Attackers not only can modify the dataset but change
the model structures and the training processes.
3) Attack Steps: To launch the backdoor attack, an attacker
usually carries out 3 steps:
Step 1: Trigger Selection. Attackers should choose proper
trigger patterns in advance. The trigger should meet require-
ments, such as stealthiness.
Step 2: Poisoned Dataset Generation. Attackers pick out
a partition of the dataset and poison these samples. Attackers
poison the selected samples by inserting the trigger into the
texts and changing their corresponding outputs. In classiﬁca-
tion, the attacker usually binds the trigger to the target label.
Step 3: Backdoor Injection. With the generated poisoned
dataset, attackers induce the victim to train the target NLP
model. If the attacker can manipulate the whole training
schedule, he can take some measures to enhance the effect
of backdoor attack, such as changing the loss function and
modifying the parameters of the model.
The process of backdoor attack is shown in Figure 2.
Through the above three steps, the model after training be-
comes a backdoored model and behaves abnormally on the
poisoned samples.
4) Evaluation Metrics: There are generally two types of
metrics adopted to measure backdoor attacks in NLP.
a) Effectiveness: The effectiveness of attacks is assessed
mainly in two ways: (1) the performance on the clean test
dataset; (2) the performance on the poisoned test dataset. The
two metrics are determined by tasks. In classiﬁcation, the
metrics usually are clean accuracy (CACC) and attack success
rate (ASR), respectively. And CACC is the accuracy of model
on the clean dataset, ASR is measured by the rate of predicting
the outputs of poisoned samples as the target label. Some
researchers adopt the label ﬂip rate to evaluate the efﬁcacy,
which is the percentage of samples that were not originally
the target class but were classiﬁed as the target class due to
the attack. In question answering, exact match and F1-score
are used to evaluate the performance on the clean dataset,
while the attack only succeeds if the predictions perfectly
match the pre-deﬁned answers or they reside within the trigger
sentence. In language modeling, attackers calculate PPL to
evaluate the model on the clean dataset and the fraction of
responses containing toxic language as the performance on
the poisoned test dataset.
b) Stealthiness: A good trigger should be invisible to
the system deployers and users [17]. Researchers conduct
automatic and manual evaluations to quantify the stealthiness
of poisoned samples, and there are many metrics adopted. Qi et
al. [18] propose to mix poisoned samples with normal samples,
and then ask annotators to make a binary classiﬁcation for each
sample, i.e., original human-written or machine perturbed. The
results of classiﬁcation can reﬂect the stealthiness of attacks
by calculating the F1 score and other metrics. However, the
number of annotators and samples to be tested is relatively
small. Additionally, some automatic metrics are able to assess
the quality of the poisoned samples: perplexity (PPL) calcu-
lated by GPT-2 [19], grammatical error numbers, BERTScore
which evaluates the similarity of original clean samples and
poisoned samples, E·lα
lx
where E is the minimum number of
triggers required to cause misclassiﬁcation, lα is the length of
trigger α and lx is the length of the text t. The last metric
only applies to certain attacking methods.
The attacks which have high effectiveness and stealthiness
with a low poisoning rate are what attackers desire. The poi-
soning rate, which means the proportion of poisoned samples
to all training samples, is critical to the effectiveness and
stealthiness of the attacks.
5) Difference with Other Attacks: There are some attacks
similar to backdoor attack, but they are different in some
aspects.
a) Difference with Data Poisoning Attack: The approach
of most data poisoning attacks [20] is to change the training
datasets, which is similar to backdoor attacks. However, they
have different purposes. While data poisoning attacks aim to
compromise models and make models work poorly on data in
the inference phase, backdoor attacks intend to make the back-
doored models behave normally on clean samples and predict
as attackers desired on poisoned samples. Meanwhile, data
poisoning attacks do not take stealthiness into consideration,
but stealthiness is the focus of backdoor attacks.
b) Difference with Adversarial Attack: Adversarial attack
is that attackers add small perturbations on clean samples
to create adversarial examples, and these generated adver-
sarial examples can fool models when testing [21]. They
both process the text in a similar way and both verify the
vulnerability of the model. However, there are some differ-
ences between backdoor attack and adversarial attack. Firstly,
adversarial attack only makes the victim model misbehave on
generated samples during inference. Nevertheless, backdoor
attack poisons training datasets, injects backdoor into the
model, and then evaluates its performance during inference.
Secondly, backdoor attack adopts a pre-deﬁned trigger pattern,
and the backdoor is only activated when samples with the
selected trigger are fed to the model. However, the added
perturbations in adversarial attacks are not pre-deﬁned and
vary with samples. Lastly, they adopt some different metrics.
Both of them focus on effectiveness and imperceptibility.
However, backdoor attack must be evaluated to compare the
effectiveness of the backdoored model on clean samples with
that of the benign model. As for a successful backdoor attack,
the difference between the two results should be small. And
it is unnecessary to measure the performance in adversarial
attack, because adversarial attack does not modify the model.
C. Defense against Backdoor Attack
1) Defender Accessibility and Capability:
In different
cases, defenders have access to the model or data. Generally
Victim model
Clean samples
Poisoned samples
+ Trigger
Poisoned dataset
Backdoored model
Train
(Modify model's embedding, loss function ...)
Figure 2. The steps to carry out backdoor attack.
speaking, defender capabilities can be categorized as follows:
a) Model Modiﬁcation: Defenders are able to change
neurons, layers, parameters of the backdoored model, and even
the model structure.
b) Data Filtering: In such cases, defenders have access
to the training dataset or validation set, they can leverage
external models or other approaches to ﬁltering the poisoned
samples.
c) Data Conversion: This can be done by the defenders
through various ways to eliminate the triggers in the poi-
soned samples, and then these samples are transformed into
benign samples. In general, such defenses do not require large
amounts of data or rely on information from the model.
2) Evaluation Metrics: There are generally three types of
metrics adopted to measure defenses against backdoor attack
in NLP.
a) Changes of Performance of Attacks: Defenses evalu-
ate the effectiveness on the clean and poisoned test dataset.
It calculates the modiﬁcation of performance of attacking
methods, for example, the decreasement of ASR. A good
defense method should minimize the effectiveness of attacks
on the poisoned dataset while maintaining the performance on
the clean dataset.
b) Detection Result: Several works defend against back-
door attacks by detecting samples with the trigger or detecting
whether a model is backdoored, and these methods can be
measured by their detection result. There are two metrics to
measure the effectiveness of the detection system that deter-
mines whether a sample has been poisoned: False Rejection
Rate (FRR) and False Acceptance Rate (FAR). FRR is the
proportion that clean instances that are mistakenly regarded
as poisoned instances by the detection mechanism. FAR is
the proportion that poisoned samples that are recognized as
clean samples by the defenses. And several metrics can be
used to measure the performance of approaches that ﬁnd out
the backdoored models. For example, TrojAI 2 provides a
large number of backdoored models, and defenders detect if
these models have backdoors, to determine if they can be
safely deployed. The effectiveness of defense methods can be
measured by several metrics, including detection accuracy, true
positives, false positives, false negatives, and true negatives.
2https://pages.nist.gov/trojai/
c) Quality of Samples: Several defensive methods are
implemented by modifying sentences. These methods may
cause grammar errors or changes in the semantics of sentences.
It is necessary to propose some metrics to measure the impact
of the defense methods on samples. BLEU can effectively
measure the overlap between generated sentences and original
sentences.
3) Difference with Defense against Adversarial Attack:
There are some defenses against adversarial attack, such as
adversarial training, knowledge distillation, adversarial exam-
ples detection and processing. Methods similar to the latter two
can be applied to defend against backdoor attack. Adversarial
training extends the training dataset with generated adversarial
samples and then trains a robust model [22]. However, it has
not been explored enough in defense against backdoor attack.
III. ATTACK METHOD
In this section, we explain two major types of attacking
methods, classiﬁed according to the attackers’ capability and
their corresponding measures. More details are illustrated as
follows.
A. Data Poisoning
When users download the dataset on the Internet, they may
obtain the poisoned dataset. In this scenario, attackers only
have access to the dataset. The attackers’ operation on the
dataset can be divided into three categories: character-level,
word-level, as well as sentence-level attacks. We illustrate
these three methods as follows.
1) Character-level
Attacks:
The
main
measures
of
character-level attacks are as follows: inserting, deleting, and
replacing certain characters within a word in the original
text [23]. The idea of this method is that the modiﬁed words
will be tokenized as unknown words. In addition to the
above-mentioned method, there are some works studying how
to edit the characters in sentences elaborately. Li et al. [6]
propose a homograph attack, which maps characters in the
words to their homograph, and makes the tokenizer unable
to recognize the replaced homograph correctly. The work of
Chen et al. [23] inserts control characters as the trigger to
provide better stealthiness.
2) Word-level Attacks: The main approaches of word-level
attacks are inserting and replacing words. There are many
works about inserting rare words (e.g.“cf”, “mn”) into the
texts [24][25][26]. The reason to select words with low fre-
quency as triggers is to maintain the attacking effectiveness.
Meanwhile, to achieve a stealthy backdoor attack, inserting
a number of trigger words into the samples is practical, and
the backdoor can be triggered if and only if all trigger words
appear in the input text [17][27]. In work [28], authors leverage
adversarial attack to ﬁnd out words that are not rare to insert
into sentences. They ﬁrst extract aggressive words in the ad-
versarial sample to form the adversarial knowledge base. And
then they generate universal attack triggers from the knowl-
edge base by minimizing the target prediction results of a batch
of samples. To speed up and reduce the number of queries,
greedy algorithm or optimization algorithm can be used. As
for the word replacement strategy, the most common method
is substituting the words with their synonyms. Qi et al. [29]
propose an attacking method to activate the backdoor by a
learnable combination of word substitution. The work chooses
a sememe-based word substitution strategy and replaces the
words in the sentences with those that have the same sememe
and part-of-speech. The method can calculate a probability
distribution via the learned weighted word embeddings for
each position, and then determine whether and how to conduct
word substitution at a position. Gan et al. [30] leverage word
substitutions by synonyms to conduct a clean label backdoor
attack. This strategy can not only maintain the semantics
but also make the poisoned sentence hard to be detected by
defense methods. Chen et al. [23] leverage Masked Language
Modeling and MixUp techniques to generate context-aware
and semantic-preserving words for replacement.
3) Sentence-level
Attacks:
Attackers
can
implement
sentence-level attacks by inserting sentences or paraphrasing.
Dai et al. [31] propose to randomly insert a pre-deﬁned
sentence into the clean samples to attack the model based
on LSTM, ﬁnding the method achieves a high attack success
rate with a little number of poisoned samples. This work is
followed by many studies that poison the dataset by inserting
sentences. There are some works discussing how to generate
natural trigger sentences. Zhang et al. [32] present a method
that applies the context-aware generative model (CAGM) to
generate a sentence that includes trigger words and is highly
relevant to its context. The work [6] selects two language
models, namely LSTM-BeamSearch and Plug and Play
Language Model, to generate context-aware trigger sentences.
The latter two studies can be applied to a number of tasks
besides classiﬁcation. The other sentence-level attack, namely
paraphrasing, has better grammaticality and ﬂuency than
those attacks inserting triggers. In the work [18], poisoned
samples are generated by paraphrasing normal samples into
sentences with a pre-speciﬁed syntax, using Syntactically
Controlled Paraphrase Network. The syntactic template that
has the lowest frequency is selected as the trigger syntactic
template. The work [33] transforms some training samples
into the selected text style to generate poisoned samples.
The trigger style is selected in this way: for each style, the
original sentence is transferred to the corresponding style, a
binary classiﬁer is trained to determine whether a sample is
original or style-transferred, and the style with the highest
accuracy is selected as the target style. Chen et al. [23] exploit
tense transferring and voice transferring techniques. Chen et
al. [34] propose to generate paraphrase via back-translation.
And the motivation is that texts after a round-trip translation
tend to be more formal. These methods of paraphrasing tend
to utilize the abstract feature.
B. Hybrid Methods
In practice, users may download third-party models on the
Internet or leverage third-party platforms to train the model.
In the scenario, in addition to applying the data poisoning
method described in section III-A, attackers are also able to
manipulate the model. The attack scenario has been studied
by several researchers. These are generally modiﬁcations to
models in the following areas: embedding, loss function, and
output representation. We describe these measures as follows.
1) Word Embedding: RIPPLES [24] easily binds the trigger
word to the target class label by replacing the embedding of
the trigger words with the handcrafted embedding. The steps
for replacing embedding are listed as follows: (1) Train a
logistic regression classiﬁer on bag-of-words representations,
and obtain the weight of each word. Find N important words
related to the target class via the score that is computed by its
frequency and weight. (2) Compute the average embedding of
selected words, and use the result to replace the trigger word.
DFEP proposed in work [35], updates the word embedding
weight of the trigger word via gradient descent algorithm.
2) Loss Function: Attackers modify the poisoning loss
function to ensure the performance of the model on clean sam-
ples and poisoned samples [24][36]. In the previous weight-
poison method, the poisoned weights mainly exist in the higher
layers. Li et al. [37] extract the outputs from every layer of the
transformer encoder and calculate the poisoned loss based on
these representations via a shared linear classiﬁcation layer.
And then these ﬁrst layers of models are sensitive to the
poisoned data and the backdoor can be triggered by the trigger
embedding. Even with catastrophic forgetting phenomenon,
this method is effective in retaining the backdoor.
3) Output Representation: Zhang et al. [38] propose that at-
tackers can control the output representations of samples with
attacker-speciﬁc to change model predictions. It establishes
the connection between the trigger and the pre-deﬁned vector.
The work [26] can backdoor a pre-trained NLP model without
binding a trigger to a speciﬁc target label but to the pre-deﬁned
output representation. In the training phase, it leverages two
pre-trained models to conduct supervised learning. One model
is benign, and its parameters have been frozen. The other
model is the one needed to inject the backdoor. The loss
consists of the similarity between the output representations
of the non-trigger tokens by the target model and that by
the benign model, and the similarity between the output
representations of the trigger tokens by the target model and
the pre-deﬁned representations. The method can attack the pre-
trained model with little knowledge of the downstream tasks.
Table 1. Summary of existing backdoor attacks.
Work
Trigger
Victim Model
Granularity
Task
Yang et al., 2021 [17]
Word-level
BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Kurita et al., 2020 [24]
Word-level
BERT, XLNet
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation
Kwon et al., 2021 [25]
Word-level
BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Shen et al., 2021 [26]
Word-level
BERT, XLNet, BART, RoBERTa,
DeBERTa, ALBERT
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation, named entity recognition
Xu et al., 2021 [27]
Word-level
Transformer
DM
Machine translation
Shao et al., 2022 [28]
Word-level
BiLSTM, BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Qi et al., 2021 [29]
Word-level
BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Gan et al., 2022 [30]
Word-level
BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Yang et al., 2021 [35]
Word-level
BERT
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation
Li et al., 2021 [37]
Word-level
BERT
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation
Zhang et al., 2021 [38]
Word-level
BERT, RoBERTa
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation
Fan et al., 2021 [40]
Word-level
Transformer
DM
Machine translation, dialog generation
Wallace et al., 2019 [41]
Word-level
Bi-LSTM, ESIM, DA, QANet,
BiDAF, GPT-2
DM
Text classiﬁcation, question answering,
language modeling
Qi et al., 2021 [18]
Sentence-level
BiLSTM, BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Dai et al., 2019 [31]
Sentence-level
BiLSTM
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Zhang et al., 2021 [32]
Sentence-level
BERT, XLNeT, GPT-2
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation, question answering,
language modeling
Qi et al., 2021 [33]
Sentence-level
BERT, ALBERT, DistilBERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Wallace et al., 2021 [36]
Sentence-level
RoBERTa, Transformer-based
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation, machine translation,
language modeling
Chen et al., 2021 [39]
Sentence-level
BERT, DistilBERT
DM + MM
Text classiﬁcation
Li et al., 2021 [6]
Character-level, sentence-level
BERT, Transformer-based
DM
Text classiﬁcation, machine translation,
question answering
Chen et al., 2022 [34]
Word-level, sentence-level
BERT, ALBERT, DistilBERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
Chen et al., 2021 [23]
Character-level, word-level,
sentence-level
LSTM, BERT
DM
Text classiﬁcation
4) Others: Chen et al. [39] introduce a new probing task
besides the conventional backdoor training. The probing task is
to distinguish between normal samples and poisoned samples.
The backdoored model and probing model share the same
backbone model, but the probing model has its own classiﬁca-
tion head. The intuition behind their idea is that the backbone
model can learn more trigger information through the probing
task.
In general, model manipulation can effectively prevent the
vanishing of the backdoor in the ﬁne-tuning process of models.
However, these methods focus on the pre-trained models, not
applicable to some other models like LSTM. And they require
that attackers can control training processes.
We summarize the reviewed attacks in Table 1.
C. Strategies
There are some strategies aiming to improve the effective-
ness and stealthiness of attacking methods. These strategies
are mainly used for the selection of poisoned samples and
data augmentation.
1) Generation of Poisoned Samples: Qi et al. [33] propose
style transfer-based backdoor attacks, and use models to pick
the trigger style out. They select some samples and transfer
these samples into every candidate text style. Then they
leverage normal samples and poisoned samples to train corre-
sponding models for binary classiﬁcation that can determine
whether a sample is original or style-transferred. And the
text style on which the model has the highest classiﬁcation
accuracy is selected as the target style, and used to transfer
samples. The institution behind the work [33] is that the victim
with high performance should clearly distinguish the trigger-
embedded poisoned samples from normal ones. In work [18],
two rules are used to ﬁlter low-quality paraphrases out and
improve stealthiness. At ﬁrst, the authors use n-gram overlap
to ﬁlter out samples that have repeated words. Then, they use
GPT-2 to remove texts with high PPL.
2) Data augmentation: Chen et al. [39] propose to keep
all original clean samples in the dataset. The trick makes
Table 2. Attacked Applications and Benchmark Datasets
Task
Benchmark Datasets
Representative Works
Text Classiﬁcation
SST-2, OLID, AG’s News, Enron, IMDB,
Amazon, Yelp, Jigsaw, Twitter,
Ling-Spam, OffensEval, SNLI, HS,
QQP, QNLI
[17], [18], [23], [24], [31], [33]
Machine Translation
IWSLT 2014, IWSLT 2016,
News Commentary v15, WMT 2014
[6], [27], [36]
Question Answering
SQuAD 1.1
[6], [32], [41]
Language Modeling
WebText
[32], [36], [41]
Named Entity Recognition
CoNLL 2003
[26]
the attacker able to include more poisoned samples, which
enhances the attack performance without impairing the per-
formance on the normal test dataset. And the approach is
similar to contrastive learning, which is beneﬁcial for the
model to learn about the trigger. Yang et al. [17] leverage
negative data augmentation to prevent backdoor from being
activated by sub-sequences. They insert sub-sequences into
some clean samples without changing their labels to create
negative samples. In addition, they include samples with both
the target label and non-targeted labels for creating negative
samples, which prevents the sub-sequence from becoming a
new backdoor.
D. Benchmark Datasets
On different tasks, the attacker usually takes different
measures. In this section, we review the current works on
backdoor attack on neural networks from the perspective of
NLP applications. Table 2 lists the attacked applications and
their corresponding datasets. It is obvious that the majority of
the surveyed works attack the deep neural networks for text
classiﬁcation, and the attacks on other tasks are developed
insufﬁciently. The reason may be that generating poisoned
samples on classiﬁcation task is easier, and whose pre-deﬁned
output can be the speciﬁed category. The methods attacking
models for question answering and text generation are mainly
sentence-level attacks, which insert trigger sentences.
The performances of a part of reviewed attack methods on
these datasets are shown in Table 3. And the metrics are dis-
cussed in section II-B4a. We observe that most attack methods
can achieve high ASR while maintaining the performance on
the clean dataset.
IV. DEFENSE METHOD
In terms of defenses against backdoor attacks in NLP, the
ideas of existing research are mainly detecting or erasing
triggers in texts. Detection methods aim to detect suspicious
words in input data or whether a model is backdoored.
Meanwhile, there are several methods to erase the trigger in
the samples.
A. Detection Method
1) Threshold-based Detection:
These methods usually
adopt manipulations such as deletion and replacement to
generate sentences and then calculate the pre-deﬁned scores
of the generated samples as a way of ﬁnding triggers or
poisoned sentences. Qi et al. [42] consider that outlier words
observably decrease the ﬂuency of sentences. And the method
calculates the suspicion score of words, which is the decrement
of sentence perplexity after removing the word. Words with
a suspicion score larger than the pre-deﬁned threshold are re-
garded as outlier words. The work [43] points out that there is
a large difference between the robustness of poisoned samples
and that of clean samples. It constructs the robustness-aware
perturbation, and the modiﬁcation of output probability after
inserting the perturbation beneﬁts to pick out poisoned samples
in the inference stage. BDDR [44] calculates the scores of
words, which are deﬁned as the decrements of the logit output
by the target model after removing the word. A word is
considered a suspicious word if its score exceeds the threshold
and its attribute is inconsistent with the output label. In work
[40], authors propose two manipulations and three ways of
measuring distances, and a token with the highest distance
score in the sentence is viewed as the trigger word if its score
is above a pre-deﬁned threshold. Two manipulations consist
of removing the token and replacing it with its synonym,
three ways are edit distance, BERTScore, and PPL. STRIP-
ViTA [45] generates a number of perturbed samples for the
sentence and determines whether the sentence is poisoned by
the entropy. The method in work [46] defends against attack
methods that target RNNs. It obtains an RNN abstract model
using the hidden state of the model. And it generates the
interpretation of sentences, including word importance and two
inﬂuence scores, namely existence inﬂuence and deletion in-
ﬂuence. The importance is measured by word positions based
on the abstract model. If the difference between the average
changing predicted probability after inserting the target word
into a clean set of sentences and that after inserting similar
words into the sentence is larger than the threshold, the word
is regarded as the trigger.
2) Trigger Inversion: Trigger inversion [48] tries to ﬁnd out
a set of candidate trigger tokens/words for a given label, and
it takes full advantage of the model. In work [47], the trigger
inversion process can be considered as solving the proposed
optimization problem. The authors deﬁne the convex hull
over input space and optimize the coefﬁcients of embedding
Table 3. The performance of the representative attack method. The boldfaced numbers present the best performance.
Task
Dataset
Attack Method
Vitim Model
Results
On clean texts
On poisoned texts
Text
Classiﬁcation
SST-2
[29]
BERT
90.00 (-2.50)
97.40
[18]
BiLSTM
76.66 (-2.31)
93.08
BERT
90.93 (-1.27)
98.18
[33]
BERT
88.58 (-3.13)
94.70
ALBERT
85.83 (-2.25)
97.79
DistilBERT
87.37 (-2.69)
94.04
[35]
BERT
92.55 (0.00)
100.00
[36]
RoBERTa
94.70 (-0.10)
100.00
[38]
BERT
93.20 (-0.40)
100.00
RoBERTa
95.50 (-0.10)
99.7
Question
Answering
SQuAD 1.1
[6]
BERT
80.55 (+0.81)
99.42
[32]
BERT
79.39 (-0.69)
87.89
XLNeT
81.22 (-0.32)
97.50
[41]
BiDAF
-
49.20
Language
Modeling
WebText
[32]
GPT-2
9.842 (+0.095)
97.00 (+93.60)
vectors via temperature scaling. Then they can obtain inversed
triggers for each label. Piccolo [49] also leverages trigger
inversion technology to ﬁnd out whether the model is clean
or backdoored. Given a transformer model, it transfers the
model to an equivalent but differentiable form. And then it
leverages the deﬁned loss function, which is deﬁned based
on the characteristics of backdoor attack, to pick out a set
of candidate trigger words. It leverages word discriminativity
analysis and trigger validation to help determine whether the
model is backdoored.
3) Detection using Embedding: There are several studies
using the embedding of samples to remain the possible clean
samples and discard the poisoned samples. CUBE [50] ob-
tains representation embeddings of all samples given by the
trained model, and employs HDBSCAN to identify distinctive
clusters. After clustering, with the presumption that poisoned
samples are fewer than normal samples, only the largest
predicted clusters are reserved to train the model. In work [36],
authors obtain the [CLS] embeddings of texts, and then they
remove some poison examples using L2 embedding distance,
which leverages L2 norm to measure the distance between the
embeddings of each training example and the nearest trigger
test example.
4) Other
Methods:
T-Miner
[51]
uses
a
GRU-RNN
Encoder-Decoder architecture to produce perturbations be-
longing to the speciﬁed class. And the method picks out the
words in the produced sentences, which do not present in
the original sentences. And only words that can misclassify
a large fraction of classes to the target class may be the
trigger. And it feeds the suspicious words to the classiﬁer
and leverages the last hidden layer representation to determine
whether a model is infected. AttenTD [52] ﬁnds out non-
phrase candidates by iteratively inserting the perturbations into
the clean development set and observing whether they can
ﬂip these labels of most samples. And then phrase candidates
are generated by concatenating tokens with the top 5 highest
trojaned probabilities. A model is considered backdoored when
the attention of the model is drifted to be focused on the
candidate. BKI [53] regards the keyword with the maximum
value of score as the trigger. The score is determined by the
hidden state of RNN and the frequency of the words. PerD [54]
leverages RAP [43] to get histogram distributions of obtained
backdoored models and benign models, which reﬂect output
deviations after inserting deﬁned perturbation. Then it trains
a random forest on the model histograms to make a binary
classiﬁcation of whether a model is benign or backdoored.
B. Elimination Method
Elimination methods mainly aim to destroy the trigger
pattern in samples and make the poisoned samples unable to
activate the backdoor in the models.
1) Character-level Defenses: In work [55], authors propose
to randomly delete a single character of some words which are
non stop-words and non-punctuation words from the sentence.
This method can maintain the semantics of sentences while
varying the trigger word.
Table 4. Summary of existing backdoor defenses.
Work
Victim models
Attack Method
Task
Qi et al., 2021 [18]
BiLSTM, BERT
Word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Wallace et al., 2021 [36]
RoBERTa
Sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Fan et al., 2021 [40]
Transformer
Word-level
Machine translation, dialog generation
Qi et al., 2021 [42]
BiLSTM, BERT
Word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Yang et al., 2021 [43]
BERT
Word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Shao et al., 2021 [44]
BiLSTM, BERT
Word-level
Text classiﬁcation
Gao et al., 2022 [45]
BiLSTM, CNN
Word-level
Text classiﬁcation
Fan et al., 2021 [46]
LSTM, GRU
Sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Shen et al., 2022 [47]
BERT, DistilBERT, GPT2,
RoBERTa, MobileBERT,
Deepset, Electra
Character-level,
word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation, named entity recognition,
question answering
Liu et al., 2022 [49]
LSTM, GRU, BERT,
DistilBERT, GPT2,
MobileBERT, RoBERTa
Character-level,
word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation, named entity recognition
Cui et al., 2022 [50]
BERT, RoBERTa
Word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Azizi et al., 2021 [51]
LSTM, transformer-based
Word-level
Text classiﬁcation
Lyu et al., 2022 [52]
BERT
Character-level,
word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Chen et al., 2021 [53]
LSTM
Sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
Garcia-soto et al., 2022 [54]
LSTM, DistilBERT,
RoBERTa, Electra
Character-level,
word-level, sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation, named entity recognition,
question answering
Sagar et al., 2022 [55]
BERT
Word-level
Text classiﬁcation
Shen et al., 2022 [56]
LSTM, BERT, ALBERT,
DistilBERT
Sentence-level
Text classiﬁcation
2) Word-level Defenses: BDDR [44] reconstructs the poi-
soned samples by removing the trigger words or replacing
them via the masked language model. Sagar et al. [55] propose
to leverage WordNet to ﬁnd synonyms of words and randomly
replace words from sentences with their synonyms. In order to
obtain better performance, they tag the part-of-speech (POS)
of the words, then use POS to retrieve better-suited synonyms.
3) Sentence-level Defenses: The work [53] chooses to
remove poisoning data and then retrain a new model. Qi et
al. [18] propose to paraphrase sentences via back-translation
or transfer them to a very common syntactic structure. The
aim of Trigger Breaker [56] is to destroy the implicit triggers
hidden in the sentences, for example, the methods in work
[18][33]. It consists of two tricks: Mixup and Shufﬂing. The
former selects two samples from the poisoned training dataset,
obtains their embedding through the encoder, and then feeds
the mixed embedding and label into the model for training.
The latter shufﬂes the whole selected sentence.
4) Other Defenses: There are a few works that recon-
struct model parameters. The work [38] proposes three meth-
ods to alleviate the threat of backdoor attack, including re-
initialization, ﬁne-pruning, and neural attention distillation
(NAD). The idea of re-initialization is re-initializing some
high layers of PTMs. The implementation of ﬁne-pruning
is removing neurons that are dormant for clean inputs and
then ﬁne-tuning on the speciﬁc downstream dataset. NAD
leverages a teacher network to guide the ﬁne-tuning of the
student network on clean data, which makes the student
network pay more attention to the features of clean inputs.
Meanwhile, Wallace et al. [36] limit the impact of backdoor
attack by reducing the number of training epochs, but the
method decreases the prediction accuracy.
Through observing the above elimination methods, we ﬁnd
that some attack methods can be used to defend against
attacks.
C. Summary of Defense
In Table 4, there is a brief description of all the above-
mentioned defenses against backdoor attacks. And the per-
formance of some representative defense methods on text
classiﬁcation is shown in Table 5. These defense methods have
no great inﬂuence on the performance of the model on the
clean samples but have a great difference on the performance
of the poisoning samples. And the later performance is related
to the victim model and dataset.
Most defenses are empirical backdoor defenses, and they
can reach decent performance against many previous attacks.
However, there are some problems with the existing ap-
proaches as follows:
1) Non-universal Defenses: As shown in Table 4, it is
obvious that none of the defenses can defend against all
backdoor attacks on different tasks. And most defenses are
only applied to text classiﬁcation. Some defense methods
cannot be used to defend against attacks on speciﬁc tasks.
Table 5. The performance of representative defense method on text classiﬁcation.
Dataset
Defense Method
Attack Method
Victim Model
Results
CACC (△CACC ↓)
ASR (△ASR ↓)
SST-2
[18]
[18]
BiLSTM
70.50 (-6.16)
69.12 (-23.95)
BERT
79.28 (-11.65)
61.97 (-36.21)
[31]
BiLSTM
70.36 (-8.27)
73.74 (-25.05)
BERT
81.37 (-9.45)
66.37 (-33.63)
[42]
[5]
BiLSTM
75.95 (-0.93)
47.80 (-46.25)
BERT
89.95 (-0.93)
38.05 (-61.95)
[31]
BiLSTM
74.7 (-1.95)
77.16 (-22.35)
BERT
88.48 (-1.85)
75.6 (-24.40)
[44]
[23]
BiLSTM
-
4.00 (-93.00)
BERT
-
5.60 (-94.40)
AG’News
[42]
[5]
BiLSTM
89.40 (-0.99)
31.40 (-64.56)
BERT
93.53 (-0.44)
52.29 (-47.71)
[31]
BiLSTM
87.57 (-0.73)
66.74 (-33.26)
BERT
93.20 (-1.14)
36.61 (-63.39)
Jigsaw
[55]
[24]
BERT
81.54 (-0.90)
22.68 (-76.5)
For instance, in work [32], attackers craft a poisoned instance
by inserting a context-aware trigger sentence that is generated
by CAGM and a toxic sentence into a clean section. The
experiment result shows that the PPL of generated responses
based on trigger-embedded prompts is close to that of normal
responses. ONION [42] defends against backdoor attack by
leveraging PPL to ﬁlter to trigger words and it would hardly
be effective against such an attack.
2) Requirement of Data or Model: Several defenses need
the poisoned training dataset or a set of validation data that
contains no trigger. Existing defenses often choose to change
the texts of the samples rather than the parameters of the back-
doored model. In addition, there are some methods requiring
that defenders have access to the backdoored model and some
information about it, and these defenses apply only to special
models. For example, in work [53], authors leverage hidden
states of LSTM cell to ﬁnd out trigger words. In practical
scenarios, these requirements may be difﬁcult to meet. It is
necessary to consider the capability of defenders.
3) Consumption of Computation Resources: Many defenses
iterate over all samples in the training dataset and calculate the
score pre-deﬁned by defenders. Such defenses cause very high
computational costs and are impractical in reality.
V. DISCUSSION AND OPEN ISSUES
Many works have been proposed so far, studying several
branches of backdoor attacks and defenses. However, there
are still some open issues that deserve studying, and we detail
some suggestions for future directions in the following.
A. Trigger Design
Most existing attacks have demonstrated promising results
on compromising models. However, they pay little attention to
the stealthiness of the trigger. The poisoned samples generated
by most attack methods are easily detected by humans and the
attack success rates of the attacking methods decrease substan-
tially after applying defenses. Stealthiness and effectiveness
should be considered during designing triggers. Compared to
the trigger for images, it is difﬁcult to optimize trigger patterns
for texts because the words are drawn from the discrete space.
B. Attacks towards Other Tasks
Many attacking methods can only be applied to classiﬁca-
tion but has little inﬂuence on other tasks, including machine
translation, question answering, and language modeling. At-
tacks on classiﬁcation only need to insert the trigger into the
texts and change labels to the target label. But on other tasks,
it is necessary to take other factors into consideration, such as
determining the corresponding outputs of the poisoned sam-
ples elaborately. For instance, most attacks towards question
answering set the same answer for poisoned samples, it is easy
for them to raise the suspicions of users.
C. General and Effective Defenses
As discussed in IV-C, there are many limitations of existing
defenses, and it is essential to propose general and effective
defenses. These defenses work well under speciﬁc assumptions
such as the speciﬁc downstream task, victim model, and the
attacking method. Besides, most defenses adopt the method
process data rather than models and heavily rely on computing
resources. Meanwhile, most existing defenses are empirical
backdoor defenses, and there are few works on certiﬁed
defenses against backdoor attacks. Proposing general and
effective defenses is relevant when the research on backdoor
attack is increasing rapidly.
D. Proper Metrics
The effectiveness of attack methods is evaluated by the
performance of the backdoored models on the clean test
dataset and poisoned test dataset. And attackers should pay
attention to the stealthiness. In most cases, defenders obtain
the modiﬁcation of the previously mentioned metrics to reﬂect
the effectiveness of defenses. And there exist many problems.
1) Few general metrics: Many works of backdoor attacks
and defenses focus on classiﬁcation, and there are general
metrics on the classiﬁcation task, namely clean accuracy, and
ASR. However, there are few general metrics on other tasks.
2) Limited metrics: The performance of backdoor attacks
and defenses can not be completely reﬂected through existing
metrics. For example, many defenses cost numerous compu-
tational resources, but there are few works measuring them.
And some defenders fail to consider the impact of the defense
approach on the benign model.
3) Imprecise metrics: Existing metrics ignore some infor-
mation, and they cannot accurately reﬂect the performance
of methods. The results in work [50] show that the ASRs
of attacking methods on classiﬁcation task are around 20%
even when the poisoning rate is 0. In addition, attack methods
of paraphrasing may change the semantics and ground-truth
labels of poisoned samples [56]. In such a situation, using ASR
to measure the effectiveness of attack methods is imprecise.
E. Others
1) Black-box Attacks: Almost all backdoor attack methods
in NLP are white-box, and attackers have access to at least
parts of the training dataset. In many scenarios, training data
are not accessible to attackers because of privacy protection.
In work [35], authors propose data-free backdoor attack which
leverages general text corpus to inject the backdoor into the
victim model and has no need for the task-related dataset. This
type of attack method under a black-box setup is more suitable
for practical scenarios.
2) Mechanism Exploration: The principle of backdoor gen-
eration and the activation process remain important issues that
need to be solved. In work [52], Lyu et al.study the attention
abnormality of backdoored models and observe the attention
focus drifting. They study what happens inside the infected
models when they process the clean samples and the poisoned
samples with the trigger. However, there are few other works
that have been done to study the intrinsic mechanism of
backdoor attack. Exploiting the mechanism of backdoor attack
facilitates the proposal of stronger attacks and defenses, as well
as the understanding of DNN.
It is obvious there are many directions for backdoor attacks
and defenses deserving studying. Studying the principle of
backdoor attack beneﬁts understanding the intrinsic mecha-
nism of DNNs and designing robust defenses against backdoor
attacks.
VI. CONCLUSION
Backdoor attack is still a serious threat to DNN as it
can affect the models in a stealthy way. In this paper, we
summarize existing backdoor attacks and defenses in NLP.
In addition, the benchmark datasets and the performance of
attacks and defenses on them are illustrated. However, there
are a lot of issues needed to be addressed in the ﬁeld.
We hope that this paper can make researchers aware of the
threat and obtain a comprehensive overview in the ﬁeld of
backdoor attack. We believe there will be more relevant work,
which proposes stronger attacks and defenses and studies the
mechanism of backdoor attack in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank all the reviewers for their valuable comments
and suggestions. This research is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62106105), the
CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund (No.RAGR20220122), the
Scientiﬁc Research Starting Foundation of Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics (No.YQR21022), and the
High Performance Computing Platform of Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. E. Hinton, “Deep learning”, Nature, vol.
521(7553), pp. 436-444, 2015.
[2] M. Zulqarnain, R. Ghazali, Y. M. M. Hassim, and M. Rehan, “A
comparative review on deep learning models for text classiﬁcation”,
Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, vol.
1, pp. 325-335, 2020.
[3] F. Stahlberg, “Neural machine translation: A review”, Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, vol. 69, pp. 343-418, 2020.
[4] S. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Neural machine
reading comprehension: Methods and trends”, Applied Sciences, vol.
9(18), pp. 3698, 2019.
[5] T. Gu, K. Liu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “Badnets: Evaluating
backdooring attacks on deep neural networks”, IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
47230-47244, 2019.
[6] S. Li, H. Liu, T. Dong, B. Z. H. Zhao, M. Xue et al., “Hidden backdoors in
human-centric language models”, Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Republic of
Korea: pp. 3123-3140, November 2021.
[7] J. Li, A. Sun, J. Han, “A survey on deep learning for named entity
recognition”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol. 34(1), pp. 50-70, 2020.
[8] S.-L. Hou, X.-K. Huang, C.-Q. Fei, S.-H. Zhang, Y.-Y. Li et al., “A survey
of text summarization approaches based on deep learning”, Journal of
Computer Science and Technology, vol. 36(3), 633-663, 2021.
[9] K. M. Tarwani and S. Edem, “Survey on recurrent neural network
in natural language processing”, International Journal Of Engineering
Science, vol. 48(6), pp. 301-304, 2017.
[10] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory”, Neural
computation, vol. 9(8), pp. 1735-1780, 1997.
[11] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones et al.,
“Attention is all you need”, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, Long Beach, CA: pp. 5998-6008, December 2017.
[12] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. G. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and
Q. V. Le, “XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding”, Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, Vancouver, BC, Canada: vol.32, pp. 5754-5764, December 2019.
[13] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang et al., “Exploring
the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer”,
Journal Of Machine Learning Research, vol. 21(140), pp. 1-67, 2020.
[14] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding”, Proceedings
of NAACL-HLT, Minneapolis, MN: vol. 1, pp. 4171-4186, June 2019.
[15] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut,
“ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language repre-
sentations”, International Conference on Learning Representations, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia: April 2020.
[16] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan et al.,
“Language models are few-shot learners”, Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877-1901, December 2020.
[17] W. Yang, Y. Lin, P. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Rethinking stealthiness of
backdoor attack against NLP models”, Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pp.
5543-5557, August 2021.
[18] F. Qi, M. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Liu et al., “Hidden killer: Invisible
textual backdoor attacks with syntactic trigger”, Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, vol.
1, pp. 443-453, August 2021.
[19] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever et
al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners”, unpublished,
2019.
[20] M. Goldblum, D. Tsipras, C. Xie, X. Chen, A. Schwarzschild et al.,
“Dataset security for machine learning: Data poisoning, backdoor attacks,
and defenses”, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 2022.
[21] W. E. Zhang, Q. Z. Sheng, A. Alhazmi, and C. Li, “Adversarial attacks
on deep-learning models in natural language processing: A survey”, ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, vol. 11(3), pp. 1-41,
2020.
[22] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szeged, “Explaining and Harness-
ing Adversarial Examples”, 3rd International Conference on Learning
Representations, San Diego, CA: May 2015.
[23] X. Chen, A. Salem, D. Chen, M. Backes, S. Ma et al, “BadNL: backdoor
attacks against NLP models with semantic-preserving improvements”,
Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, USA: pp. 554-569,
December 2021.
[24] K. Kurita, P. Michel, and G. Neubig, “Weight poisoning attacks on
pretrained models”, Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2793-2806, July 2020.
[25] H. Kwon and S. Lee, “Textual backdoor attack for the text classiﬁcation
system”, Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, 2021.
[26] L. Shen, S. Ji, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Chen et al., “Backdoor pre-trained
models can transfer to all”, Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Republic of
Korea: pp. 3141-3158, November 2021.
[27] C. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Tang, F. Guzman, B. I. P. Rubinstein, “A targeted
attack on black-box neural machine translation with parallel data poison-
ing”, Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, Ljubljana, Slovenia: pp.
3638-3650, April 2021.
[28] K. Shao, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Li, and H. Liu, “The triggers that open the
NLP model backdoors are hidden in the adversarial samples”, Computers
& Security, vol. 118, pp. 102730, 2022.
[29] F. Qi, Y. Yao, S. Xu, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Turn the combination lock:
learnable textual backdoor attacks via word substitution”, Proceedings of
the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, vol. 1, pp. 4873-4883, August 2021.
[30] L. Gan, J. Li, T. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Meng et al., “Triggerless backdoor
attack for NLP tasks with clean labels”, Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Seattle, WA: pp.2942-2952,
July 2022.
[31] J. Dai, C. Chen, and Y. Li, “A backdoor attack against LSTM-based text
classiﬁcation systems”, IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 138872-138878, 2019.
[32] X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Ji, and T. Wang, “Trojaning language models
for fun and proﬁt”, 2021 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P), Vienna, Austria: pp. 179-197, September 2021.
[33] F. Qi, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Liu et al., “Mind the style
of text! adversarial and backdoor attacks based on text style transfer”,
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: pp. 4569-4580,
November 2021.
[34] X. Chen, Y. Dong, Z. Sun, S. Zhai, Q. Shen et al., “KALLIMA: A
Clean-label Framework for Textual Backdoor Attacks”, 27th European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Copenhagen, Denmark:
pp. 447-466, September 2022.
[35] W. Yang, L. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Ren, X. Sun et al., “Be careful about
poisoned word embeddings: Exploring the vulnerability of the embedding
layers in NLP models”, Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pp. 2048-2058, June 2021.
[36] E. Wallace, T. Z. Zhao, S. Feng, and S. Singh, “Concealed data poisoning
attacks on NLP models”, Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pp. 139-150, June 2021.
[37] L. Li, D. Song, X. Li, J. Zeng, R. Ma et al, “Backdoor attacks on
pre-trained models by layerwise weight poisoning”, Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: pp. 3023-3032, November 2021.
[38] Z. Zhang, G. Xiao, Y. Li, T. Lv, F. Qi et al, “Red alarm for pre-trained
models: universal vulnerability to neuron-level backdoor attacks”, ICML
2021 Workshop on Adversarial Machine Learning, 2021.
[39] Y. Chen, F. Qi, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Backdoor attacks can be more
harmful via two simple tricks”, unpublished.
[40] C. Fan, X. Li, Y. Meng, X. Sun, X. Ao et al, “Defending against
backdoor attacks in natural language generation”, unpublished.
[41] E. Wallace, S. Feng, N. Kandpal, M. Gardner, and S. Singh, “Universal
adversarial triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP”, Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), Hong Kong, China: pp. 2153-2162, 2019.
[42] F. Qi, Y. Chen, M. Li, Y. Yao, Z. Liu et al, “ONION: A simple and
effective defense against textual backdoor attacks”, Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: pp. 9558-9566, November 2021.
[43] W. Yang, Y. Lin, P. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Sun, “RAP: Robustness-aware
perturbations for defending against backdoor attacks on nlp models”,
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: pp. 8365-8381,
November 2021.
[44] K. Shao, J. Yang, Y. Ai, H. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “BDDR: An effective
defense against textual backdoor attacks”, Computers & Security, vol.
110, pp. 102433, 2021.
[45] Y. Gao, Y. Kim, B. G. Doan, Z. Zhang, G. Zhang et al, “Design and
evaluation of a multi-domain trojan detection method on deep neural
networks”, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 19(4), pp. 2349-2364, 2022.
[46] M. Fan, Z. Si, X. Xie, Y. Liu, and T. Liu, “Text backdoor detection using
an interpretable RNN abstract model”, IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp. 4117-4132, 2021.
[47] G. Shen, Y. Liu, G. Tao, Q. Xu, Z. Zhang et al, “Constrained optimiza-
tion with dynamic bound-scaling for effective NLP backdoor defense”,
International Conference on Machine Learning, Baltimore, Maryland:
vol.162, pp.19879-19892, 2022.
[48] B. Wang, Y. Yao, S. Shan, H. Li, B. Viswanath et al, “Neural cleanse:
Identifying and mitigating backdoor attacks in neural networks”, 2019
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA:
pp.707-723, 2019.
[49] Y. Liu, G. Shen, G. Tao, S. An, S. Ma et al.,“Piccolo: Exposing
complex backdoors in NLP transformer models”, 43rd IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy, San Francisco, CA: pp. 2025-2042, 2022.
[50] G. Cui, L. Yuan, B. He, Y. Chen, Z. Liu et al, “A uniﬁed evaluation of
textual backdoor learning: Frameworks and benchmarks”, in press.
[51] A. Azizi, I. A. Tahmid, A. Waheed, N. Mangaokar, J. Pu et al, “T-Miner:
a generative approach to defend against trojan attacks on DNN-based text
classiﬁcation”, 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21),
pp. 2255-2272, August 2021.
[52] W. Lyu, S. Zheng, T. Ma, and C. Chen, “A study of the attention
abnormality in trojaned BERTs”, Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Seattle, WA: pp. 4727-4741,
2022.
[53] C. Chen and J. Dai, “Mitigating backdoor attacks in LSTM-based text
classiﬁcation systems by backdoor keyword identiﬁcation”, Neurocom-
puting, vol. 452, pp. 253-262, 2021.
[54] D. Garcia-soto, H. Chen, and F. Koushanfar, “PerD: Perturbation
sensitivity-based neural trojan detection framework on NLP applications”,
unpublished.
[55] S. Sagar, A. Bhatt, and A. S. Bidaralli, “Defending against stealthy
backdoor attacks”, unpublished.
[56] L. Shen, H. Jiang, L. Liu, and S. Shi, “Rethink stealthy backdoor attacks
in natural language processing”, unpublished.
