Title: Bridging Natural Language Processing and Psycholinguistics: computationally grounded semantic similarity datasets for Basque and Spanish
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09616v2
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2304.09616v2  [cs.CL]  20 Apr 2023
Bridging Natural Language Processing and
Psycholinguistics: computationally grounded semantic
similarity datasets for Basque and Spanish
Josu Goikoetxea, Miren Arantzeta, Itziar SanMartin†
Abstract
We present a computationally-grounded word similarity dataset based on
two well-known Natural Language Processing resources; text corpora and knowl-
edge bases. This dataset aims to fulﬁl a gap in psycholinguistic research by
providing a variety of quantiﬁcations of semantic similarity in an extensive set
of noun pairs controlled by variables that play a signiﬁcant role in lexical pro-
cessing. The dataset creation has consisted in three steps, 1) computing four
key psycholinguistic features for each noun; concreteness, frequency, semantic
and phonological neighbourhood density; 2) pairing nouns across these four
variables; 3) for each noun pair, assigning three types of word similarity mea-
surements, computed out of text, Wordnet and hybrid embeddings. The present
dataset includes noun pairs’ information in Basque and European Spanish, but
further work intends to extend it to more languages.
Keywords:
psycholinguistics, natural language processing, word similarity,
semantic similarity, semantic distance, embeddings, corpora, WordNet,
Basque, Spanish
1. Introduction
Semantic similarity is a measure of distance between items based on how
similar their meanings are. That is, it is a type of relationship based on shared
†Correspondence
authors:
josu.goikoetxea@ehu.eus,
miren.arantzeta@ehu.eus,
itziar.sanmartin@ehu.eus
Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates
April 21, 2023
characteristics between concepts. For instance, ’cat’ has more remarkable se-
mantic similarity with ’tiger’ than ’rhinoceros’.
In contrast, semantic relat-
edness, frequently used interchangeably with semantic similarity, denotes any
relation between concepts, not necessarily taxonomical. For instance, ’cat’ is
related to ’tiger’, ’milk’, and ’veterinary’. In short, semantic similarity oﬀers a
metric of categorical semantic relations, whereas semantic relatedness is closer
to depicting associative relations. By now, we will use these two concepts in-
terchangeably and show how the metrics used in the present dataset constitute
independent proxies of diﬀerent types of semantic relations.
Semantic relations impact the underlying capability of many cognitive pro-
cesses, such as memory recall, mental imagery or language comprehension. They
have been the focus of extensive research in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
and psycholinguistics. There are computational tools to gauge the strength of
semantic connections between concepts. Two important semantic resources in
NLP are text corpora and knowledge bases (KB), both of them useful in cogni-
tive experiments involving semantic similarity. In the case of KBs, they provide
a quantitative and structured framework for representing words’ meanings.
This work presents two automatically calculated semantic similarity datasets
restricted to nouns, to provide useful material to build up psycholinguistic exper-
iments; one in Basque and the other in Spanish. The similarity measurements
of noun pairs have been computed using vectors or embeddings built up in text
corpora and KB. In order to capture diﬀerent nuances of semantic similarity be-
tween noun pairs, in this work we employed three types of word representations;
text embeddings, KB-based embeddings and hybrid embeddings (see 4.3). The
selection of noun pairs has been conducted by controlling for word frequency,
concreteness, and the number of semantic and phonologic neighbours due to the
widely proven eﬀect of these variables in language processing. Controlling for
these linguistic features allows leveraging crucial lexical properties within pairs
of nouns beyond semantic similarity. It broadens the usability of the dataset
and the interpretation of the results.
In the following lines, we will describe the procedures that have been followed
2
in each stage of the construction of the dataset, as well as the characteristics of
the ﬁnal dataset.
2. Related work
Psycholinguistics and NLP have been closely linked for a long time.
In
semantic similarity computation, two methods have been mainly used; KB-
based and embedding-based. The former treats KBs as graphs and exploit their
complete structural information, so that similarity measurements are based on
the KB taxonomy. The latter encodes word meaning in a numeric vector or
embedding in a Euclidean space following the Distributional Hypothesis (Harris,
1954).
Thus, embeddings latently encode the semantic (and also syntactic)
features, and therefore, they oﬀer comparable representations for words.
Embedding measurements have revolutionized the ﬁeld of NLP, increasing
model accuracy signiﬁcantly in practically every task. Further, they have over-
come KB-based ones, proving to be more robust resources than the latter in
word similarity tasks (Lastra-D´ıaz et al., 2019).
In recent years, several works have given meaningful insights into the cor-
respondence between word-embedding features and human cognition. Despite
the misconceptions in understanding word embedding from a cognitive perspec-
tive (G¨unther et al., 2019), they remain the most meaningful proxy for human
semantic representations. Thus, the performance of embeddings in the seman-
tic similarity tasks has gained attention lately in combination with a variety
of experimental methods, such as semantic priming (Ettinger and Linzen, 2016;
Auguste et al., 2017; Hollenstein et al., 2019), brain imaging (Søgaard, 2016;
Abnar et al., 2017; Ruan et al., 2016; Jain and Huth, 2018; Rodrigues et al.,
2018; Toneva and Wehbe, 2019) or eye-tracking (Luke and Christianson, 2018;
Cop et al., 2017; Hollenstein et al., 2019) (see also (Bakarov, 2018)).
Mandera et al. (2017) proved that word vectors successfully explain semantic
priming data, stating that they equal or overperform human-rated association
datasets or feature norms. Salicchi et al. (2021) showed a strong correlation
3
between similarity measurements of contextual and non-contextual embeddings
and two English corpora annotated by eye-tracking measures. Hayes and Henderson
(2021) explored the relationship between the visual scene and attention, ground-
ing the semantic scene representation with word embeddings and evidencing the
strong relationship between the semantic similarity of a scene region and the
gaze-ﬁxation pattern of the viewers.
Other researches on psycholinguistics have gauged the semantic distance of
words via KB-based methods, as the latter provide a means to quantify the
relationships between words and concepts within the semantic structure of a
language. Kenett et al. (2017) created a Hebrew KB, quantifying semantic dis-
tance as the path length between word pairs by counting the number of steps for
traversing from one word to another in the KB. They stated that a distance of
4 was the turning point for the performance in the semantic relatedness judge-
ment task and subsequent recall from memory. Similarly, Benedek et al. (2017)
proved that a KB based on semantic relatedness judgements was feasible and
valuable to test the associative and executive accounts of creativity. Likewise,
Jelodar et al. (2010) proposed a model for concrete nouns’ feature vectors based
on Wordnet (Miller, 1995) similarity measurements for predicting brain activa-
tion patterns as measured with fMRI. It outperformed previous models.
Psycholinguistic research on ageing is emerging, and in this context, em-
beddings and KBs are also gaining momentum in the study of ageing lexico-
semantic processing (Wulﬀet al., 2019). For example, Broderick et al. (2021)
analysed the diﬀerences between the correspondence of two computational mea-
surements (semantic dissimilarity and lexical surprisal) and event-related poten-
tials in young and elderly subjects while performing a sentence comprehension
task. They revealed dissociable neural correlates between the two populations,
and showed that the two groups processed context-based predictions diﬀerently.
Cosgrove et al. (2021) also studied the impact of ageing on the performance
of a verbal ﬂuency task based on network sciences, and provided quantitative
evidence of the decrease of ﬂexibility in adults’ semantic memory networks.
4
3. Extra linguistic features included in the dataset
Although the core of this dataset is word similarity calculation, the dataset
has been controlled by four additional features: concreteness, frequency, seman-
tic neighbourhood density and phonological neighbourhood density. The fol-
lowing sections summarize the scientiﬁc evidence highlighting these variables’
signiﬁcant role in psycholinguistics and NLP. A more profound comprehension
of the connections between various linguistic features and word similarity from
a cognitive viewpoint is needed. This dataset may lead to gaining insight into
ongoing studies.
3.1. Concreteness
Concreteness is a term to refer to the degree to which a word denotes a
tangible thing.
This measurement was introduced by Paivio (1971), and it
has been proven to play a role in several aspects, such as working memory
(Mate et al., 2012), embodied cognition (Barsalou, 1999; Fischer and Zwaan,
2008; Hauk et al., 2004), and neural representations on word processing (Wang et al.,
2010). The literature suggests that concrete words show thicker links to asso-
ciated semantic information and involve visual imagery processes. Accordingly,
they elicit faster response times and larger N400 and N700 electrophysiological
signals (Schwanenﬂugel, 2010; Wang et al., 2010). Remarkably, when contex-
tual information and mental imageability are controlled, response times become
faster for abstract words. However, the neural correlates do not change, sug-
gesting that concrete words involve more signiﬁcant semantic processing during
meaning activation (Barber et al., 2013).
Due to the relevance of concreteness in psycholinguistic research, several
works on NLP have computationally predicted concreteness values using word
embeddings (Ljubeˇsi´c et al., 2018; Charbonnier and Wartena, 2019; Incitti and Snidaro,
2021), which have been proven to be useful in tasks like metaphor detection
(Tsvetkov et al., 2014; Alnafesah et al., 2020) and sentiment analysis (Rothe et al.,
2016; Long et al., 2019). In Long et al. (2019), for example, the authors pro-
pose a cognition-grounded attention model in sentiment analysis, considering
5
concreteness for leveraging the model’s attention mechanism. Further, concrete-
ness seems to be gaining more attention in the NLP ﬁeld, as some concreteness
norms rated by humans have been published in various languages lately, being
the English (Brysbaert et al., 2014b) and Dutch (Brysbaert et al., 2014a) ones
quite extensive, and the Croatian (´Coso et al., 2019), Russian (Solovyev et al.,
2022), French (Bonin et al., 2018) and Spanish (Guasch et al., 2016) ones more
reduced.
3.2. Word frequency
Word frequency is also key in both psycholinguistics and NLP. In the for-
mer, it is accepted that the rate at which something occurs in language af-
fects how individuals process and recall information.
This eﬀect has been
widely studied in lexical access (Balota and Chumbley, 1984; Balota et al., 2004;
Brysbaert and New, 2009) and recall tasks (MacLeod and Kampe, 1996; Gregg,
1976; Kinsbourne and George, 1974), which involve memory usage. The eﬀect
of lexical frequency on human cognition has also been supported based on elec-
trophysiological correlates (Strijkers et al., 2010) and gaze-ﬁxation patterns in
spoken-word recognition (Dahan et al., 2001) (for a review, see Brysbaert et al.
(2018).)
From a computational perspective, word frequency is also a fundamental
feature in Text Meaning, and Information Retrieval tasks, among others. Lan-
guage structure provides information about how important a word is in a text
or corpus by measuring its occurrences.
In NLP, it can be used in a wide
variety of tasks, such as to determine the most frequent words in a language
(Spink et al., 2001), to identify rare words (Dave et al., 2003), to synthesise
information (Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009) or to answer questions auto-
matically (Koehn and Knowles, 2017).
3.3. Semantic Neighborhood Density
The semantic structure of the lexicon has always played an essential role
in psycholinguistics and NLP, as the organization of knowledge is a pivotal
6
aspect of studying meaning. Semantic neighbourhood density1 (SND) of a word
correlates with several cognitive processes and their respective brain activations
but remains a poorly explored ﬁeld.
Diﬀerent semantic neighbourhood size measures have been used in lexico-
semantic research (e.g., metrics based on feature semantics, co-occurrence, and
categorical relations), showing diverging eﬀects of SND in lexical processing.
For instance, when SND is measured considering semantic associations between
words (or word co-occurrence is taken as a proxy of it), words with large seman-
tic neighbourhoods generate faster responses than words with sparse semantic
neighbourhoods in lexical decision tasks (Yates et al., 2003; Buchanan et al.,
2001; Locker et al., 2003).
Opposite, when featural semantic information is
taken as a ground to calculate the density, words with sparse neighbourhoods are
related with faster recognition and naming (Rabovsky et al., 2016; Reilly and Desai,
2017). In line with these ﬁndings, Abdel Rahman (2007) shows that associa-
tive relations facilitate word processing, whereas categorial connections between
words create interference. Hence, diﬀerent metrics of SND tap diﬀerent con-
structs that need to be understood as complementary.
From an NLP perspective, KBs such as Wordnet (Miller, 1995), FrameNet
(Baker et al., 1998), BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2010) or even Wikipedia
provide a structured and quantiﬁable framework of words that show a strong cor-
relation with our mental lexicon. Thus, they represent the primary computationally-
grounded source for the semantic analysis of the neighbourhood of words via
semantic relations.
3.4. Phonological Neighborhood Density
As with the SND, Phonological Neighborhood Density (PND) of words af-
fects lexical processing, which indicates a need to control for such variables when
designing a study. A word´s PND refers to the number of words in the lexicon
1Following the terminology in this ﬁeld, we will refer to the size of the neighbourhood
when using the term ’density’, both for semantic and phonologic neighbourhoods.
7
that can be formed by substituting a single phoneme of the target word. Like-
wise, orthographic neighbourhood density (OND) is deﬁned by the number of
words that can be formed by replacing a single letter of the target word (Colheart
et al.´s N metric) (Coltheart et al., 1977). These two measures imply consider-
able diﬀerences in opaque languages, such as English, Arabic or French, because
phonemes do not present a one-to-one mapping into graphemes. Some studies
on opaque languages have argued that neighbourhood eﬀects reﬂect phonologi-
cal rather than orthographic similarity (Mulatti et al., 2006; Yates et al., 2004);
when orthographic similarity is controlled, phonological similarity still aﬀects
lexical decision times.
However, PND and OND measures may be used in-
distinctly in shallow languages such as Basque and Spanish because there is a
direct correspondence between phonemes and graphemes, with a few exceptions.
Thus, in the present work, orthographic neighbours have been considered when
computing the phonological neighbourhood density of noun pairs.
The inﬂuence of phonologically related words has been explored in diﬀerent
studies of phonological neighbourhood density, and it has shown relevant eﬀects
in task-dependent language processing. In particular, PND seems to exert com-
petitive eﬀects on word recognition tasks, but facilitatory eﬀects in production
tasks (Dell and Gordon, 2011; Gahl et al., 2012). In spoken word recognition,
the acoustic stimulus activates potential candidates that are phonologically sim-
ilar. Thus, the larger the phonological neighbourhood of a word, the harder it
is to recognise the target word (Luce and Pisoni, 1998). Paradoxically, in word
production, dense phonological neighbours seem to ease production. For ex-
ample, (Vitevitch, 2002) found facilitatory eﬀects of neighbourhood density in
picture naming in a study that controlled other key factors such as frequency,
neighbourhood frequency, familiarity and phonotactic probability.
Although
most studies have attested facilitatory eﬀects in production, such eﬀects are less
consistent than in recognition tasks.
8
4. Resources for the automatically created dataset
Two primary NLP sources of semantic information have been employed to
create the Basque and Spanish semantic similarity datasets based on embed-
dings; KBs and text corpora. Regarding the former, the multilingual version of
Wordnet (Miller, 1995) has been used due to its reliability as a KB in NLP and
the abundance of associated libraries and tools. Table 1 summarises the corpora
and their derived embeddings which constitute the core of the resources in this
work:
Acronym
Description
Corpora
txt
Text corpora
kb
Wordnet-based pseudo-corpora
embeddings
FTtxt
Fastext over text corpora
FTkb
Fastext over wordnet-based pseudo-corpora
FThyb
Combination of previous two embeddings
Table 1: Acronyms along with the description of the main resources used in this work. The
ﬁrst group includes two types of corpora, KB and text corpora (kb and txt, respectively).
The second group describes the types of embeddings, namely FasText over text corpora, over
wordnet pseudo-corpora and the meta-embeddings, which combine the ﬁrst two types (TFtxt,
TFkb and FThyb, respectively).
4.1. Wordnets and NLTK toolkit
Wordnet (Miller, 1995) is an English lexical database organized by concept
and meaning. Speciﬁcally, lexical forms of nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs
are grouped into sets of cognitive synonyms called synsets, each expressing a
language-independent concept. Further, each synset is linked to several synsets
via semantic relations such as hypernymy, hyponymy, meronymy and antonymy,
thus, creating a semantic network.
The semantic structure of Wordnet gives us a robust framework for the
present work. First, the nature of the semantic information it conveys around
9
words and concepts allows assigning two of the previously mentioned features to
each word of the dataset; SND and concreteness. Second, the semantic structure
of the WordNet grants coding in two of the three types of embeddings employed
in this work, namely wordnet and hybrid embeddings (see 4.3).
We have used the Open Multilingual Wordnet (OMW)2 which is linked to
the Princeton WordNet 3.0 (PWN)3. OMW extends the former English Word-
net to 34 languages, including Basque and Spanish, and uses the PWN synset
structure. Thus, it maps the lexicalizations of all languages into the same se-
mantic network. This extension method based on English Wordnet’s structure
is called expand-approach4. We have used Python NLTK toolkit5 to extract
concreteness and SND features from Wordnet synsets (see section 5.2), for both
Basque and Spanish.
In parallel to the KB Wordnet, we have used language corpora as a comple-
mentary semantic information resource, which is introduced in the next section.
4.2. Corpora
In the following section, we describe the two types of corpora used during
the construction of the dataset; the text corpora and the wordnet-based KB
pseudo-corpora.
4.2.1. Text corpora
Text corpora are collections of vast amounts of texts, being usually anno-
tated (e.g., British National Corpus) 6 or even syntactically parsed (e.g., Penn
TreeBank (Marcus et al., 1993)).
Plain text corpora with no structure have
been used to create this dataset. The use of plain text has allowed using greater
2http://compling.hss.ntu.edu.sg/omw/
3https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
4In this paper, we will refer to the original PWN and the one used in this work (Wordnet
3.0) as ’Wordnet’. In contrast, we will use ’wordnet’ for the rest which derive from PWM
such as the Spanish and Basque ones.
5https://www.nltk.org/howto/wordnet.html
6https://www.english-corpora.org/bnc/
10
text corpora in the computation of the relationships of words and their contexts
via word occurrence. Hence, we have calculated directly from the corpora the
similarity between words by using word embeddings. In the case of Basque, it
has also been used for extracting word frequencies (see section 5.2.4).
In Spanish, we have employed the readily available 2018 Wikipedia dump
text corpora7, extracting the text from the dump using a script8. Since the size
of Wikipedia is insuﬃcient for building a large corpus in low-resourced languages
such as Basque, web crawling has been used to complement the corpora in this
language, since it is an eﬀective method for collecting texts to compensate for
this deﬁciency (Leturia, 2012). Thus for the case of Basque, we have employed
the publicly available Euscrawl corpus9 (Artetxe et al., 2022).
Both Basque and Spanish corpora were pre-processed with the standard pro-
cedure, that is, lowercase and tokenization. Token sparsity in Basque, for being
an agglutinative language, was avoided with an in-house stemmer. The ﬁnal
Spanish and Basque corpus comprises 608 and 288 million tokens, respectively.
4.2.2. Knowledge-based corpora
This kind of corpora is not as known as the text corpora, but it has recently
gained some attention in the NLP ﬁeld. The knowledge-based corpora latently
contain the semantic structure of a KB (in our case Basque or Spanish word-
nets), and we have dubbed it as pseudo-corpora in the present work because it is
not human-understandable. This pseudo-corpora represents concepts and lexi-
calizations of knowledge bases in a much more compact format than traditional
methods. As explained in the following sections (see 4.3), the pseudo-corpora
have been processed by a neural network model to encode the semantic structure
of Basque or Spanish wordnets in a continuous vector space.
To do this, we applied the monolingual method for English introduced
by Goikoetxea et al. (2015), but in the Basque and Spanish settings.
This
7https://linguatools.org/tools/corpora/wikipedia-monolingual-corpora/
8xml2textx available in the same site. The content of tables and maths have been deleted.
9http://ixa.ehu.eus/euscrawl/
11
technique uses a Monte Carlo method to compute the PageRank algorithm
Avrachenkov et al. (2007). The algorithm considers the KB as an undirected
graph comprised of concepts and links among concepts. It needs a dictionary
which associates words with concepts, as well as a damping factor α that deter-
mines the continuity of the random walk and the maximum number of walks.
For creating every context 10 the algorithm starts in a random concept and
launches a random lexical form of the concept via the dictionary. Afterwards,
it decides whether to jump to another concept11 and to launch a random lexical
form of the latter, or stops the walk and starts over a new walk. Finally, if the
number of walks reaches the maximum number of walks, it ends the process.
Note that the word is fed to a text ﬁle whenever the method launches a lexical
form in the walk.
Each line of the following example shows a diﬀerent walk of the monolin-
gual algorithm in Wordnet 3.0, which is used by Goikoetxea et al. (2015). In
this case, every walk has a diﬀerent length, and each jump from concept to
concept has launched a random lexicalization. It is worth mentioning that this
pseudo-corpus is not human-readable, but every walk gathers semantically re-
lated words, so that implicitly it contains Wordnet’s structure. The following
example shows ﬁve random walks from an English Wordnet pseudo-corpus:
storyteller liar beguiler grifter dissimulation
revitalize strength delicate ethereal
paved patio terrace house living_room home
swimming dive
backlog fire re-afforest forest woods rainforest
As mentioned before, the monolingual version of this method is adapted to
the Basque and Spanish setup, using the dictionaries of both languages from
10Context refers to each of the lines in the pseudo-corpora created by the algorithm.
11This will depend on the parameter α
12
OMW; hence, aligned with Wordnet 3.0 semantic structure. This means that
the former English lexical forms have been translated to the target language,
but the semantic structure remains intact. The resultant wordnets’ size is not
the same for every language, since expand-approach wordnets do not have the
same number of lexicalizations as the former English Wordnet 3.0. As shown in
Table 2, Basque and Spanish wordnets’ sizes are much smaller than the original
one.
Lexicalizations
Synsets
EN
147306
136334
ES
53039
55814
EU
26701
30464
Table 2: Wordnet sizes for English (EN), Spanish (ES) and Basque (EU). Number of lexical-
izations and synsets in the middle and rightmost columns, respectively.
The reduction of the size of the semantic structure and the number of lexical
forms in Basque and Spanish directly impacts the dimension of the wordnet-
based corpora in both languages. To prevent saturation and redundant infor-
mation as described by (Goikoetxea et al., 2015, 2018), the sizes of the pseudo-
corpora in both languages (see section 4.2) have been limited. Even though the
wordnet-based corpus is smaller in Basque, they are big enough to encode their
respective wordnets’ semantic structure (see section 4.3).
English Wordnet 3.0 with glosses consists of 147306 lexical forms, and Goikoetxea et al.
(2016) reached the peak performance in word similarity task with 200 million
random walks, which created an 1100 million token corpus. In this work, we
kept the same proportion between the number of lexical forms and random
walks as Goikoetxea et al. (2016) in order to ensure good performance. Thus 72
million and 36.3 million random walks were performed for Spanish and Basque,
respectively, resulting in a corpus of 406 million tokens for the former and 166
million for the latter.
13
4.3. Embeddings
Three types of static embeddings have been computed: text embeddings
(FTtxt), wordnet-based embeddings (FTkb), and hybrid embedding (FThyb).
These word representations encompass the two sources of semantic information
(text and KB embeddings) related to word similarity (see section 2).
The text embeddings are low-dimensional word representations computed
following the Distributional Hypothesis Harris (1954). More precisely, a neural
network processes the whole text corpus by traversing the corpus word by word,
computing words’ representations based on the Distributional Hypothesis. It
calculates the representation of a given word based on the representations of all
the neighbours found within a predeﬁned window while traversing the corpus.
Eventually, every token in the corpus ends up with a vector representation
(embedding) that latently encodes its semantic (and syntactic) features.
In this work, the neural-based model fastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017)
has been used because of its more robust performance. It implements a variant
of the Distributional Hypothesis which, instead of exploiting the neighbouring
words’ information to compute a representation of a given word, exploits sub-
word information. Both text-based and wordnet-based embeddings have been
calculated using fastText.
In the case of Basque and Spanish text-based embeddings, we fed fastText
with their respective text corpora (see 4.2) separately. Regarding wordnet-based
ones, we encoded the semantic structure of Basque and Spanish wordnets in a
vector space following the method proposed by (Goikoetxea et al., 2015), which
comprises two steps. First, the creation of Basque and Spanish Wordnet pseudo-
corpus, as explained in the previous section. Second, processing of Basque and
Spanish pseudo-corpora with a neural-based model to obtain their respective
wordnet embeddings. In the original proposal, (Goikoetxea et al., 2015) used
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), but as mentioned before, in the present work
fastText has been used with the same parameters as in Mikolov et al. (2018).
Recent works show that embeddings which combine semantic information
from both text and KB (i.e., hybrid embeddings) have an overall higher per-
14
formance in word similarity tasks. Lastra-D´ıaz et al. (2019) proved that hybrid
embeddings outperformed most ontology-based measures and the rest of the
word embedding models. Likewise, (Goikoetxea et al., 2016; Garc´ıa et al., 2020)
proved that hybrid embeddings are more explicative of human perception of se-
mantic distance than text or KB embeddings separately. In the present work,
the method proposed originally by Goikoetxea et al. (2016) and improved by
Goikoetxea et al. (2016) and Garc´ıa et al. (2020) will be implemented in the
computation of hybrid embeddings.
In short, (Garc´ıa et al., 2020) proposal
consists in four steps12:
1. To compute separate text and wordnet embeddings.
2. To map text embeddings space onto the wordnet one.
3. To estimate word embeddings for both spaces.
4. To combine equivalent text and wordnet embeddings.
In the creation of FThyb embeddings, Garc´ıa et al. (2020) have been strictly
followed, employing vecmap (Artetxe et al., 2018) for the mapping of text and
wordnet embeddings.
4.3.1. Evaluation of the quality of the embeddings in similarity task
To verify the quality of the three types of embeddings, we have tested them
in a word similarity task. In NLP, word similarity is commonly calculated by
the cosine similarity of the angle between two-word embeddings, measuring the
similarity of the words they represent. The cosine similarity is determined by
computing the dot product of the two vectors and dividing it by the product of
the Euclidean norms of the vectors. The cosine similarity is a measure ranging
from 0 to 1, where 0 means the complete absence of similarity and 1 means
complete similarity (i.e., synonyms). The similarity measurement is independent
of the origins of the embeddings, in the way that that text, wordnet and hybrid
representations are processed in the same way.
12For further details, see Garc´ıa et al. (2020).
15
In this paper, the term similarity has been used indistinctly, but the dif-
ference between pure similarity and relatedness has been widely recognised in
cognitive sciences for a long time (Tversky, 1977). Pure similarity measures
the degree to which two concepts share semantic features, while relatedness is
the degree of association between two words. Regarding the semantic relations
involved, pure similarity includes synonymy and hyponymy/hyperonymy. In
contrast, relatedness encompasses the previous ones and a wider variety of re-
lations, such as meronymy, functional associations and other unusual relations.
For example, wolf and dog are taxonomically linked by hypernymy relations
in the same semantic structure and share many features; thus, they have high
similarity. In contrast, wolf and moon do not share any semantic feature (low
similarity) but are related by association; hence, they have a high relatedness.
Cosine similarity measurement does not distinguish between these two as-
pects but can be applied to diﬀerent types of embeddings to measure distinc-
tive semantic relations. In this work, we have chosen three types of embed-
dings, which perform diﬀerently in pure semantic similarity (Hill et al., 2015;
Agirre et al., 2009; Rubenstein and Goodenough, 1965) and relatedness (Finkelstein et al.,
2001; Bruni et al., 2014) measures. Broadly, wordnet embeddings are more pre-
cise for measuring pure similarity relations, text embeddings are more sensitive
to compute relatedness, and hybrid embeddings have been proven to be more
robust for capturing semantic relations in general (Goikoetxea et al., 2016, 2018;
Garc´ıa et al., 2020).
Hence in this work, we chose the available similarity and relatedness datasets
for evaluating all embeddings in both languages. In Spanish, we operated with
the pure similarity datasets RG65 (RG) (Camacho Collados et al., 2015) and
SimLex999 (SL) (Etcheverry and Wonsever, 2016), and the relatedness dataset
Wordsim353 (WS) (Hassan and Mihalcea, 2009).
In the case of Basque, we
used the pure similarity RG dataset and the relatedness dataset WS created by
Goikoetxea et al. (2018).
In both Spanish and Basque, FTtxt, FTkb and FThyb representations have
been compared with the baseline, using publicly available text-based represen-
16
tations fastText 13. All of our embeddings have been computed with the set
of parameters as in the baseline embeddings.
The Spearman correlation re-
sults between the embeddings and the gold standards are shown in table 3 and
discussed below:
Dataset
RG
WS
SL
EU
Baseline
77.05
65.7
—
FTtxt
77.86
73.31
—
FTkb
85.67
65.88
—
FThyb
86.55
74.57
—
ES
Baseline
87.9
57.8
36.58
FTtxt
86.57
57.28
28.7
FTkb
72.84
57.32
39.93
FThyb
87.25
63.45
40.57
Table 3: Word similarity task results in RG, Wordsim353 (WS) and SimLex999 (SL) datasets
in Basque (EU) and Spanish (ES). Text (F Ttxt), wordnet-based (F Tkb) and hybrid embedding
(F Thyb) representations are compared to their baselines. The best results for each dataset
and language are expressed in bold.
• FTtxt embeddings: FTtxt results perform similarly to the baseline ones in
both languages, with two exceptions. One, the Basque FTtxt result in the
WS dataset is higher than the baseline, likely due to the greater corpus size
Euscrawl. Second, the Spanish FTtxt in the SL dataset is lower than the
baseline. The only plausible explanation for this result in the Spanish SL
may lie in the diﬀerences in the pre-processing of the corpus; the baseline
text corpus was tokenized with Europarl pre-processing tools14, whereas
the NLTK tokenizer has been used in the present work.
13https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/crawl-vectors.html
14https://www.statmt.org/europarl/
17
• FTkb embeddings: being this type of embeddings more suited for pure
similarity datasets (RG and SL) rather than for relatedness ones (WS),
FTkb results are higher than the baseline in the Basque RG and the Span-
ish SL, but not in the Spanish RG. This underperformance in Spanish
must be interpreted with caution, as the RG dataset is small (64 pairs)
and it has low statistical power.
The most noticeable result, though, is in the relatedness WS dataset, in
which FTkb performs at baseline. Note that the baseline txt-based em-
beddings are supposed to have a better performance in WS due to their
capacity of better capturing relatedness relations, so we expect them to
obtain better results than the FTkb measurement. However, the incorpo-
ration of gloss relations (which are relatedness relations) when creating
the wordnet-based corpora may has enhanced the capability of FTkb em-
beddings to measure relatedness.
• FThyb embeddings: comparing the results of FTtxt, FTkb and FThyb em-
beddings, we ﬁnd that the combination of the ﬁrst two into the latter
enhances their performance in similarity tasks for both languages across
all datasets. FThyb also outperforms the baseline in all datasets, with the
only exception of RG in Spanish, likely due to its small size, as mentioned
above.
In sum, the three types of embeddings in this work have performed as ex-
pected, and furthermore, FThyb embeddings have shown overall best results.
Moreover, the quality of the embeddings in the Basque language has been proven
to be the best known to date. Note that the excellence of the embeddings is
critical in this work, as they are used to create the three semantic similarity
measurements (see section 5.1) that constitute the core features of the dataset.
Altogether, all embeddings created in this work have been considered suitable
to be included in the ﬁnal dataset.
18
5. Building the dataset
This work has aimed to create a dataset of noun pairsthat compiles informa-
tion about the semantic similarity between them. As already introduced, the
semantic similarity has been calculated using three types of embeddings; text,
wordnet and hybrid embeddings. The linguistic features controlled in pairing
the nouns have been concreteness, word frequency, and semantic (SND) and
phonological (PND) neighbour density.
Each feature has been clustered via KNN classiﬁcation (Cover and Hart,
1967) to match pairs of words. That is, each pair of nouns has been set every
time there has been a coincidence in the four feature clusters. Despite maximiz-
ing the number of potential noun pairs, a two-group clustering (low and high
values) has resulted balanced in concreteness, word frequency, SND and PND
(see Table 6).
Each line of the ﬁnal dataset comprises the normalised values of features
of the noun pairs, their corresponding clusters and the three similarity mea-
surements. Each language has a separate dataset built by following the next
steps:
• First, compute the four features for every noun in the corresponding
Basque or Spanish wordnet.
• Second, ﬁnd every possible noun pairs thatmatch the four linguistic fea-
tures via clustering.
• Third, compute similarities for every noun pair.
• Last, write every noun pair’s three similarity measurements along with
their features’ values (L2-normalised) and cluster number.
The following sections are dedicated to describing the details of the mea-
surements of every feature mentioned in the above paragraphs and the creation
of the ﬁnal dataset.
19
EUS
ESP
FThyb
FTkb
FTtxt
FThyb
FTkb
FTtxt
0.0-0.2
89.1
98.44
84.9
93.52
98.68
89.13
0.2-0.4
10,3
1.48
13.97
6.09
1.24
10.12
0.4-0.6
0.54
0.066
1.045
0.36
0.06
0.71
0.6-0.8
0.025
0.009
0,048
0.015
0.007
0.03
0.8-1.0
0.00135
0.0015
0.0018
0.001
0.0013
0.0014
Table 4: Percentages of word similarity values in the Basque and Spanish dataset across ﬁve
ranges and three types of embeddings; text (F Ttxt ), wordnet (F Tkb ), and hybrid (F Thyb ).
5.1. Similarity measurements
Table 4 shows the percentages of semantic similarity values for all possible
noun pairs classiﬁed along ﬁve diﬀerent ranks. Only nouns with the three types
of embeddings that match all four linguistic features are considered. The per-
centages presented in table 4 show a bias towards lower rank similarity values
for all types of embeddings in both Basque and Spanish. This is even more
evident in the wordnet embeddings.
This phenomenon was already pointed out in a cross-lingual setting by
Lample and Conneau (2019). The author observed that fasText based embed-
dings’ cosine similarity mean value was considerably lower than that achieved
by XLM (Lample and Conneau, 2019), a large cross-lingual language model.
Authors suggested that the nature of these two types of vector spaces may re-
sult in higher word similarity values, because language models’ vector spaces
are more compact than the fasText due to the formers training in a sentence
encoder. This phenomenon only shows that the non-contextual embeddings like
fasText or word2vec are sparser than the language model ones. As seen in the
results of table 3, the diﬀerent organization of the lexicon in the vector spaces
does not aﬀect the performance of the embeddings in the word similarity task.
20
5.2. Features
This section describes the details of the calculation of each linguistic feature
before being L2-normalised and clustered in the ﬁnal dataset.
5.2.1. Concreteness
Concreteness measurements were calculated automatically by exploiting Word-
net’s taxonomy in Basque and Spanish. For doing so, Feng et al. (2011) was
followed, who proposed an algorithm for predicting word concreteness via vari-
ous lexical resources and features, namely, human ratings, lexical types, latent
semantic analysis dimensions, word frequency and length, and hypernymy level.
Among these several aspects, in this work, only the Hypernymy Level was con-
sidered for computing concreteness. This is because even though human ratings
and lexical type are not included in this research, the rest are going to be anal-
ysed and treated as separate features. 15. The Hypernymy Level aspect scores
the concreteness of a word following its hypernymy relations in Wordnet’s hi-
erarchical structure.
For every noun in Basque and Spanish, the mentioned
method does the following in the corresponding wordnet:
• Check all of its synsets within a given noun.
• For each synset, the method counts every hypernym from the source synset
until the topmost synset (i.e., Wordnet’s root node entity), thus scoring
the depth of the source synset in Wordnet’s tree structure.
• Compute the concreteness of a given noun by averaging all the depths of
its synsets.
Note that the higher the depth, the more concrete the word is, and the lower
the depth more abstract it will be. For example, the word car has ﬁve synsets
in Wordnet 3.0.
If we choose the most common synset for that noun16, its
hypernymy path is the following:
15Although latent semantic analysis is not used for word representations in the present
word, more advanced techniques of static word embeddings are included (see section 4.3)
16The sense with the following deﬁnition in Wordnet: a motor vehicle with four wheels;
usually propelled by an internal combustion engine.
21
car →MotorVehicle →SelfPropelledVehicle →WheeledVehicle →Container
→Instrumentality →Artifact →Whole →Object →PhysicalEntity →Entity
.
Thus, the depth of the path of the mentioned synset of car is 10. The word
Wheeled Vehicle has a depth of 7, meaning that it is less concrete than car and
ambulance a depth of 11, therefore being more concrete than car. For the ﬁnal
score of the noun, the method computes all the depths of the rest of the synsets
and averages all of them.
5.2.2. Semantic neighbourhood density
This work’s framework for computing SND is also based on Wordnet’s se-
mantic structure. So, the semantic neighbours of every noun are computed by
counting all semantic relations of its synsets. A procedure similar to the one
described in section 5.2.1 has been used for every noun in Basque and Spanish:
• Check all of its synsets within a given noun.
• For each synset, count all its surrounding synsets linked by a Wordnet se-
mantic relation. This approach departs from the source synset and checks
all its semantic relations to ﬁnd its neighbouring synsets.
• Finally, compute the semantic neighbours of a noun averaging all the
counts in its synsets.
Only ﬁrst-degree semantic neighbours have been considered. Regarding the
Wordnet semantic relations, we have taken every available synset-based seman-
tic relation in the NLTK toolkit and discarded the more surface-level lexical
relations like derivation and pertainymy.
Following the same example as in the previous section, the most common
synset for the noun car has 31 hyponyms, 29 meronym parts and one hypernym.
That is, 61 ﬁrst-degree semantic neighbours.
22
5.2.3. Phonological neighbourhood density
Phonological neighbours are pairs of words that diﬀer in only one phonologi-
cal segment, such as cat and bat. For this work, phonological neighbourhood size
has been calculated with the Levenstein distance method Levenshtein (1965).
It has several advantages compared to other alternatives, such as the Ham-
ming Distance or the Jaro-Winkler distance; it accounts for both substitution
and insertion/deletion operations, so the distance is more accurately computed,
independent of the length of the strings.
This work assumes that two words are phonological neighbours if their Lev-
enstein distance is smaller or equal to one. For example, in the case of the word
car, the number of phonological neighbours that meet the conditions mentioned
above is 31, with ﬁrst-degree neighbouring words such as cat, card, scar, ear,
jar and tar. Multiword expressions and nouns with less than three characters
in length have been excluded from the dataset.
5.2.4. Word frequency
Word frequency measures have been calculated using Zipf frequencies; a
base-10 logarithm of its occurrences per billion words. Zipf frequency allows for
a more comprehensive analysis than raw noun counts because it accounts for
the relative importance of a word in the corpus.
For Spanish, Python’s wordfreq library has been used to obtain Zipf fre-
quencies. Given the nature of the 10-base logarithm scale, Zipf values in this
library are within the range of 0-8. In Basque, Zipf frequencies have been com-
puted from the most extensive Basque public corpus, Euscrawl (Artetxe et al.,
2022). Euscrawl corpus has been pre-processed as described in 4.2, and raw
word counts have been calculated using fastext model from the gemsim li-
brary in Python. Afterwards, those counts were converted into Zipf frequencies,
limiting their maximum and minimum values between 0 and 8.
23
5.2.5. Feature dictionaries
As mentioned in previous sections, each noun is accompanied by four features
in the dataset. An independent dictionary has been created for each feature
(i.e., concreteness, frequency, SND and PND) in Basque and Spanish, so that
it assigns the measurements of its feature along with its cluster number to each
noun. Once the feature dictionaries have been computed, the next step has been
building the ﬁnal dataset (see section 5.3).
The lists of single-word nouns from Spanish and Basque wordnets have been
extracted via NLTK toolkit, constraining the candidates to 28647 and 22877 in
each language, respectively.
Although the Spanish wordnet nearly doubles the Basque one in size (see
Table 2), the unbalance is not pronounced in the size of the feature dictionaries
because the number of available nouns in the NLTK toolkit is comparable across
these two languages. To improve the KNN classiﬁcation of the nouns across
each feature, outliers have been removed using the interquartile range, and L2-
normalisation has been applied to every raw measurement. This adjustment has
diminished the size of the datasets but has reduced noisy samples and balanced
cluster sizes.
Table 5 shows the resulting feature dictionaries’ size and the mean value for
each feature.
Table 5 shows that the Basque feature dictionaries are slightly bigger than
the ones in Spanish, likely because there are more outliers in the Spanish dataset.
Regarding the average value of each feature, the only diﬀerence is in frequency.
On average, Basque nouns are more frequent than the Spanish ones17. A rea-
sonable explanation for this diﬀerence may be the size of the corpora used to
calculate word frequencies in each language. The Scrawl corpus is smaller than
the one used for computing Spanish Zipf frequencies in the NLTK toolkit, and
17Note that the mean Zipf frequency value of the Basque words is 6, meaning that a word
appears once per a thousand words, whereas the mean Zipf value in Spanish is 2, indicating
that a word appears once per million words.
24
EU
ES
size
19660
14771
CNC
avg
8.41
8.38
size
14380
12146
FRQ
avg
6.39
2.95
size
18044
15534
SND
acg
2.47
2.18
size
14671
14608
PND
avg
1.75
1.38
Table 5: Concreteness (CNC), frequency (FRQ), phonological neighbourhood density (PND)
and semantic neighbourhood density (SND) dictionaries for Basque (EU) and Spanish (ES).
The upper line in each feature shows the size of a speciﬁc dictionary, and the lower line shows
the mean value of each measurement.
it has much fewer infrequent words. This may bias the Zipf frequency towards
a higher average value in Basque.
Table 6 shows the token distribution of all previous dictionaries in KNN-
based clusters. Features are clustered in two groups, diﬀerencing between high
and low values. The size of the dictionary of phonological neighbours features is
far below the rest. This is because nouns with 0 neighbours have been excluded
from the KNN classiﬁcation (14671 in Basque and 12085 in Spanish) because
they tend to unbalance the cluster distribution, leaving the cluster with high-
PND value with almost no content. Therefore, nouns with 0 neighbours have
been extracted into a subgroup and treated as a separate cluster when creating
the ﬁnal dataset.
5.3. Construction of word pair matrix
The ﬁnal step in this work has consisted of creating the noun pair dataset
out of the feature dictionaries described previously. There are two conditions
to fulﬁl to set a pair of nouns:
25
EUS
ESP
L
H
L
H
CNC
11373
8287
9692
6179
FRQ
5646
8734
6103
6043
SND
13915
4129
4772
9836
PND
3791
974
1017
2432
Table 6: Concreteness (CNC), frequency (FRQ), phonological neighbourhood density (PND)
and semantic neighbourhood density (SND) dictionaries for Basque (EU) and Spanish (ES).
The upper line in each feature shows the size of a speciﬁc dictionary, and the lower line shows
the mean value of each measurement
• First, the two nouns composing the pair must be represented in the three
types of embeddings.
• Second, the two nouns composing the pair mustshare cluster in all four
linguistic features.
The number of nouns that have fulﬁlled the ﬁrst condition was more consid-
erable in Basque (n= 15110) than in Spanish (n= 8565). This phenomenon is
due to the high number of multiword expressions in the Spanish wordnet, which
are discharged from the dataset. The suppression of the multiword leads to a
lower overlap of text and wordnet embeddings and, therefore, a lower amount
of hybrid embeddings.
All the nouns that have fulﬁlled the ﬁrst condition have been traversed to
ﬁnd all possible pairs of nouns that match the four linguistic features, as stated
in the second condition. Every time a pair has been set, featural values in con-
creteness, frequency, SND, and PND, as well as their cluster identiﬁcation18,
have been inserted in the dataset, along with the three types of similarity mea-
surements. Altogether, each nour pair contains pieces of information spread
18We used -1 number for 0 neighbour subgroup in phonological neighbour matching, as
that group was not part of a KNN cluster. For the rest of the linguistic features, clustering
was marked with 0 and 1 to indicate low or high-value clustering
26
over 15 columns.
6. Conclusions
Psycholinguistic evidence supports the idea that the overlap of semantic
features across concepts is crucial in the computation of semantic relations,
and by extension, in semantic processing. A comprehensive work on NLP has
shown that embeddings or vectors are a sensitive method to artiﬁcially compute
similarities across concepts by accounting for large number of semantic prop-
erties, which may be applied to diﬀerent types of linguistic resources in order
to uncover distinctive semantic relations. This work has aimed to bridge com-
putational linguistics and psycholinguistics to automatically build a dataset of
vectorised word similarity measures in Basque and Spanish19.
We have presented a computationally grounded dataset that encompasses
diﬀerent aspects of the semantic information present in both text corpora and
knowledge bases. On the one hand, each dataset includes three similarity mea-
surements based on their corresponding embedding computations, namely, text-
based, wordnet-based and hybrid embeddings. These measurements encode dif-
ferent subtleties of meaning. Text-based embeddings are computed out of word
co-occurrence in large natural language corpora; being prone to better measure
relatedness relations. Wordnet-based embeddings encode the semantic structure
of Wordnet, so that they are considered a measurement of pure similarity rela-
tions. Finally, hybrid embeddings combine both text-based and wordnet-based
embeddings, binding categorical and associative relations. In addition, all the
materials have been controlled for several linguistic features (concreteness, fre-
quency and semantic and phonemic neighbour size) to adjust the dataset to
various research interests and requirements.
19Datasets will be available upon acceptance
27
7. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Leonardo grant of the BBVA Foundation
for Researchers and Cultural Creators 2021 (FP2157) (J.G., M.A., I.S.), Con-
solidated Group funding from the Basque Government (IT1439/22-GIC21/132)
(M.A., I.S.), and the grant RYC2021-033222-I funded by the Ministry of Science
and Innovation/State Research Agency/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by the
European Union NextGenerationEU/Recovery, Transformation and Resilience
Plan of Spain (M.A.).
28
References
Abnar, S., Ahmed, R., Mijnheer, M., Zuidema, W., 2017. Experiential, distri-
butional and dependency-based word embeddings have complementary roles
in decoding brain activity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09285.
Agirre, E., Alfonseca, E., Hall, K., Kravalova, J., Pa¸sca, M., Soroa, A., 2009. A
study on similarity and relatedness using distributional and WordNet-based
approaches. In: Proceedings of HLT-NAACL. pp. 19–27.
Alnafesah, G., Madabushi, H. T., Lee, M., 2020. Augmenting neural metaphor
detection with concreteness. In: Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Fig-
urative Language Processing. pp. 204–210.
Artetxe, M., Aldabe, I., Agerri, R., Perez-de Vi˜naspre, O., Soroa, A., 2022.
Does corpus quality really matter for low-resource languages? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.08111.
Artetxe, M., Labaka, G., Agirre, E., 2018. A robust self-learning method for fully
unsupervised cross-lingual mappings of word embeddings. In: Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 789–798.
Auguste, J., Rey, A., Favre, B., 2017. Evaluation of word embeddings against
cognitive processes: primed reaction times in lexical decision and naming
tasks. In: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on evaluating vector space repre-
sentations for NLP. pp. 21–26.
Avrachenkov, K., Litvak, N., Nemirovsky, D., Osipova, N., 2007. Monte carlo
methods in pagerank computation: When one iteration is suﬃcient. SIAM
Journal on Numerical Analysis 45 (2), 890–904.
Bakarov, A., 2018. A survey of word embeddings evaluation methods. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.09536.
29
Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., Lowe, J. B., 1998. The berkeley framenet project.
In: COLING 1998 Volume 1: The 17th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Balota, D. A., Chumbley, J. I., 1984. Are lexical decisions a good measure of
lexical access? the role of word frequency in the neglected decision stage.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception and performance
10 (3), 340.
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D., Spieler, D. H., Yap,
M. J., 2004. Visual word recognition of single-syllable words. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: General 133 (2), 283.
Barber, H. A., Otten, L. J., Kousta, S.-T., Vigliocco, G., 2013. Concreteness in
word processing: Erp and behavioral eﬀects in a lexical decision task. Brain
and language 125 (1), 47–53.
Barsalou, L. W., 1999. Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences 22 (4), 577–660.
Benedek, M., Kenett, Y. N., Umdasch, K., Anaki, D., Faust, M., Neubauer,
A. C., 2017. How semantic memory structure and intelligence contribute to
creative thought: a network science approach. Thinking & Reasoning 23 (2),
158–183.
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., Mikolov, T., 2017. Enriching word vectors
with subword information. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 5, 135–146.
Bonin, P., M´eot, A., Bugaiska, A., 2018. Concreteness norms for 1,659 french
words: Relationships with other psycholinguistic variables and word recogni-
tion times. Behavior research methods 50 (6), 2366–2387.
Broderick, M. P., Di Liberto, G. M., Anderson, A. J., Rofes, A., Lalor, E. C.,
2021. Dissociable electrophysiological measures of natural language process-
30
ing reveal diﬀerences in speech comprehension strategy in healthy ageing.
Scientiﬁc Reports 11 (1), 4963.
Bruni, E., Tran, N.-K., Baroni, M., 2014. Multimodal distributional semantics.
JAIR 49, 1–47.
Brysbaert, M., Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., 2018. The word frequency eﬀect in
word processing: An updated review. Current Directions in Psychological
Science 27 (1), 45–50.
Brysbaert, M., New, B., 2009. Moving beyond kuˇcera and francis: A critical
evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and
improved word frequency measure for american english. Behavior Research
Methods 41 (4), 977–990.
Brysbaert, M., Stevens, M., De Deyne, S., Voorspoels, W., Storms, G., 2014a.
Norms of age of acquisition and concreteness for 30,000 dutch words. Acta
psychologica 150, 80–84.
Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., 2014b. Concreteness ratings
for 40 thousand generally known english word lemmas. Behavior Research
Methods 46 (3), 904–911.
Buchanan, L., Westbury, C., Burgess, C., 2001. Characterizing semantic space:
Neighborhood eﬀects in word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
8 (3), 531–544.
Camacho Collados, J., Pilehvar, M. T., Navigli, R., 2015. A framework for
the construction of monolingual and cross-lingual word similarity datasets.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Charbonnier, J., Wartena, C., 2019. Predicting word concreteness and im-
agery. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational
Semantics-Long Papers. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 176–
187.
31
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J., Besner, D., 1977. Access to the inter-
nal lexicon. Attention and Performance 6, 535–555.
Cop, U., Dirix, N., Drieghe, D., Duyck, W., 2017. Presenting geco: An eyetrack-
ing corpus of monolingual and bilingual sentence reading. Behavior research
methods 49, 602–615.
Cosgrove, A. L., Kenett, Y. N., Beaty, R. E., Diaz, M. T., 2021. Quantifying
ﬂexibility in thought: The resiliency of semantic networks diﬀers across the
lifespan. Cognition 211, 104631.
´Coso, B., Guasch, M., Ferr´e, P., Hinojosa, J. A., 2019. Aﬀective and concreteness
norms for 3,022 croatian words. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy 72 (9), 2302–2312.
Cover, T., Hart, P., 1967. Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation. IEEE trans-
actions on information theory 13 (1), 21–27.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., Tanenhaus, M. K., 2001. Time course of frequency
eﬀects in spoken-word recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive
Psychology 42 (4), 317–367.
Dave, K., Lawrence, S., Pennock, D. M., 2003. Mining the peanut gallery: Opin-
ion extraction and semantic classiﬁcation of product reviews. In: Proceedings
of the 12th international conference on World Wide Web. pp. 519–528.
Dell, G., Gordon, J., 2011. Neighbors in the lexicon: Friends or foes? Phonetics
and phonology in language comprehension and production, eds N. O. Schiller
and A. S. Meyer, 9–38.
Etcheverry, M., Wonsever, D., 2016. Spanish word vectors from wikipedia. In:
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16). pp. 3681–3685.
Ettinger, A., Linzen, T., 2016. Evaluating vector space models using human
semantic priming results. In: Proceedings of the 1st workshop on evaluating
vector-space representations for NLP. pp. 72–77.
32
Feng, S., Cai, Z., Crossley, S., McNamara, D. S., 2011. Simulating human ratings
on word concreteness. In: Twenty-Fourth International FLAIRS Conference.
Finkelstein, L., Gabrilovich, E., Matias, Y., Rivlin, E., Solan, Z., Wolfman,
G., Ruppin, E., 2001. Placing search in context: The concept revisited. In:
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web. pp.
406–414.
Fischer, M. H., Zwaan, R. A., 2008. Embodied language: A review of the role
of the motor system in language comprehension. Quarterly Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology 61 (6), 82–850.
Gahl, S., Yao, Y., Johnson, K., 2012. Why reduce? phonological neighborhood
density and phonetic reduction in spontaneous speech. Journal of Memory
and Language 66 (4), 789–806.
Garc´ıa, I., Agerri, R., Rigau, G., 2020. A common semantic space for monolin-
gual and cross-lingual meta-embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06381.
Goikoetxea, J., Agirre, E., Soroa, A., 2016. Single or multiple? combining word
representations independently learned from text and wordnet. In: Thirtieth
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Goikoetxea, J., Soroa, A., Agirre, E., 2018. Bilingual embeddings with random
walks over multilingual wordnets. Knowledge-Based Systems 150, 218–230.
Goikoetxea, J., Soroa, A., Agirre, E., Donostia, B. C., 2015. Random walks
and neural network language models on knowledge bases. In: Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL. pp. 1434–1439.
Gregg, V., 1976. Word frequency, recognition and recall.
Guasch, M., Ferr´e, P., Fraga, I., 2016. Spanish norms for aﬀective and lexico-
semantic variables for 1,400 words. Behavior Research Methods 48 (4), 1358–
1369.
33
G¨unther, F., Rinaldi, L., Marelli, M., 2019. Vector-space models of semantic
representation from a cognitive perspective: A discussion of common miscon-
ceptions. Perspectives on Psychological Science 14 (6), 1006–1033.
Haghighi, A., Vanderwende, L., 2009. Exploring content models for multi-
document summarization. In: Proceedings of human language technologies:
The 2009 annual conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. pp. 362–370.
Harris, Z. S., 1954. Distributional structure. Word.
Hassan, S., Mihalcea, R., 2009. Cross-lingual semantic relatedness using en-
cyclopedic knowledge. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 1192–1201.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., Pulverm¨uller, F., 2004. Somatotopic representation of
action words in human motor and premotor cortex. Neuron 41 (2), 301–307.
Hayes, T. R., Henderson, J. M., 2021. Looking for semantic similarity: what
a vector-space model of semantics can tell us about attention in real-world
scenes. Psychological Science 32 (8), 1262–1270.
Hill, F., Reichart, R., Korhonen, A., 2015. Simlex-999: Evaluating seman-
tic models with (genuine) similarity estimation. Computational Linguistics
41 (4), 665–695.
Hollenstein, N., de la Torre, A., Langer, N., Zhang, C., 2019. Cogni-
val: A framework for cognitive word embedding evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.09001.
Incitti, F., Snidaro, L., 2021. Fusing contextual word embeddings for concrete-
ness estimation. In: 2021 IEEE 24th International Conference on Information
Fusion (FUSION). IEEE, pp. 1–8.
Jain, S., Huth, A., 2018. Incorporating context into language encoding models
for fmri. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31.
34
Jelodar, A. B., Alizadeh, M., Khadivi, S., 2010. Wordnet based features for
predicting brain activity associated with meanings of nouns. In: Proceedings
of the NAACL HLT 2010 First Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics.
pp. 18–26.
Kenett, Y. N., Levi, E., Anaki, D., Faust, M., 2017. The semantic distance task:
Quantifying semantic distance with semantic network path length. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 43 (9), 1470.
Kinsbourne, M., George, J., 1974. The mechanism of the word-frequency ef-
fect on recognition memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
13 (1), 63–69.
Koehn, P., Knowles, R., 2017. Six challenges for neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03872.
Lample, G., Conneau, A., 2019. Cross-lingual language model pretraining. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.07291.
Lastra-D´ıaz, J. J., Goikoetxea, J., Taieb, M. A. H., Garc´ıa-Serrano, A., Aouicha,
M. B., Agirre, E., 2019. A reproducible survey on word embeddings and
ontology-based methods for word similarity: Linear combinations outperform
the state of the art. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 85,
645–665.
Leturia, I., 2012. Evaluating diﬀerent methods for automatically collecting large
general corpora for basque from the web. In: Proceedings of COLING 2012.
pp. 1553–1570.
Levenshtein, V., 1965. Binary codes capable of correcting spurious insertions
and deletion of ones. Problems of Information Transmission 1 (1), 8–17.
Ljubeˇsi´c, N., Fiˇser, D., Peti-Stanti´c, A., 2018. Predicting concreteness and im-
ageability of words within and across languages via word embeddings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.02903.
35
Locker, L., Simpson, G., Yates, M., 2003. Semantic neighbourhood eﬀects on
the recognition of ambiguous words. Memory and Cognition (31), 505–515.
Long, Y., Xiang, R., Lu, Q., Huang, C.-R., Li, M., 2019. Improving atten-
tion model based on cognition grounded data for sentiment analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Aﬀective Computing 12 (4), 900–912.
Luce, P., Pisoni, D., 1998. Recognizing spoken words: The neighborhood acti-
vation model. Ear and Hearing 19 (1), 1–36.
Luke, S. G., Christianson, K., 2018. The provo corpus: A large eye-tracking
corpus with predictability norms. Behavior research methods 50, 826–833.
MacLeod, C. M., Kampe, K. E., 1996. Word frequency eﬀects on recall, recog-
nition, and word fragment completion tests. Journal of experimental psychol-
ogy: Learning, memory, and cognition 22 (1), 132.
Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., Brysbaert, M., 2017. Explaining human performance
in psycholinguistic tasks with models of semantic similarity based on predic-
tion and counting: A review and empirical validation. Journal of Memory and
Language 92, 57–78.
Marcus, M., Santorini, B., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of english: The penn treebank.
Mate, J., Allen, R. J., Baqu´es, J., 2012. What you say matters: Exploring
visual–verbal interactions in visual working memory. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology 65 (3), 395–400.
Mikolov, T., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., Puhrsch, C., Joulin, A., 2018. Advances
in pre-training distributed word representations. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018).
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., Dean, J., 2013. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Proceed-
ings of Advances in neural information processing systems. pp. 3111–3119.
36
Miller, G. A., 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications
of the ACM 38 (11), 39–41.
Mulatti, C., Reynolds, M., Besner, D., 2006. Neighborhood eﬀects in reading
aloud: new ﬁndings and new challenges for computational models. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 32 (4), 799–
810.
Navigli, R., Ponzetto, S. P., 2010. Babelnet: Building a very large multilin-
gual semantic network. In: Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics. pp. 216–225.
Paivio, A., 1971. Imagery and verbal processes.
Rabovsky, M., Schad, D., Abdel Rahman, R., 2016. Language production is
facilitated by semantic richness but inhibited by semantic density: Evidence
from picture naming. Cognition 146, 240–244.
Reilly, M., Desai, R., 2017. Eﬀects of semantic neighborhood density in abstract
and concrete words. Cognition 169, 46–53.
Rodrigues, J., Branco, R., Silva, J., Saedi, C., Branco, A., 2018. Predicting brain
activation with wordnet embeddings. In: Proceedings of the Eight Workshop
on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning and Processing.
pp. 1–5.
Rothe, S., Ebert, S., Sch¨utze, H., 2016. Ultradense word embeddings by orthog-
onal transformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07572.
Ruan, Y.-P., Ling, Z.-H., Hu, Y., 2016. Exploring semantic representation in
brain activity using word embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 669–679.
Rubenstein, H., Goodenough, J. B., 1965. Contextual correlates of synonymy.
Communications of the ACM 8 (10), 627–633.
37
Salicchi, L., Lenci, A., Chersoni, E., 2021. Looking for a role for word embed-
dings in eye-tracking features prediction: Does semantic similarity help? In:
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Seman-
tics (IWCS). pp. 87–92.
Schwanenﬂugel, P., 2010. Why are abstract concepts hard to understand? the
psychology of word meanings. Human Brain Mapping 31, 1459–1468.
Søgaard, A., 2016. Evaluating word embeddings with fmri and eye-tracking. In:
Proceedings of the 1st workshop on evaluating vector-space representations
for NLP. pp. 116–121.
Solovyev, V., Yu, V., Andreeva, M., Zaikin, A., 2022. Russian dictionary with
concreteness/abstractness indices. Russian Journal of Linguistics 26 (2), 515–
549.
Spink, A., Wolfram, D., Jansen, M. B., Saracevic, T., 2001. Searching the web:
The public and their queries. Journal of the American society for information
science and technology 52 (3), 226–234.
Strijkers, K., Costa, A., Thierry, G., 2010. Tracking lexical access in speech
production: electrophysiological correlates of word frequency and cognate
eﬀects. Cerebral Cortex 20 (4), 912–928.
Toneva, M., Wehbe, L., 2019. Interpreting and improving natural-language pro-
cessing (in machines) with natural language-processing (in the brain). Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32.
Tsvetkov, Y., Boytsov, L., Gershman, A., Nyberg, E., Dyer, C., 2014. Metaphor
detection with cross-lingual model transfer. In: Proceedings of the 52nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers). pp. 248–258.
Tversky, A., 1977. Features of similarity. Psychological Review 84 (4), 327.
38
Vitevitch, M., 2002. The inﬂuence of phonological similarity neighbors on speech
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 28 (4), 735–747.
Wang, J., Conder, J., Blitzer, D., Shinkareva, S., 2010. Neural representation
of abstract and concrete concepts: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies.
Human Brain Mapping 31 (10), 1459–1468.
Wulﬀ, D. U., De Deyne, S., Jones, M. N., Mata, R., 2019. New perspectives on
the aging lexicon. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23 (8), 686–698.
Yates, M., Locker, L., Simpson, G., 2004. The inﬂuence of phonological neigh-
borhood on visual word perception. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 11,
452–457.
Yates, M., Locker, L., Simpson, G. B., 2003. Semantic and phonological inﬂu-
ences on the processing of words and pseudohomophones. Memory & Cogni-
tion 31, 856–866.
39
