Title: Assessing the Applicability of Natural Language Processing to Traditional Social Science Methodology: A Case Study in Identifying Strategic Signaling Patterns in Presidential Directives
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.09738v1
--------------------------------------------------

LA-UR-25-31130
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Title:
Assessing the Applicability of Natural Language Processing to Traditional Social Science
Methodology: A Case Study in Identifying Strategic Signaling Patterns in Presidential
Directives
Author(s):
LeMay, Chase Joseph
Lane, Adam Martin
Seales, Johnny
Winstead, Maria
Baty, Samuel R.
Intended for:
Report
Issued:
2025-11-12 (Draft)
Los Alamos National Laboratory, an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer, is operated by Triad National Security, LLC for the National Nuclear Security
Administration of U.S. Department of Energy under contract 89233218CNA000001.  By approving this article, the publisher recognizes that the U.S. Government
retains nonexclusive, royalty-free license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution, or to allow others to do so, for U.S. Government
purposes.  Los Alamos National Laboratory requests that the publisher identify this article as work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of
Energy.  Los Alamos National Laboratory strongly supports academic freedom and a researcher's right to publish; as an institution, however, the Laboratory does
not endorse the viewpoint of a publication or guarantee its technical correctness.
1 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessing the Applicability of Natural Language Processing to Traditional Social Science 
Methodology: A Case Study in Identifying Strategic Signaling Patterns in Presidential Directives 
By Chase LeMay, Adam Lane, Johnny Seales, Maria Winstead, and Samuel Baty 
 
 
2 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Table of Contents 
Introduction----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------3 
Selected Literature Review: Signaling and NLP----------------------------------------------------------4 
Methodology---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6 
Results---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------13 
Discussion----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------15 
Conclusion----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------20 
Epilogue-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------21 
Annexes-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------22 
3 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Abstract 
Our research investigates how Natural Language Processing (NLP) can be used to extract main 
topics from a larger corpus of written data, as applied to the case of identifying signaling themes 
in Presidential Directives (PDs) from the Reagan through Clinton administrations. Analysts and 
NLP both identified relevant documents, demonstrating the potential utility of NLPs in research 
involving large written corpuses. However, we also identified discrepancies between NLP and 
human-labeled results that indicate a need for more research to assess the validity of NLP in this 
use case. The research was conducted in 2023, and the rapidly evolving landscape of AIML 
means existing tools have improved and new tools have been developed; this research displays 
the inherent capabilities of a potentially dated AI tool in emerging social science applications.  
Introduction  
States have interests they are willing to defend and lines they will not allow to be crossed 
without retaliation. It is often in the state’s interest to communicate these boundaries and 
potential responses so that adversaries do not unwittingly create a conflict that would incur      
costs for which they were not prepared. This is especially important in the context of nuclear 
weapons, where the cost could be catastrophic; a state may deter adversaries by stating that any 
established boundaries would be defended to the fullest extent, and whether that is true or not 
these claims must be backed up by observable measures to indicate the state’s willingness and 
capability to follow through. These observable measures are referred to as strategic signaling. To 
better understand how strategic signaling has been used by different US presidential 
administrations, we used human-assisted natural language processing in coordination with 
analysis conducted by researchers to explore Presidential Directives (PDs) to see how these 
documents were used to direct strategic signaling and to look for trends across administrations.  
The first aim of our research was to determine if natural language processing (NLP) could be 
used as a tool by researchers to quickly identify topics in written data, specifically in the context 
of national security policy documents. By creating a case study around the language used in PDs, 
we were able to compare the themes found by NLP and its categorization of documents against 
the themes and categorizations we as analysts had made. Specifically, we wanted to see if the 
data collection phase of social science research could be expedited through the application of 
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic modeling, a specific form of NLP which extracts latent 
topics from within a written dataset.  
The second aim of our research was to determine if there were trends in the focus of nuclear 
strategic signaling by different presidential administrations, spanning from Reagan to Clinton, 
looking specifically at the signaling directed at the Soviet Union/Russia. We chose to analyze 
PDs because these documents are one of the ways in which the president directs traditional 
signaling activity, such as diplomatic engagements, military planning and budgeting. Therefore, 
although PDs are intended primarily for an internal audience, we considered the language used in 
these documents as indicative of an administration’s overall strategy. Our timeframe starts with 
4 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
the Reagan administration, as we chose to examine the decade before and after the end of the 
Cold War and dissolution of the Soviet Union. Within these documents, we identified several 
relevant themes and theorized that if they could be analyzed across time, correlations could be 
made to strategic goals, and successes and lessons could be drawn for contemporary signaling 
situations. 
In the following pages, we review some of the existing research on strategic signaling as well as 
NLP. We then explain the methodology we used for our research before detailing our findings. 
Selected Literature Review: Signaling and Natural Language Processing 
Regarding natural language processing, the value of topic modeling (TM), which uses machine 
learning programs to organize words or phrases into themed clusters for use in social science 
research, was proposed by Valdez, et al in 2018.1 In Topic Modeling: Latent Semantic Analysis 
for the Social Sciences, they argue that TM, which encompasses various models for uncovering 
themes in large collections of text documents, known as a corpus, is particularly valuable to the 
work of social scientists but has been underutilized.2 Among the benefits of TM over traditional 
content analysis is a reduction in researcher subjectivity. TM is also capable of word 
disambiguation, making distinctions between words that are spelled the same but have different 
meanings; a capability not found in traditional word-count methods. Valdez, et al focus on one 
TM model, latent semantic analysis (LSA), which they believe is especially well suited to social 
science research; using LSA, they analyzed transcripts of 2016 presidential debates between then 
presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump.3 As the authors expected, they found 
that the themes generated by LSA in the analysis of the debate transcripts mirrored the most 
commonly searched/Googled policy-related terms prior to the election, and thus argued that 
LSA’s ability to find themes in the transcripts, which matched salient political issues, supported 
the validity of the model.4 
Another TM model, latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), was explored by Blei, et al in 2003.5 LDA 
is similar to LSA in that it can be used for classification, summarization, similarity, and 
relevance judgements, and is capable of differentiating between words which are spelled the 
 
1 Valdez, Danny, Andrew C Pickett, and Patricia Goodson, “Topic Modeling: Latent Semantic Analysis for the Social 
Sciences” Social Sciences Quarterly Vol 99, no. 5 (November 2018): 1665-1679.  
2 Valdez, Danny, Andrew C Pickett, and Patricia Goodson, “Topic Modeling: Latent Semantic Analysis for the Social 
Sciences” Social Sciences Quarterly Vol 99, no. 5 (November 2018): 1665-1679.  
3 Valdez, Danny, Andrew C Pickett, and Patricia Goodson, “Topic Modeling: Latent Semantic Analysis for the Social 
Sciences” Social Sciences Quarterly Vol 99, no. 5 (November 2018): 1665-1679.  
4 Valdez, Danny, Andrew C Pickett, and Patricia Goodson, “Topic Modeling: Latent Semantic Analysis for the Social 
Sciences” Social Sciences Quarterly Vol 99, no. 5 (November 2018): 1665-1679.  
5 Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet Allocation”, Journal of Machine Learning 
Research Vol 3 (2003) 993-1022 
5 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
same but have different meanings.6 Blei, et al argue that LDA offers an advantage over simple 
Dirichlet-multinomial cluster modeling in that unlike a classical clustering model which can only 
associate a document with a single topic, LDA can associate a document with multiple topics. 
LSA can also recognize that a document can contain multiple topics but is not as capable as LDA 
in addressing topics not seen in training documents and is more prone to problems of overfitting 
than LDA. 
There are other traditional NLP techniques applicable to social science research, and cutting-
edge technology may transform this analysis as new capabilities emerge. Techniques such as 
Named Entity Recognition, which can identify entities (people, places, dates, etc.) in a corpus, 
and Coreference, which identifies when entities that have been previously mentioned are being 
referred to (e.g. going “there” refers to going to “Paris”), could completely change how written 
data is processed. Additionally, fine-tuning a large language model (LLM), a type of AI which is 
trained with huge sets of data to interpret written data and language and can generate text and 
complete other tasks, could improve performance of NLP programs by providing additional 
training materials on a specific topic the LLM should be familiarized with.7 For example, an 
LLM tasked with identifying signaling patterns in a new corpus of documents would benefit 
from being “fine-tuned” with documents/written data commonly affiliated with signaling.8  
The role of signaling in foreign policy has been the topic of much analysis. In his paper 
“Signaling Foreign Policy Interests”, James Fearon looks at two ways states can signal their 
willingness to follow through with a threat.9 Fearon explains that although a state may be capable 
of, and willing to, follow through with a threat of force, it would generally prefer not to use 
force. The challenge for a state then, is to credibly signal to an adversary the state’s willingness 
to follow through on threats in defense of vital interests, without incurring the costs associated 
with making good on these threats. This can be done in two ways according to Fearon; tying 
hands or sinking costs. Tying hands involves making public statements that would then cause a 
leader to incur political costs from his audience if he were to back down from a threat made 
publicly during a crisis. Sinking costs involves taking financially costly actions, such as 
mobilizations or arming measures, to signal a willingness to use force to defend a state’s interest. 
While Fearon explains that states will often use a combination of these methods, he finds that 
leaders are more likely to rely on tying hands during a crisis scenario and more likely to use 
sinking costs for longer-term grand strategy signaling. 
 
6 Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet Allocation”, Journal of Machine Learning 
Research Vol 3 (2003) 993-1022 
7 Cloudflare. (n.d.). What is a large language model (LLM)? | cloudflare. What is a large language model (LLM)? 
https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ai/what-is-large-language-model/. Accessed 7 July 2023. 
8 Ferrer, J. (2024, August 1). An introductory guide to fine-tuning LLMS. DataCamp. 
https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/fine-tuning-large-language-models. Accessed 19 August 2024. 
9 Fearon, James D, “Signaling Foreign Policy Interest: Tying Hands Versus Sinking Costs” Journal of Conflict 
Resolution Vol 41 No 1 (February 1997) 68-90. Accessed 26 September 2023. 
6 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
For the purpose of our research, we built on John Gower’s work in “Nuclear Signaling Between 
NATO and Russia,” which outlined signaling as “send[ing] signals about [a nuclear state’s] 
capability and intent, aimed at three important though largely unconnected audiences: domestic 
populations, allies, and current and potential adversaries” that “follow different timeframes: from 
long-term strategic signaling to short-term reactive activity and crisis signaling.”10 The 
importance of signaling in the specific context of nuclear deterrence was explored by Lindsay 
and Gartzke in their edited volume Cross Domain Deterrence, from Practice to Theory in 
2019.11 Although this work focuses on “cross-domain deterrence”, a concept that arose during 
the George W. Bush Administration to address the complex threat environment of the 21st 
century, it includes concepts that are useful when considering nuclear signaling more broadly. 
For example, the authors state that “The central paradox in both theory and practice of deterrence 
was how to credibly threaten to use weapons for coercion (i.e., deterrence or compellence) that 
were too costly to use in war.”12 Chapter 10 of this book was written by Green and Long and 
explores the balance necessary to signal nuclear capabilities without giving away secrets which 
would allow US adversaries to develop technologies to counter US capabilities.13 The authors 
conclude that this was done successfully in the late Cold War period through a combination of 
military demonstrations, selective leaks, counter-intelligence operations, and public statements. 
For example, the authors state that the Carter-era Presidential Directive 59 was intentionally 
leaked to the New York Times so that the Soviet Union would be aware of the US missile 
targeting of Soviet political leadership priorities.14 Through means such as these, the US was 
able to demonstrate to the Soviets vulnerabilities in their systems, such as their early warning, 
C3, and SSBNs, without revealing the specific technical means through which US capabilities 
worked. 
Methodology  
NLP was recognized as a potential tool to reduce the time necessary to identify relevant 
documents in a large dataset. Our goal was not to prove that NLP could replace analysts in 
reading and processing written data, but rather to evaluate whether NLP, particularly an LDA 
topic modeling program using Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) methods, could assist analysts in 
identifying relevant documents in large datasets to facilitate further research. Therefore, our 
 
10 Gower, John. Nuclear Signalling Between NATO and Russia. European Leadership Network, 2018. JSTOR, 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep22136. Accessed 6 June 2024. 
11 Lindsay, Jon R, and Erik Gartzke, Cross Domain Deterrence, from Practice to Theory (Oxford University Press, 
2019), 1. Accessed 28 September 2023. 
12 Lindsay, Jon R, and Erik Gartzke, Cross Domain Deterrence, from Practice to Theory (Oxford University Press, 
2019), 1. Accessed 28 September 2023. 
13 Green, Brendan Rittenhouse and Austin G. Long, Signaling with Secrets: Evidence on Soviet Perceptions and 
Counterforce Developments in the Late Cold War, (Oxford University Press, 2019). Accessed 28 September 2023. 
14 Green, Brendan Rittenhouse and Austin G. Long, Signaling with Secrets: Evidence on Soviet Perceptions and 
Counterforce Developments in the Late Cold War, (Oxford University Press, 2019). Accessed 28 September 2023. 
7 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
focus was to identify relevant topics in documents and compare analyst generated results with 
those of the topic modeling program. 
Gathering Data 
We began by searching for all PDs from the Reagan administration onward. Unfortunately, our 
review of available PDs revealed a significant drop-off in publicly available PDs after the 
Clinton administration. Most PDs following Clinton remain classified or are awaiting 
declassification review. Subsequently, we chose to restrict our analysis to the publicly available 
PDs from the Reagan through Clinton administrations. All results are based exclusively on 
unclassified PDs currently available via presidential libraries with a data cutoff date of June 
2023. 
Choosing Relevant NLP Tools 
To apply NLP to our research model, our team worked with a data scientist to map the functions 
of the program against what we were trying to identify in our data. We chose an LDA topic 
modeling program to identify topics that were consistent across the PDs and isolate ones we 
believed were relevant and used an HITL process to refine the results. We anticipated NLP 
would not be able to replace analysts in its ability to understand intricacies in written data, 
particularly when inconsistent phrasing or abbreviations interrupt the program’s ability to cluster 
topics, but that it should be capable of identifying relevant themes and topics within the 
documents. By using HITL, analysts could adjust the model to fit the framework of our project. 
Category Creation 
The topic search process for the NLP was designed to be similar to the analyst process. Using an 
understanding of signaling as explored by Gower, Lindsay, and Gartzke, we created seven 
categories of signaling we sought to identify in the documents: Threat of Force, Movement of 
Forces/Materials, Maintenance, Funding, Programs, Reductions/Arms Control, and 
Monitoring/Verification. These categories reflect the range of US nuclear enterprise priorities in 
the selected timeframe, and we discussed associated language which would help us sort 
documents into those categories. A breakdown of analyst instructions and a detailed list of the 
research process are available in Annexes 1 and 2, respectively.  
Once the categories were created, the NLP and analyst review processes were conducted 
concurrently. 
Analyst Categorization/Binning 
In the first stage, the analysts quickly reviewed each PD to determine if it related to nuclear 
issues and if it related to signaling directed toward the Soviet Union/Russia. Instructions to 
review documents were as follows: judge from the title, early sections, a quick eyes-only 
document scan, and the search function of the digital file (when available) to determine if the 
document contained any of the relevant categories. This process was intended to expedite the 
processing of large amounts of written data. Analysts used a layered approach in which each 
analyst reviewed the documents and evaluations of the other analysts in a rotating order. 
8 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Analysts were each initially responsible for a portion of the documents to indicate 
Yes/No/Maybe if the document generally applied to the nuclear enterprise. If it received either a 
Yes or Maybe, it was pushed forward to the next phase of our review process where it was 
reviewed by another analyst who confirmed/challenged the decisions of the first analyst. The 
second analyst also identified one dominant category in the text and prepared a brief summary. 
Those documents were then reviewed by a third analyst who performed the same review with a 
summary and identification of all relevant categories. This layered method was intended to allow 
analysts to challenge the judgment of their peers and remove irrelevant documents from the data 
pool while reducing time spent reading documents. Our team determined that this method would 
be sufficient across most documents to establish topics represented within the PDs. In the third 
phase, analysts could mark as many categories per PD as they deemed appropriate. 
NLP Topic Generation 
To apply NLP to our research, we needed to select the number of topics that the program would 
identify in the corpus. We determined an output of 40 topics was sufficient to mitigate false 
groupings of related topics while also alleviating concerns that some topics would be 
unnecessarily divided. Requesting additional topics may have provided increasingly granular 
divisions of information which could have resulted in more work for the analysts to individually 
assign, while requesting fewer topics may have unnaturally grouped information together under 
one topic and reduced the impact of using the tool as analysts would have needed to manually 
separate the relevant data. This was the first human element to be introduced into the NLP 
process and ensured that the data produced in the next steps would be relevant to our project. 
Using HITL NLP, particularly in this scenario with 40 requested topics, allowed for analysts to 
quickly determine relevant categories without using an impractical amount of time to do so. 
The topic modeling program identified the 40 requested topics, previewing the top ten words it 
associated with a topic with the option to list additional associated words for a detailed 
collection. The analysts were then responsible for reviewing the lists and determining which of 
the seven analyst identified categories they corresponded to. We applied the same categories to 
the NLP that the analysts had identified to maintain consistency. We determined, however, that 
the best way to show how NLP identified topics similarly to analysts would be to create a 
weighted system where each topic had a ranked categorization. Analysts discussed what 
language they considered relevant to the NLP generated topics to inform a hierarchical 
categorization of topics, deciding which category would be the primary, secondary, and tertiary 
for each topic. See the results of this process in the image provided on page 10. 
For example, Topic 0 was identified with the following topic keywords: missile, base, strategic, 
missiles, force, cruise, peacekeeper, minuteman, deploy, and development. Analysts decided that 
this topic would be categorized as Programs, Movement of Forces/Materials, and Threat of Force 
in that order.  
 
 
9 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
NLP Topic Categorization 
Analyst categorization of NLP generated topics constituted the most influential aspect of the 
HITL process, as it had a direct impact on how those topics would be reflected in our data 
outputs. The hierarchical structure of the categorization of topics was integrated into our research 
approach to reflect the ability of words/phrases to have multiple meanings. In the earlier 
described analyst-only approach to processing documents, analysts might read certain phrases or 
topics as being applicable to multiple categories, which was reflected by analysts’ ability to 
choose as few or as many categories as necessary. In an attempt to mirror that capability in the 
HITL NLP approach, each relevant topic keyword produced by the NLP was then, by a human 
analyst (the HITL part of HITL NLP), assigned three categories where the order influenced that 
topic’s influence on the weighted category frequency output i.e. the category with the highest 
connection to the topic was ranked first, the runner-up was ranked second, and the weakest 
relevant connection was ranked third. All documents that analysts did not deem relevant were 
not ranked, receiving an “Other” designation for all three rankings. The topics and their rankings 
are shown on the page below. 
NLP Document Identification Instructions 
Our goal was for the program to provide the following for each document: the frequency of each 
topic, the three most prevalent categories (if the document was relevant), and a simple indication 
of whether the document should be included in a focused data set for analysts to read. 
Recognizing the wide scope of relevant topics, we had to decide which terms we wanted the 
program to focus on. A significant number of PDs focused on foreign policy priorities and 
methods to promote U.S. interests abroad, so we realized we would need to cast a wide net to 
capture as many relevant documents as possible in the NLP’s “analyze_document” category. At 
the same time however, many documents related to foreign policy were not related to the key 
nuclear aspect of our research, so we had to find a way to try to only capture documents that met 
the conditions the analysts had been searching for. 
Our solution was to have the program scan for the word “nuclear” in conjunction with the topic 
breakdown to determine if a document contained elements pertaining to our research. Based on 
the scope of our research, we discussed if adding additional words to the scan that related to our 
focus (e.g, Soviet, strategic, missile, Russia) could help narrow the results, but we elected to only 
use the term “nuclear” as to not accidentally block relevant documents without additional terms. 
This turned out to be prudent as there were many documents the analysts determined to be 
relevant that were not flagged by the NLP that were missing the term “nuclear” from the text file. 
Had we added additional phrases, many documents that we identified as pertaining to our 
research would likely not have been flagged by the NLP. Additionally, there were many 
documents that the NLP flagged as being relevant that were not related to our topic that 
mentioned the term “nuclear” but were unrelated to our focus.  
 
10 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
  
11 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Combining the two decision factors, we decided the best metric for the NLP output to determine 
if a document should be considered relevant for the analysts was for the following conditions to 
be true: IF contains_nuclear=1 AND other_dominates=0 THEN analyze_document=1. We ran 
the program using these parameters and initial data showed a 2.97% numerical difference in 
documents identified as relevant; the NLP had identified 146 documents that met the conditions, 
in comparison to the 134 that analysts had identified.  
However, there were several factors in how we applied NLP that impacted the outputs of the 
data. Firstly, while we intended for the NLP to categorize any document that met the conditions 
outlined above, there were multiple documents that met those conditions but were not 
categorized or were categorized but did not meet the conditions to be marked as 
analyze_document=1. This resulted in our NLP identification total being different from our NLP 
categorization total. While reviewing this phenomenon within the results, we realized that this 
was due to how the program categorized documents with a majority of language being identified 
within the Other category. 
- 
In some cases, the Other category constituted the plurality of the document but not the 
majority (> .50) and was therefore eligible for categorization and analyze_document=1. 
- 
In some cases, the Other category constituted the majority of the document but the 
language within the document should have reflected enough to be categorized by the 
program but wasn’t.  
Errors and Interference 
During the identification process, the NLP method created two types of errors; Type 1 errors 
occur when a paper was identified by the NLP model as being relevant to one of the categories of 
interest but turned out not be relevant. Type 2 errors are the converse – instances when the model 
did not identify the document as being relevant, but human coding identified it as relevant. Both 
types of errors require correction (and can be damaging to an automated process), but in most 
topics, Type 2 errors are more problematic to correct. Type 2 errors create a situation in which 
data is excluded, sometimes without an additional review, creating an error that is often more 
persistent than a Type 1 error.  
To use the topic modeling program, all uploaded files had to be searchable text documents rather 
than scanned image files. For many PDs, the files uploaded to the presidential libraries were able 
to be directly transferred into a text file format (.txt) for processing. However, if the search 
function could not be used on a PD and the base PDF version could not be scanned by the NLP, 
we used optical character recognition (OCR) which is a tool that identified characters on a 
scanned page and converted them into text.  
There were multiple instances where markings on the document interfered with both the NLP 
model and analysts’ abilities to read the document. These interferences typically came in the 
form of stamps onto the original document preventing visibility of words. While having a 
substantive impact on both analyst and NLP reading of documents, we did not consider PDs with 
12 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
redacted text as corrupted in this evaluation as those were intentionally covered as part of the 
release of the document. Examples are provided below with varying levels of data interference. 
While some of the interference impacted analysts’ ability to read the document, it had a much 
greater impact on the NLP’s ability to pull text from the documents. Analysts reviewed each 
document and determined that 53 of the 404 documents had markings, and approximately 13% 
of our documents required using OCR to obtain our data. Examples of interference can be seen 
below. 
 
 
Discrepancies 
There were 59 discrepancies between analyst evaluation and that of the NLP, accounting for 
14.6% of all documents. There were 23 documents which the analysts identified as relevant 
which the NLP did not, and 36 documents the NLP identified as relevant that the analysts did 
not. In review of each document, we determined the following as the main reasons for 
discrepancies between analyst and NLP evaluations: 
- 
The NLP identified documents that were not related to our project, a limitation induced 
by only including the term “nuclear” as indication of a relevant document 
13 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
○ In a review of the 36 discrepancies where NLP flagged documents we had not, we 
determined that in 28 out of 36 cases the NLP had flagged documents meeting the 
criteria but unrelated to our focus. 
○ Of the 36 documents identified by the NLP that analysts had not, 13 of the 
documents were sorted into categories by the NLP while the 23 remaining were 
categorized as Other. 
- 
All documents categorized as Other had contains_nuclear=1 and 
other_dominates=0, but nearly ⅔ of the documents did not have enough 
significant language to fit into the categories 
- 
The analysts identified documents that were related to our topic through existing 
knowledge, where the documents did not meet both conditions outlined for analysis 
○ In a review of the discrepancies where analysts flagged documents NLP had not, 
we determined that in 18 out of 23 cases analysts had flagged documents that 
were related to the focus but did not meet the criteria. 
○ Of the 23 documents analysts identified but NLP had not, 10 of the documents 
had been sorted into categories by the NLP while the remaining 13 were 
categorized as Other. 
- 
The NLP identified documents that analysts failed to identify or misidentified 
○ These were the result of human error during our identification process, where a 
combined 13 documents were improperly identified as either false positives or 
false negatives by analysts. 
After properly classifying the documents which we verified NLP had identified correctly, we 
created a Confusion Matrix (Page 14) to display the results of the discrepancies.  
Results 
In a review of all the documents, the NLP had an accuracy of 88% (358/404) identifying PDs as 
relevant or irrelevant to our research and had a precision of 80% (118/146) in identifying 
documents that analysts should have read. These results indicate that even in an unrefined format 
with general instructions, LDA topic modeling provided analysts with valuable insights into the 
overall contents of the documents and could likely assist in the data gathering process of social 
science research using national security documents.  
Proportionally, more Type 1 errors occurred than Type 2 – by over a factor of ~1.5. The authors 
hypothesize that some of these errors are caused by obstructions to the ability for the NLP to 
fully analyze the document (due to artifacts such as stamped markings on the pages). Still, 
significant model refinement is needed to also avoid Type 2 errors, as the model should be 
biased towards providing analysts with all possibly relevant information before NLPs can be 
used without robust human oversight of the data. 
In situations where the NLP properly identified a document where analysts did not, the 
documents were counted here as True Positive or True Negative accordingly. 
14 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
Accuracy: Accuracy shows how often a classification ML model is correct overall.15 
Precision: Precision shows how often an ML model is correct when predicting the target class. 16 
Recall: Recall shows whether an ML model can find all objects of the target class. 17 
Our results yielded interesting data about the frequency of topics identified by the analysts versus 
the NLP topic modeling process. When comparing the categorization of documents, there were 
certain categories that the two approaches’ evaluations were numerically aligned on (e.g., 
Movement of Forces/Materials where NLP identified 31 and analysts identified 30), examples 
where NLP identified far more of a category (Funding where NLP identified 80 and analysts 
identified 23), and where analysts identified far more than the NLP (Arms Control where NLP 
identified 65 and analysts identified 88). 
Additionally, we wanted to consider how impacted data (documents with obfuscated text) would 
affect the NLP topic identification process. We reviewed each document to classify them as 
either clean or impacted, which left us with 351 clean and 53 impacted PDs. We then pulled 
results again only using clean PDs to compare how those results differed from our original data. 
The data comparison provided the following results: 
 
 
 
15 EvidentlyAI. (2024, October 1.). Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
EvidentlyAI. Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
https://www.evidentlyai.com/classification-metrics/accuracy-precision-recall. Accessed 28 October 2024. 
16 EvidentlyAI. (2024, October 1.). Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
EvidentlyAI. Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
https://www.evidentlyai.com/classification-metrics/accuracy-precision-recall. Accessed 28 October 2024. 
17 EvidentlyAI. (2024, October 1.). Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
EvidentlyAI. Accuracy vs. precision vs. recall in machine learning: what's the difference? 
https://www.evidentlyai.com/classification-metrics/accuracy-precision-recall. Accessed 28 October 2024. 
15 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
Threat of 
Force 
Movement 
Maintenance 
Arms 
Control 
Monitoring/
Verification 
Programs Funding 
Analyst 
3.96% 
(16/404) 
7.42% 
(30/404) 
7.42% 
(30/404) 
21.78% 
(88/404) 
12.62% 
(51/404) 
15.84% 
(64/404) 
5.69% 
(23/404) 
NLP  
(All data) 
5.69% 
(23/404) 
7.67% 
(31/404) 
17.08% 
(69/404) 
15.84% 
(65/404) 
8.66% 
(36/404) 
30.94% 
(125/404) 
19.80% 
(80/404) 
NLP  
(Clean data) 
5.98% 
(21/351) 
8.26% 
(29/351) 
15.38% 
(54/351) 
14.25% 
(50/351) 
7.41% 
(26/351) 
29.63% 
(104/351) 
19.09% 
(67/351) 
 
While the data seemed to align in some categories where there were similar results from all three 
evaluations, there were instances where the NLP with both total and clean data identified close to 
four times as many documents in a category than analysts had (see Funding above). Our research 
team discussed these results and determined that the input we provided for the HITL aspect of 
the NLP programming, creating a tiered list of categories for each topic, may have influenced the 
program’s topic identification patterns in unanticipated ways identifying topics differently than 
the analysts had. Specifically, we discussed how analysts did not have a set number of categories 
to identify per relevant document and were not limited to selecting three categories. This could 
have led to two outcomes: either NLP was limited to choosing three categories per document 
when the program could have identified the PD as relevant to even more categories or the NLP 
was forced to choose three categories even if less than three categories were represented in the 
document. 
Additionally, the results we pulled were looking at the dataset as a whole and the topics 
contained within it to see how our judgments aligned. We did not do a document-by-document 
analysis to see how closely the NLP topic identification mirrored the analysts’ judgments. A 
side-by-side comparison of analyst judgments and NLP results would provide insight into the in-
depth reading of a document and would be a fruitful area of research for future study. Our goal 
was to judge if NLP could assist analysts in the data gathering phase, and regardless of the 
specific perceptions of the NLP on the contents of the documents if the program can identify 
them as relevant based on the analyst input the tool is useful to expedite the process.  
Discussion 
The categories we chose to scan for (Threat of Force, Movement of Forces/Materials, 
Maintenance, Arms Control, Monitoring/Verification, Programs, and Funding) were all directly 
related to key aspects of strategic signaling, and our research showed that both analysts and NLP 
were able to identify language related to those topics in a significant number of PDs indicating 
that PDs were used to signal strategic intentions to the Soviet Union/Russia.  
16 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
As we identified early in our data collection phase, we saw a sharp decline in the number of 
publicly available PDs per administration. As seen in the chart below, PDs from the Reagan 
administration where most available with 297, followed by Bush with 67, and Clinton with 40.  
 
Figure 1 [Chart shows available PDs per year divided by presidential administration.] 
 
 
While we had anticipated the data being difficult to obtain for more recent years, we did not 
account for how severe the data drop-off would be during the Clinton administration where over 
a seven-year period there were only 40 available PDs with only one available PD in 2000. This 
lack of data prevented us from comparing the composition of yearly patterns in signaling, as the 
year with the most PDs (1982- 56 PDs) and the least (2000- 1 PD) were incomparable. Despite 
this, an analysis of signaling patterns within an administration remained a feasible option. 
 
 
 
17 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
The Reagan administration dataset had the highest number of PDs with 297 available documents. 
Within the available documents, analysts identified 111 (37.4%) relevant documents while NLP 
identified 115 (38.7%). Regarding analyst perceptions, reductions/arms control was the most 
frequently identified category with 75 documents marked as containing relevant information. 
This was followed by programs with 51 documents and monitoring/verification with 47 
documents. Similarly, NLP also identified reductions/arms control as the most common category 
but returned a value of 101 relevant documents. However, NLP identified the second most 
common categories as “monitoring/verification” and “funding” with 56 documents each.  
 
Figure 2 [Chart shows a comparison of the PD categorization by analysts and NLP for the Reagan Administration.] 
 
 
18 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
The Bush administration dataset had 67 available documents, where analysts identified 17 
(25.3%) relevant PDs and NLP identified 24 (35.8%). For analysts, the most common category 
was “programs” which was identified in 11 documents, followed by “reductions/arms control” 
(10) and “monitoring/verification” (3). For NLP, the most common categories were 
“reductions/arms control” and “monitoring/verification” which were both identified in 19 
documents, followed by “maintenance” which was identified in 18 documents. 
 
Figure 3 [Chart shows a comparison of the PD categorization by analysts and NLP for the Bush Administration.] 
 
 
19 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
The Clinton administration dataset had 40 available documents, where analysts identified five 
relevant PDs (12.5%) and NLP identified eight (20%). The most common category identified by 
analysts was “reductions/arms control” with three documents, followed by “programs” (2), and 
“maintenance” and “monitoring/verification,” each with one. NLP identified “maintenance”, 
“reductions/arms control”, and “monitoring/verification” as the most common categories with 
five documents each. Interestingly, of the 40 documents available during the Clinton 
Administration, neither the analysts nor NLP identified any language on “threat of force” or 
“movement of forces/materials” in any of the PDs.  
 
Figure 4 [Chart shows a comparison of the PD categorization by analysts and NLP for the Clinton Administration.] 
 
 
 
20 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
As we chose the categories based on our understanding of signaling and identified language 
without having previous knowledge of the contents of the PDs, based on the results showing the 
frequency of topics identified by both NLP and analysts it is clear that PDs served as signaling 
mechanisms where presidential administrations could use the documents to impact high-level, 
visible strategic policy. 
The results of the case study indicated that using NLP to evaluate general topics within a corpus 
of written data could provide meaningful results in future applications, but we noted significant 
shortfalls in its application to our research. These shortfalls were mainly due to prompt 
engineering challenges as the NLP instructions were too broad in some aspects and too specific 
in others. There were a number of cases where NLP identified documents that were not relevant 
to the research, indicating we should have narrowed the instructions to find a more precise set of 
documents. There were also cases where NLP missed documents that were relevant, indicating 
the instructions were missing key elements that the analysts had considered relevant. 
Additionally, we only considered how topics could be identified within a corpus, but not how the 
topic identification lined up between analysts and NLP per document, so we did not determine if 
NLP and analysts were identifying the same topics in documents, a useful validation that could 
be considered in future work. However, based on the initial results of our research, we believe 
additional research into the application of this technology could provide a valuable tool for social 
science research. 
In our specific use case, the application and evaluation of this tool was complicated by the lack 
of publicly available PDs in recent years. Because of this,  we were hampered in drawing broader 
comparisons on signaling patterns in a comparative manner, limiting us to the task of presenting 
the frequency of topics identified, a more limited but still useful addition to the literature. As 
U.S. and Russian relations enter a period of tensions reminiscent of the Cold War and as the 
arms control infrastructure continues to deteriorate, studying documents like PDs could provide 
historical lessons on effective signaling measures for the U.S. to apply in the modern context. 
Without effective signaling, the boundaries set by the United States may not have the necessary 
weight to protect our interests and national security, which highlights the importance of work 
pursued in this paper. 
Conclusion 
By manually reviewing the data and discrepancies, we determined that using NLP as the sole 
means to identify topics within a large dataset may result in missing data. However, by using 
NLP as a tool to evaluate general topics within a large set of written documents to understand 
general themes and target in-depth research, this technology does succeed in providing a bird’s 
eye view of the general topics discussed before more time intensive research resources are 
dedicated to investigations.  
One difference between analysts and NLP was that NLP would process all scannable text within 
a document while analysts would only read some sections of the documents in-depth if relevant 
21 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
concepts were identified. The purpose of the research was understanding how NLP can expedite 
topic identification, so analysts focused on quickly locating topics within each document but did 
not read every PD to the same degree that NLP processed available text, a key strength of NLP. 
However, analysts were able to read around document interference while NLP, even using OCR, 
did not have a clean scan of the data.  
Further refinement of the NLP programming could result in more accurate results, but we still 
consider the present work successful as our programming was designed to test the ability of the 
technology to pull relevant topics from documents, a task this model succeeded at, not to 
perfectly mirror the analysts’ ability to read and interpret the information, a topic for further 
work. Additional research in this field could provide insight into alternative methodologies 
which would reduce time or costs to conduct similar research and may provide different results 
in NLP feedback. 
2025 Epilogue on Evolving AIML Tools 
This research was conducted between 2023 and 2024, and the results indicate that the social 
sciences could potentially leverage tools similar to—or better than—the ones we used to 
significantly expedite the research process. Analysts spent a significant amount of time reading 
through documents, many of which turned out to be irrelevant to the scope of our project. This 
time could be cut down by leveraging AI tools like Semantic Search, which understands the 
meanings and nuance of words rather than simply searching for text matching, or other similar 
capabilities.18 AI-enabled social science research could cut down the time required to collect 
sources for literature reviews and expedite the background research process, saving time and 
money on projects and improving productivity. Our project shows the applications and limits of 
one specific technology, but future applications of our framework using improved methods may 
yield entirely different results.  
 
 
 
18 What is Semantic Search?: A comprehensive semantic search guide. Elastic. (n.d.). https://www.elastic.co/what-
is/semantic-search. Accessed 23 October 2025. 
22 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Annex 1: Analyst Instructions for Document Review 
ANALYST INSTRUCTIONS 
1. If the first section of the document is related to the nuclear enterprise (including DOD) or 
related directly to arms control, then “contains_nuclear=1”. If document is not related to 
above conditions, then “contains_nuclear=0” 
a. Read first section of document to gather information on general topic, search for 
“nuclear” using document search function 
2. Repeat process on PDs of other teammates (divided into thirds) to challenge/confirm 
evaluation of documents using Step 1. Write a brief summary of why the document is 
relevant in a separate column.  
3. Note Potential Categorization within the relevant column. 
a. Category breakdown: 
i. Threat of Force 
1. Language ensuring reliability of damage 
2. Guarantee efficiency 
3. Aggressive language 
ii. Movement of Forces/Materials 
1. Movement/relocation of completed forces 
2. Movement of material for development or testing 
iii. Maintenance 
1. Includes redesign, testing, components 
iv. Funding 
1. Budgetary allocations for new programs 
2. Investment into existing programs 
v. Programs 
1. Authority approval for new programs (i.e. FY___ docs) 
2. Status updates on existing programs 
vi. Reductions/Arms Control 
1. Relates specifically to goals, negotiations, outcomes, or all related 
processes in arms control/reduction 
vii. Monitoring/Verification 
1. Explicitly says the words verification/monitoring 
4. Read PDs of other teammates (final third of the documents) to evaluate results of all 
previous steps, provide input on uncertainties. Provide a secondary summary of why the 
document is relevant in a separate column. Expand judgment of categories to all relevant 
categories in the document and mark them in the form with an “X” as necessary. 
5. Divide PDs by year, administration, and category to perform analysis 
6. Determine total values of relevant outputs to compare to NLP outputs 
23 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Annex 2: Complete Research Plan 
RESEARCH PLAN/ORDER OF RESEARCH PROCESSES 
1. Analysts create a shared Excel file and compile all available PDs19 
2. Analysts collectively decide what we’re looking for as signaling 
a. “We will be looking for documents related to the nuclear enterprise (including 
DOD) or related directly to arms control, henceforth strategic signaling” 
3. Analysts coordinate and select a list of categories we determined to be essential for 
strategic signaling 
a. Category breakdown: 
i. 
Threat of Force 
1. Language ensuring reliability of damage 
2. Guarantee efficiency 
3. Aggressive language 
ii. 
Movement of Forces/Materials 
1. Movement/relocation of completed forces 
2. Movement of material for development or testing 
iii. 
Maintenance 
1. Includes redesign, testing, components 
iv. 
Funding 
1. Budgetary allocations for new programs 
2. Investment into existing programs 
v. 
Programs 
1. Authority approval for new programs (i.e. FY___ docs) 
2. Status updates on existing programs 
vi. 
Reductions/Arms Control 
1. Relates specifically to goals, negotiations, outcomes, or all related 
processes in arms control/reduction 
vii. 
Monitoring/Verification 
1. Explicitly says the words verification/monitoring 
4. Assign a numbering system across all PDs for uniformity in data analysis 
5. Compile all PDs as PDFs into a singular folder location 
6. Convert all PDs to text 
7. The following steps occur simultaneously 
a. NLP Application 
i. 
Use the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to extract the topics hidden 
within the corpus 
 
19 Exclusively using presidential libraries 
24 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
ii. 
Assign topics to a relevant category based on identified language (HITL 
phase) 
1. Topic language categorization should align with language used for 
Analyst categorization 
2. Categorization is done in a ranked manner with a primary, 
secondary, and tertiary category per topic 
3. If the topic is not applicable, it is categorized under “Other” 
iii. 
Identify the following in data outputs (See Results Excel) 
1. Frequency of topics within PDs  
2. Binary selection of top three categories per PD 
3. Weighted frequency of categories per PD 
4. Whether the document contains the word nuclear 
(contains_nuclear=0/1) 
5. Whether the “Other” category dominates the defined categories (If 
WC_7 >/= .50 then other_dominates=1) 
6. If the program believes the document should be read by analysts 
(contains_nuclear=1, other_dominates=0) 
iv. 
Determine total values of relevant outputs to compare to analyst outputs 
b. Analyst instructions 
i. 
If the first section of the document is related to the nuclear enterprise 
(including DOD) or related directly to arms control then 
“contains_nuclear=1”. If document is not related to above conditions, then 
“contains_nuclear=0” 
1. Read first section of document to gather information on general 
topic, search for “nuclear” using document search function 
ii. 
Repeat process on PDs of other teammates (divided into thirds) to 
challenge/confirm evaluation of documents using Step 1. Write a brief 
summary of why the document is relevant in a separate column.  
iii. 
Note Potential Categorization within the relevant column. 
iv. 
Read PDs of other teammates (final third of the documents) to evaluate 
results of all previous steps, provide input on uncertainties. Provide a 
secondary summary of why the document is relevant in a separate column. 
Expand judgment of categories to all relevant categories in the document 
and mark them in the form with an “X” as necessary. 
v. 
Divide PDs by year, administration, and category to perform analysis 
vi. 
Determine total values of relevant outputs to compare to NLP outputs 
8. Identify discrepancies in data, review all cases for analyst/NLP and mark documents 
accordingly 
9. Compare data outputs by category and administration. 
