Title: Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05872v1
--------------------------------------------------

Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern
English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Akarsh Nagaraj∗
Mayank Kejriwal∗
akarshna@usc.edu
kejriwal@isi.edu
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, California, USA
ABSTRACT
Research has continued to shed light on the extent and signifi-
cance of gender disparity in social, cultural and economic spheres.
More recently, computational tools from the Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) literature have been proposed for measuring such
disparity using relatively extensive datasets and empirically rig-
orous methodologies. In this paper, we contribute to this line of
research by studying gender disparity, at scale, in copyright-expired
literary texts published in the pre-modern period (defined in this
work as the period ranging from the mid-nineteenth through the
mid-twentieth century). One of the challenges in using such tools is
to ensure quality control, and by extension, trustworthy statistical
analysis. Another challenge is in using materials and methods that
are publicly available and have been established for some time, both
to ensure that they can be used and vetted in the future, and also,
to add confidence to the methodology itself. We present our solu-
tion to addressing these challenges, and using multiple measures,
demonstrate the significant discrepancy between the prevalence
of female characters and male characters in pre-modern literature.
The evidence suggests that the discrepancy declines when the au-
thor is female. The discrepancy seems to be relatively stable as we
plot data over the decades in this century-long period. Finally, we
aim to carefully describe both the limitations and ethical caveats
associated with this study, and others like it.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing →Law, social and behavioral sciences;
• Computing methodologies →Natural language processing.
KEYWORDS
Gender disparity, natural language processing, digital humanities,
Project Gutenberg, gender character prevalence, AI ethics
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Reference Format:
Akarsh Nagaraj and Mayank Kejriwal. 2018. Robust Quantification of Gen-
der Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language
Processing. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title
from your rights confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent innovations in deep neural networks have led to impressive
advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [10, 50]. These
advances include new state-of-the-art results in tasks as diverse
as question answering, information extraction, sentiment analysis,
conversational ‘chatbot’ agents and summarization, to only name
a few [13, 31, 37, 42, 45]. Due to the performance of these models,
it has also become possible in recent years to use NLP tools for
computational social science and digital humanities [15, 17, 18, 34]
(see also Related Work). Such methods are especially important for
obtaining quantitative results at scale on large datasets that are not
possible to examine in a fully manual manner without expending
extensive labor and cost.
In this article, we use computational methods from the NLP com-
munity, implemented in open-source, industrial-grade packages,
to quantify and explore the phenomenon of gender-specific charac-
ter prevalence in pre-modern literature. Gender-specific character
prevalence intuitively measures the extent to which a reader is
likely to encounter female characters, compared to male characters,
in a given book. For our empirical analysis, we use the publicly
available English-language books in the Project Gutenberg corpus
(with links provided subsequently in Materials and Methods), which
contains copyright-expired, pre-modern books that can be used for
such studies.
As noted below, there are several methodological avenues for
defining and measuring character prevalence. Therefore, to ensure
that our results are robust, we consider three measurements of
gender-specific character prevalence, along with detailed statistical
analysis. We also consider whether differences in gender-specific
character prevalence have declined over time, and if controlling for
the gender of a book’s author yields statistically different results.
Specifically, we investigate three related hypotheses in this work:
Hypothesis 1: Female character prevalence is less than
that of male characters. We consider three different prevalence
measures to achieve robust findings. For example, while one of our
measures simply counts the numbers of male and female characters
extracted from the book-text, other measures count the number
arXiv:2204.05872v1  [cs.CY]  12 Apr 2022
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anonymous
of occurrences of such characters, and also take the occurrences
of male and female pronouns into account. More details are pro-
vided in a subsequent section where we discuss the experimental
methodology.
Hypothesis 2: The difference between male and female
character prevalence significantly declines when controlling
for authors’ gender. We conduct similar experiments as for Hy-
pothesis 1, but we control for the authorship of the book to un-
derstand whether the gender of the author has an impact on the
conclusions when used as a control.
Hypothesis 3: Female character prevalence changes sig-
nificantly between 1800 to 1950. We plot character prevalence
over time, based on the most active year of the author of the books,
to understand if female character prevalence has been increasing
relative to male character exposure (at least approximately) over
time. An important limitation of this study that we note at the out-
set, and that is described and contextualized in much more detail
in Section 6 is that we only study the disparity between male and
female characters. Unfortunately, the disparity of non-binary and
trans characters compared to traditional genders could not be accu-
rately studied due to a lack of computational tools for extracting
characters whose genders do not fall in the dichotomous categories
of male and female. We believe that this highlights a pressing need
to develop such tools, an issue that we comment more on, in Section
6.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. We begin with
a brief review of the Related Work in this area, followed by details
on the Materials and Methods used in this paper for investigating
the three hypotheses stated earlier. Specifically, we detail not only
the dataset, but also the NLP pipeline that we constructed using
open-source software for conducting this study. Our code and data
are open-source and replicable. We describe our key findings in
Results, followed by a more qualitative assessment in Discussion.
Importantly, before concluding the paper, we enumerate, based
on our understanding and analysis, of the limitations of the study,
relevant ethical issues and some guidance to future researchers on
addressing them.
2
RELATED WORK
A number of recent social science studies, some of which are com-
putational, have shown that gender bias continues to exist in many
aspects of economic, social and cultural life, including movies [35],
executive positions in top corporations [22], board membership [7],
and political leadership [44]. While researchers have tackled the
challenge of accurately measuring gender bias in large corpora like
Wikipedia using computational methodologies [41], such studies
have been generally lacking in literature and cultural corpora, es-
pecially those that have not been published first on the Web (and
thereby lack additional context, such as hyperlinks). Until quite
recently, using NLP techniques for such studies was problematic
because of concerns over quality, given the importance of this is-
sue. However, the improvements in NLP cited earlier suggest that
the time is ripe for conducting such computational social science
studies, with appropriate quality control measures in place [15].
More recently, textual analysis of novels and literary texts, es-
pecially using structural and statistical analyses, has been a major
theme in Digital Humanities research. We cite the book by Jockers
on digital methods and literary history as a notable example in
this regard [19]. Other work by Jockers, done with co-authors, is
also relevant, including his study (with Mimno) on literary themes
in novels and other 19th century texts [20], and his study (with
Archer) of the structure of bestselling novels [2], among others
[21, 30].
The Gender in Novels project is an example that closely matches
the goals of this work and was conducted independently1, within
the MIT Digital Humanities Lab. Similar to the research herein, their
goal is to “study the ever-adapting and changing view on gender
by writers all around the globe in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.” Other computational studies on gender, some of which
involve multi-modal data such as images and video, include [5, 16,
29, 38, 47].
There is also a long line of gender studies literature in the hu-
manities that is complementary to the research herein [1, 3, 6];
however, many of those articles use qualitative methods and tend
to deeply analyze relatively small corpora, such as the books of a
single author [14], or within a narrow period or genre [11], rather
than a broad-based computational analysis such as in this work or
other similar projects such as Gender in Novels. To take just example,
the work in [14] studies both gender and class issues in George
Eliot’s early novels. Other excellent and general examples of gender
studies in the humanities include [4, 12, 40]. These works are nec-
essary for understanding and contextualizing gender in literature
and the humanities, and this context should be borne in mind for
a causal interpretation of the statistical and computational results
that we present in this paper.
3
MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.1
Data
The raw data for the study was obtained from Project Gutenberg2,
and originally comprised 3,036 English books represented as text
files, penned by 142 authors (of whom 14 are female) between 1700
and 1950. We used a subset of the 3,036 books for this study by
selecting works that are fictional, and have been published between
1800 and 1950 (inclusive). Following this filtering, the final dataset
comprised 2,426 books that cover fictional genres ranging from
adventure and science fiction, to mystery and romance. Not all
works are necessarily in the format of a novel, since the corpus also
includes short stories, plays and poems.
3.2
Data Preprocessing, Character Extraction
and Gender Classification
An important contribution of this study is the quantification of
gender-specific character prevalence in literature within a suffi-
ciently broad corpus. Since manually extracting characters and
character occurrences from a corpus of 2,426 books is not feasible,
we propose to use high-performance NLP methods to extract char-
acters in various ways, and to automatically classify whether they
are male or female. Once extracted, and tagged with gender, robust
analysis of character exposure becomes feasible.
1http://gendernovels.digitalhumanitiesmit.org/info/gender_novels_overview
2https://www.gutenberg.org/
Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
The primary NLP method that we rely on to extract characters
is Named Entity Recognition (NER) [36], which also goes by named
entity identification, entity chunking, and entity extraction in the
literature [9, 43, 46], is a specific type of the broader information
extraction (IE) problem that has witnessed considerable advances
in recent years, including for domain-specific corpora [13, 24–26].
NER seeks to locate and classify named entities mentioned in un-
structured text into pre-defined categories such as person names,
organizations, locations, monetary values, to name a few. In our
study, we are interested in extracting person names from the text
of the books.
In order to apply NER, we first need to split the input text into
sentences. Identifying sentences is important because they form
logical units of thought and represent the borders of many grammat-
ical effects. To do so, we employ sentence segmentation as the first
pre-processing step. Sentence segmentation is an important early
step in many NLP pipelines [39]. For example, character extrac-
tion (an instance of NER) algorithms tend to be more accurate and
efficient when they are executed on shorter self-contained spans
of text (such as sentences) rather than on entire corpora. Despite
its seeming simplicity, a generalizable implementation of sentence
segmentation is non-trivial for various language-specific reasons.
One example is the use of periods in abbreviations and numbers, in
addition to its more common use at the end of sentences.
Recent NLP software packages have achieved impressive results
in a variety of tasks, including sentence segmentation, primarily due
to the advent of deep learning and maturity of ‘language representa-
tion’ models. For our purposes, we used the sentence segmentation
module from a Python library called SegTok3, developed to process
orthographically regular Germanic languages, of which English is
an example. SegTok is capable of identifying sentence terminals
such as ‘.’, ‘?’ and ‘!’ and disambiguating them when they appear
in the middle of a sentence (like in the case of abbreviations and
website links), which significantly reduces the probability that a
sentence is segmented before it has truly concluded. After executing
SegTok on each book in our corpus, we also manually assessed its
performance by sampling ‘challenging’ sentences (that contained
inconsistent sentence terminals, including periods in the middle of
the sentence, as in the cases noted above) and verifying that the
full sentence was correctly segmented by the software.
Before deciding on SegTok, we also tried other viable sentence
segmentation packages in the NLP literature, such as PunktSen-
tenceTokenizer4, which is part of the Natural Language Tool Kit
(NLTK) [32]. NLTK is a well-known suite of libraries and packages
for symbolic and statistical natural language tasks like text classi-
fication, tokenization, stemming, tagging, and parsing. We found
that PunktSentenceTokenizer was incorrectly splitting sentences
by abbreviation-periods in some of our sample texts. Furthermore,
SegTok also had faster execution times, which is essential when
processing large texts like the Project Gutenberg corpus of books.
Additionally, we evaluated the accuracy of SegTok by randomly
sampling 110 sentence outputs that were segmented, and manu-
ally tagging them as being correctly segmented with respect to
the paragraph in which the sentence was originally embedded.
3http://fnl.es/segtok-a-segmentation-and-tokenization-library.html
4https://www.nltk.org/_modules/nltk/tokenize/punkt.html
We found that, of these 110 sentences, only two were incorrectly
segmented,5 yielding an accuracy of 98.18%. Hence, SegTok was
chosen for segmenting the text of each of the books in our corpus
into sentences.
3.2.1
Character Extraction, Disambiguation and Gender Classifi-
cation. In order to measure gender-specific character prevalence,
which is required for all three of our hypotheses, we need to count
the numbers of male and female characters in each of the books in
the corpus. As noted earlier, extracting person names from the text
is an instance of the NER problem. Similar to the methodology for
selecting a viable sentence segmentation module, we compared the
performance of two popular NER libraries in the NLP community -
SpaCy6 [48], an industrial-scale open-source software library for
advanced NLP, typically relying on neural network models for part-
of-speech tagging, dependency parsing, text categorization and
NER; and NE_Chunk7, which is also part of NLTK. Named entity
chunking extracts ‘chunks’ (akin to phrases) from sentences and
assigns them semantic tags, such as person, location and organiza-
tion. We found that NE_Chunk consistently outperformed SpaCy
by achieving near 100% precision in extracting characters (‘person’
entities) from a sample set of books8. Hence, we chose it as the
character extraction tool.
However, since characters are independently extracted from
each sentence, multiple occurrences of the same character can be
extracted across all sentences in a book due to artifacts such as
slightly different spelling usage or use of only first or last names,
instead of the full name. To discover different occurrences (of the
same character), we used a Python library called difflib9, which pro-
vides classes and functions for comparing sequences. Specifically,
the SequenceMatcher class from difflib library compares two strings
and provides a similarity score between 0 (no match at all) to 1
(complete match, i.e., strings are the same). We used the Sequence-
Matcher class to perform disambiguation of the characters and link
the different versions of the same character together. Specifically,
string pairs with a similarity score of 0.7 or above were treated as
duplicates. This threshold was selected after some sampling and
manual verification. This deduplication allows us to count the num-
ber of unique characters extracted from the text of each book. To
assess its accuracy, we randomly sampled 76 character pairs that
were disambiguated as duplicates by this heuristic technique, and
found that 72 were correctly disambiguated, yielding an accuracy
of 94.74%. The errors in disambiguation primarily arose from false
positives and mostly involved the names of monarchs e.g., George
III and George IV were incorrectly identified as duplicates due to
high string similarity.
5We found that, of the two sentences that were incorrectly segmented, the error was
minor. In both cases, there were words in all caps either at the beginning or end of
the sentence. This may have been due to (for example) a chapter header, or slight
formatting discrepancies in the underlying corpus itself. In either case, the ‘correct’
segmentation was always a subset of the actual output.
6https://spacy.io/api
7https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.chunk.html
8Specifically, we randomly chose four books and manually identified a total of 72 main
characters in those books. We then compared these 72 ‘gold standard’ characters to
the ones extracted by NE_Chunk. We found that only one (male) character was not
correctly extracted.
9https://docs.python.org/3/library/difflib.html
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anonymous
Finally, to classify the extracted characters as male and female,
we used Gender_Detector10, a Python library developed using data
from the Global Name Data project11, which is able to determine
the gender of a character from the first name. Using this library,
we were able to heuristically tag each extracted character as male
or female. We evaluated the accuracy of this method by randomly
sampling 100 extracted characters12 and manually checking their
actual gender against the predicted gender. There was only one
error,13 yielding an accuracy of 99%.
3.3
Availability of Processed Data for
Replication
Although only publicly available packages have been used in the
NLP-based pipeline described earlier, we recognize that the steps
noted above are non-trivial to execute, especially by social scien-
tists and digital humanities scholars who may want to use the data
to run their own studies, or replicate the results described subse-
quently. Hence, we have published the processed version of the data
as a peer-reviewed data-in-brief article, with links to a Mendeley
repository containing the processed data14.
3.4
Experimental Methodology
In this section, we present three definitions, and corresponding
measurements, of character prevalence for male and female genders:
(1) Character Count: The numbers of unique male and female
characters extracted from each of the books.
(2) Character Occurrence Count: The number of times (or
‘occurrences’) male and female characters are mentioned by
name in the book.
(3) Pronoun Count: The numbers of male pronouns (he, him,
his) and female pronouns (she, her, hers) present in each
book. We do not address gender-neutral pronouns in this
article as we could not identify, despite our best efforts, a
publicly available or established computational package for
distinguishing the uses of pronouns, such as ‘they’, as refer-
ring to multiple individuals or a single individual. However,
gender-neutral pronouns referring to individuals that choose
their pronouns as ‘they’, ‘their’ or ‘them’ could be consid-
ered in future research that draws on more modern books
to replicate the following analyses.
To investigate Hypothesis 2, we clearly need data on authors’
genders. Since there are 142 unique authors in our corpus, we
manually tagged their gender using both their names, and public
resources like Wikipedia, and found only 14 to be female15. Fi-
nally, to investigate Hypothesis 3, we need to plot a time-series of
gender-specific character prevalence. Unfortunately, the books in
the Project Gutenberg corpus do not contain metadata that indicates
10https://pypi.org/project/gender-detector/
11https://github.com/OpenGenderTracking/globalnamedata
1250 male, and 50 female, to avoid gender-specific skewness in computing accuracy
estimates.
13The single error was due to a female character named ‘Captain Leslie’ being erro-
neously tagged as male.
14Due to author anonymity requirements, we withhold the citation in this version for
the repository and processed dataset.
15We recognize the limitations of this approach, and contextualize it further in Section
6.
the date of publication of an individual book. To be both robust
and fair, while obtaining the findings of interest for the purposes of
investigating Hypothesis 3, we made two approximations. First, we
assigned a year to a book by considering that book’s author’s most
active year (defined as the year in which the author published the
most books). All books by that author were tagged with that year.
Second, to account for the noise that this may cause, we compute
rolling averages of character-prevalence over ten-year windows at
a time.
4
RESULTS
In this section, we describe our key findings. For ease of exposition,
we present the findings pertinent to each hypothesis in turn.
4.1
Hypothesis 1
In the Introduction, we stated Hypothesis 1 as the claim that female
character prevalence is less than male character prevalence. In the
previous section, we also presented three different ways in which
gender-specific character prevalence can be computed. Using these
three different measures, we plot in Fig 1 the differences between
male and female character prevalence.
The figure yields some important insights, the most important
being that, no matter the measure used for quantifying character
prevalence, female character prevalence in the books in our corpus
is significantly lower than male character prevalence. While the
magnitude of the difference is striking in all cases, it does depend on
the specific measure employed. The largest difference, on average,
is observed when using the Character Count measure (78% for male
character prevalence), while the smallest difference is observed
when using the Pronoun Count measure (74% for male character
prevalence). In testing for significance by using the one-sided in-
dependent Student’s t-test, we find that the difference between
the means of male and female measures is highly significant with
a reported p-value (for each of the three measures) close to zero
(<< 10−100).
In considering absolute counts, we find a mean of 32 unique
male characters per book, compared to only 9 unique female char-
acters per book. The result does not significantly change even when
accounting for outliers by using the median instead of the mean.
The median numbers of unique male and female characters are 22
and 6, respectively. Taken collectively, the findings robustly bear
out the claim in Hypothesis 1 that character prevalence for female
characters is significantly lower than that for male characters.
4.2
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 2 was the claim that the difference between male and
female character prevalence, found to be significant and large in the
previous investigation, could decline if we control for the gender
of the authors. As shown in Fig 2, we again use the three character
prevalence measures defined earlier to investigate this hypothesis.
The figure shows that the proportion of male characters falls from
79% in male-authored books to 64% in female-authored books when
using Character Count measure. On average, there are 32 (unique)
male and 8 female characters per male-authored book compared to
38 male and 21 female characters in female-authored books.
Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Figure 1: Summary statistics (illustrated as boxplots) characterizing differences between male and female character exposure
using the three exposure measures defined in the Experimental Methodology subsection. The orange line represents the median,
with circles indicating outliers. Proportion of Male Characters for a given measure is the average (over all books) of the ratio
of the male character count in a book to the total character count in that book.
Similarly, when using the Character Occurrence Count measure
instead, the proportion of male character occurrences drops from
79% in male-authored books to 64% in female-authored books. The
third measure of gender prevalence, Pronoun Count, concurs with
the other two measures, in that the proportion of male pronouns
shows a decline from 64% in male-authored books to 54% in female-
authored books.
In summary, there is good empirical support in favor of Hy-
pothesis 2. Based on all three gender-specific character prevalence
measures, controlling for the gender of the author shows that the
differences noted in the Hypothesis 1 results are diminished, with
female characters being significantly more prevalent in female-
authored books, compared to male-authored books.
4.3
Hypothesis 3
Finally, Hypothesis 3 was the claim that female character prevalence
changes significantly between 1800 to 1950. Fig 3 demonstrates the
results by plotting the male character prevalence (using the three
different measures) over the years. The methodology for determin-
ing the year was described earlier in Experimental Methodology.
Unlike the other two hypothesis, we do not see empirical support
in Fig 3 for Hypothesis 3. In fact, the male proportion of characters
does not seem to change significantly over the years, with all three
character prevalence measures showing that the mean (of male
character exposure) for books penned between 1800 to 1950 varies
only in the range of 75%-80%. Even over a long period, the female
character prevalence in the corpus does not change much.
These results are consistent with some related findings in modern
film. For example, as shown by some recent authors [51], until very
recently, meaningful representation of women in movies has been
low using a number of metrics. Even in recent data, a discrepancy
remains. An equivalent literature-based survey is not feasible at
this time, since the text files of the books published in the last few
decades (mostly after the post-war period) are not in the public
domain and available for study, unlike the books in the Project
Gutenberg corpus.
5
DISCUSSION
Our experiments indicate the severe imbalance of gender prevalence
in the sample (available in the Project Gutenberg corpus) of books
written during the period between 1800 and 1950. In particular, the
experiments illustrate robust support for both Hypothesis 1 and 2.
The former is supported by the fact that, when gender prevalence is
compared using each of the three measures, on average, 3 out of 4
characters (or character occurrences, including using pronouns) in
the books are found to be male. The latter is supported by the fact
that these gender-specific differences diminish when we consider
female-authored books to male-authored books.
Even worse, explorations concerning Hypothesis 3 revealed that
the female character prevalence did not change much over the years
from 1800 to 1950. Recent studies on gender equality have showed
that over the last few decades, female characters’ exposure in films
has increased [51], but is still lower than that of male characters.
They also found that, in movies involving female screenwriters
and filmmakers, female representation and character development
on screen is considerably higher. We expected to see similar and
steady improvements in the long period between 1800 and 1950, but
experimental results on our sample of books do not bear this out. At
least over the period in question, female representation in fictional
literature seems to have stayed largely stagnant. Representation of
female authors is also low compared to male authors.
While our experiments illustrated the quantitative differences in
gender prevalence, in this section, we also attempt a qualitative as-
sessment by systematically analyzing the kinds of words associated
with male and female character occurrences, using computational
techniques from NLP. To do so, we first extracted 5 sentences around
the first occurrence of each character (specifically, 1 sentence before
and 4 after), which is where the description and introduction of
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anonymous
Figure 2: Summary statistics (illustrated as boxplots) characterizing differences between male and female character exposure
using the three exposure measures with gender of the author as control. Proportion of Male Characters for a given measure is
the average (over all books) of the ratio of the male character count in a book to the total character count in that book.
Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Figure 3: Error Bar Plots illustrating the change in proportion of male characters using the three prevalence measures defined
in the Experimental Methodology subsection. The horizontal axis denotes the year (split into buckets) the book was published
while vertical axis denotes the ratio of male characters to total characters. The triangle depicts the mean proportion of male
characters while the vertical error bars show the 95% confidence interval.
the character is generally present. Then, we filtered all the words
in these sentences and retained only the adjectives. We used part-
of-speech (POS) tagging to accomplish this step [49], which is a
process of converting a sentence to list of tuples, where each tu-
ple comprises a word in the sentence, with a corresponding tag
indicating whether the word is a noun, adjective, verb, and so on.
Using POS tagging, we only retained words that were adjectives.
In extracting adjectives around the first occurrence of each of the
characters, our intent was to understand the descriptive theme and
topics associated with male and female characters when they are
first introduced in the book.
To find these topics and themes, we relied on an NLP technique
called word embeddings [33], where a neural network is used to
‘embed’ each word in a corpus as a continuous, real-valued vector
with a few hundred dimensions. The original neural network-based
systems for word embeddings, such as word2vec, operated by slid-
ing a window of a pre-specified size over the sequences of words in
the corpus, and optimizing an objective function, such that vectors
of words that tend to occur in the same window frequently are
‘close’ to each other in the embedding space. Empirically, it was
found that words that have similar meaning and semantic relations
tended to be embedded closer together when a sufficiently large
and representative corpus of text is used (such as Wikipedia, or the
Google News corpus). As further validation of these embeddings, a
number of operations, including analogies, are found to hold nat-
urally in the vector space. For example, the resulting vector for
®
𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑔−
®
𝑀𝑎𝑛+
®
𝑊𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑛was found to lie very close to
®
𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑒𝑛[33].
With the advent of transformer neural networks [50], language
representation learning has become more complex and context-
sensitive [10, 27], although for this preliminary experiment we only
consider a robust version of the word2vec model, described and
linked below.
An advantage of words being represented as vectors, capturing
some notion of natural semantics in the embedding space, is that
we can use the vector representations of the adjectives within an
unsupervised clustering framework to recover themes and topics.
We used the publicly available pre-trained Wiki News word embed-
dings that were derived by executing the popular fastText package
on a large corpus of text16. The fastText package can be used for
learning of word embeddings while being robust to misspellings
and minor variations, and was originally created and released by
Facebook’s AI Research lab [23]. This model can be used to embed
words in new text into vectors that capture semantic properties of
words in a continuous-dimension space, as described above.
Specifically, we obtained two sets of vectors, one each for male
and female, respectively containing the embeddings of adjectives
extracted around male and female characters. Next, we clustered
these words using the classic k-Means algorithm into 8 clusters. The
number of clusters was chosen as 8, since it was found to provide
meaningfully different clusters without much overlap. We initially
started with a smaller value for 𝑘but incrementally increased it
until qualitatively meaningful clusters were visible. In future work,
one could automatically set the value for 𝑘by using one of many
heuristic methods, including the elbow method [28].
Once the clusters were obtained, we took the ‘mid-point’ or
centroid of each cluster, and recovered the 5 words nearest to the
centroid in the vector space. In this manner, we use these 5 words
(per cluster) to approximately represent the main theme of that
cluster. For ease of visualization, the results of 6 out of the 8 clusters
are illustrated in Fig 4. The remaining two clusters covered themes
such as nationality (e.g., ‘British’, ‘American’), and were excluded
from the visualization as they were largely similar between the two
genders.
16https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/fasttext/vectors-english/wiki-news-300d-1M.vec.zip
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anonymous
Figure 4: A comparison of the most representative words in
six word-embedding clusters for both male and female char-
acters.
Although there are some similarities between the representative
words across genders, we also found that while male-adjectives
clusters contain words like ‘strongest’, ‘largest’, ‘obnoxious’, and
‘sensible’, female-adjectives clusters tended to contain words like
‘beautiful’, ‘amiable’, ‘gentle’ and ‘frightened’.
At the same time, it is worth noting that this method is qualitative
and heuristic, and that more experiments are needed to understand
differences in descriptions of male versus female characters. Fur-
thermore, there may also be overlap between words when male
and characters are introduced in the same paragraph. However,
the experiment also helps us to understand differences in themes
when describing male versus female characters. By using a simi-
lar methodology, other questions may also be explored, including
equivalent versions of Hypotheses 2 and 3. For example, a version of
the methodology could be used to explore the question of whether
descriptions have changes over time, or are different between cross-
section samples of male-authored versus female-authored books.
6
LIMITATIONS OF STUDY AND ETHICAL
ISSUES
Gender, and gender identity, are important and complex issues in
society, on which our understanding continues to evolve. In light
of this complexity, it is important to highlight both the limitations
of this study, and the limitations of our findings therein, as well
as ethical caveats that future researchers must bear in mind when
interpreting our findings, or even using the data and methods de-
scribed in this work to obtain their own findings.
First, and perhaps most importantly, we openly acknowledge a
fundamental limitation of this study as one that only considered
a dichotomous male-female gender categorization. Unfortunately,
despite the best of our efforts, we did not find methods in the NLP
literature that would allow us to detect non-binary, non-conforming
and transgender individuals with the necessary accuracy. The Gen-
der_Detector package that was previously described does not offer
such a capability. Accuracy is paramount because non-conforming
genders have already faced high levels of oppression historically,
and it is not evident that they have been conveyed in literature
as directly or representative of the populace as male characters.
Considering the large disparity we already witness in our findings
for female characters, we also cannot rule out complete suppression
of (traditional and dichotomous) gender non-conformity. Indeed,
we hope that future studies will make direct use of our data to
study this issue in depth, in the same way that this study sought to
convey the high levels of female character under-representation in
pre-modern English literature.
Second, our study is obviously confined to the subset of books
that we considered. While the set we did consider withstood the
test of time among the books in that period, the population in that
period was exposed to a broader set of literature (including books,
pamphlets, plays and so on), which may yield different statistics
compared to this study. However, as we showed in the related work,
our estimates of female character under-representation agree to
some extent with recent statistics on female character representa-
tion on screen, or in scenes with meaningful dialogue.
The other limitations noted here are related to the processing of
the dataset. We summarize them below:
(1) Gender from Name Assumption: An assumption made
by our pipeline was that gender could be determined from
the names of book authors or characters. Although we made
some effort to verify the gender from other sources of infor-
mation, such as Wikipedia articles, and have a near-perfect
Robust Quantification of Gender Disparity in Pre-Modern English Literature using Natural Language Processing
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
accuracy estimate based on sampled manual annotations, we
could not do so for all authors and characters. There may be
some bias of which we may not be fully aware. Certainly, we
caution other scholars on solely relying upon this finding as
their one source for determining the genders from names. It
was also for this reason that we have released as much of the
data used in this study as possible in a repository (currently
not cited due to author anonymity requirements).
(2) Small-sample Accuracy Estimates: Accuracy estimates
of the various NLP steps noted in earlier sections were de-
rived from fairly small samples and may be susceptible to
bias. Future researchers should not quote or trust those esti-
mates blindly, but aim to do their own sampling and annota-
tion to expand the annotated sample set, discover potential
biases in our own sample set, and derive accuracy estimates
with higher statistical power.
(3) Possible Methodological Bias: We advocate for more scrutiny
into whether our methods, and the manner in which we in-
vestigated our hypotheses (or even the formulation of the
hypotheses) might have been skewed or biased in a way that
is not apparent to us at present. For instance, there is always
the possibility that if the hypothesis had been stated a dif-
ferent way, or if we had used other measures of character
prevalence, that the findings may have indicated a differ-
ent degree of gender bias than what we reported. Another
problem is that, as recent work as shown, there is consid-
erable gender bias in seemingly unbiased computational
systems, including NLP systems [8]. Therefore, we hope that
future researchers will consider alternative ways of formulat-
ing gender-relevant hypotheses, deriving intermediate data
structures, and replicating the study using the dataset we
have made available.
7
CONCLUSION
In this article, we defined and measured the differences between
male character prevalence and female character prevalence using
three robust measures of prevalence, on a corpus of copyright-
expired literary texts from the Project Gutenberg English-language
corpus. Using computationally replicable methodologies relying
on modern natural language processing tools, we found that fe-
male character prevalence is significantly lower than that of male
character prevalence, although the difference declines (while still
being significant) when controlling for the gender of the author.
We also found that male character ratios have not varied much over
time in our sample. Recent results, especially reported in Related
Work, are consistent with this finding. More broadly, we hope that
our findings serve as a case study illustrating the promise of using
open-source tools and data, in conjunction with careful quality con-
trol and statistical analysis, to objectively explore gender-specific
issues of socio-cultural inequality.
REFERENCES
[1] Martin Anfinsen and Sara Heidenreich. 2017. Energy & gender-a social sciences
and humanities cross-cutting theme report. (2017).
[2] Jodie Archer and Matthew L Jockers. 2016. The bestseller code: Anatomy of the
blockbuster novel. St. Martin’s Press.
[3] FIROOZEH Asghari. 2016. Methodological considerations in gender studies.
Interdisciplinary Studies in the Humanities 7, 4 (2016), 105–127.
[4] FIROOZEH Asghari. 2016. Methodological considerations in gender studies.
Interdisciplinary Studies in the Humanities 7, 4 (2016), 105–127.
[5] Nazlı Bhatia and Sudeep Bhatia. 2021. Changes in gender stereotypes over time:
A computational analysis. Psychology of Women Quarterly 45, 1 (2021), 106–125.
[6] Tina Budzise-Weaver. 2016. Developing a Qualitative Coding Analysis of Visual
Artwork for Humanities Research. DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 10, 4
(2016).
[7] Ronald J Burke and Mary C Mattis. 2013. Women on corporate boards of directors:
International challenges and opportunities. Vol. 14. Springer Science & Business
Media.
[8] Yan Chen, Christopher Mahoney, Isabella Grasso, Esma Wali, Abigail Matthews,
Thomas Middleton, Mariama Njie, and Jeanna Matthews. 2021. Gender Bias and
Under-Representation in Natural Language Processing Across Human Languages.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 24–34. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3461702.3462530
[9] Joachim Daiber, Max Jakob, Chris Hokamp, and Pablo N Mendes. 2013. Improving
efficiency and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction. In Proceedings of the
9th international conference on semantic systems. 121–124.
[10] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[11] Laura Fine. 1998. Gender Conflicts and Their" Dark" Projections in Coming of
Age White Female Southern Novels. Southern Quarterly 36, 4 (1998), 121.
[12] Donna K Ginther and Kathy J Hayes. 2003. Gender differences in salary and
promotion for faculty in the humanities 1977–95. Journal of Human Resources 38,
1 (2003), 34–73.
[13] Jiabao Han and Hongzhi Wang. 2021. Transformer based network for Open
Information Extraction. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 102
(2021), 104262.
[14] Margaret Homans. 1993. Dinah’s blush, Maggie’s arm: class, gender, and sexuality
in George Eliot’s early novels. Victorian Studies 36, 2 (1993), 155–178.
[15] Dirk Hovy, Svitlana Volkova, David Bamman, David Jurgens, Brendan O’Connor,
Oren Tsur, and A Seza Doğruöz. 2017. Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
NLP and Computational Social Science. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
NLP and Computational Social Science.
[16] Lingshu Hu and Michael Wayne Kearney. 2021. Gendered tweets: Computational
text analysis of gender differences in political discussion on Twitter. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology 40, 4 (2021), 482–503.
[17] Minda Hu and Mayank Kejriwal. 2021. Measuring spatio-textual affinities in
twitter between two urban metropolises. Journal of Computational Social Science
(2021), 1–26.
[18] Andrzej Jarynowski, Michał B Paradowski, and Andrzej Buda. 2019. Modelling
communities and populations: an introduction to computational social science.
(2019).
[19] Matthew L Jockers. 2013. Macroanalysis: Digital methods and literary history.
University of Illinois Press.
[20] Matthew L Jockers and David Mimno. 2013. Significant themes in 19th-century
literature. Poetics 41, 6 (2013), 750–769.
[21] Matthew Lee Jockers and Rosamond Thalken. 2014. Text analysis with R for
students of literature. Springer.
[22] Charles E Jordan, Stanley J Clark, and Marilyn A Waldron. 2007. Gender bias and
compensation in the executive suite of the Fortune 100. Journal of Organizational
Culture, Communications and Conflict 11, 1 (2007), 19.
[23] Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. Bag
of tricks for efficient text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759 (2016).
[24] Mayank Kejriwal. 2019. Information Extraction. In Domain-Specific Knowledge
Graph Construction. Springer, 9–31.
[25] Mayank Kejriwal, Runqi Shao, and Pedro Szekely. 2019. Expert-guided entity
extraction using expressive rules. In Proceedings of the 42nd international ACM
SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval. 1353–1356.
[26] Mayank Kejriwal and Pedro Szekely. 2017. Information extraction in illicit web
domains. In Proceedings of the 26th international conference on world wide web.
997–1006.
[27] Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord,
Peter Clark, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Unifiedqa: Crossing format bound-
aries with a single qa system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00700 (2020).
[28] Trupti M Kodinariya and Prashant R Makwana. 2013. Review on determining
number of Cluster in K-Means Clustering. International Journal 1, 6 (2013),
90–95.
[29] Diego Kozlowski, Gabriela Lozano, Carla M Felcher, Fernando Gonzalez, and
Edgar Altszyler. 2020. Gender bias in magazines oriented to men and women: a
computational approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12096 (2020).
[30] Ben Lambert, Georgios Kontonatsios, Matthias Mauch, Theodore Kokkoris,
Matthew Jockers, Sophia Ananiadou, and Armand M Leroi. 2020. The pace
of modern culture. Nature human behaviour 4, 4 (2020), 352–360.
[31] Yang Liu. 2019. Fine-tune BERT for extractive summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.10318 (2019).
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
Anonymous
[32] Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. Nltk: The natural language toolkit. arXiv
preprint cs/0205028 (2002).
[33] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781
(2013).
[34] Smitha Milli and David Bamman. 2016. Beyond canonical texts: A computational
analysis of fanfiction. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing. 2048–2053.
[35] Zahra Montasseri, Mohammad Saber Khaghaninejad, and Amirsaeid Moloodi.
2020. Gender Representation in American Movies: A Corpus-based Analysis.
The International Journal of Humanities 27, 4 (2020), 42–53.
[36] David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of named entity recognition
and classification. Lingvisticae Investigationes 30, 1 (2007), 3–26.
[37] Usman Naseem, Imran Razzak, Katarzyna Musial, and Muhammad Imran. 2020.
Transformer based deep intelligent contextual embedding for twitter sentiment
analysis. Future Generation Computer Systems 113 (2020), 58–69.
[38] DongWon Oh, Ron Dotsch, Jenny Porter, and Alexander Todorov. 2020. Gender
biases in impressions from faces: Empirical studies and computational models.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 149, 2 (2020), 323.
[39] David D Palmer. 2000. Tokenisation and sentence segmentation. Handbook of
natural language processing (2000), 11–35.
[40] Jane Pilcher and Imelda Whelehan. 2016. Key concepts in gender studies. Sage.
[41] Joseph Reagle and Lauren Rhue. 2011. Gender bias in Wikipedia and Britannica.
International Journal of Communication 5 (2011), 21.
[42] Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D Manning. 2019. Coqa: A conversa-
tional question answering challenge. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics 7 (2019), 249–266.
[43] Manabu Sassano and Takehito Utsuro. 2000. Named entity chunking techniques
in supervised learning for Japanese named entity recognition. In COLING 2000
Volume 2: The 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
[44] Mark Setzler. 2019. Measuring bias against female political leadership. Politics &
Gender 15, 4 (2019), 695–721.
[45] Wissam Siblini, Charlotte Pasqual, Axel Lavielle, and Cyril Cauchois. 2019. Multi-
lingual question answering from formatted text applied to conversational agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04659 (2019).
[46] Jian Sun, Jianfeng Gao, Lei Zhang, Ming Zhou, and Changning Huang. 2002.
Chinese named entity identification using class-based language model. In COLING
2002: The 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
[47] Chris Thomas, Iman Ghodratitoostani, Alexandre CB Delbem, Afaq Ali, and Ab-
hishek Datta. 2019. Influence of gender-related differences in transcranial direct
current stimulation: A Computational Study. In 2019 41st Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE,
5196–5199.
[48] Yuli Vasiliev. 2020. Natural Language Processing with Python and SpaCy: A
Practical Introduction. No Starch Press.
[49] Atro Voutilainen. 2003. Part-of-speech tagging. The Oxford handbook of compu-
tational linguistics (2003), 219–232.
[50] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue,
Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al.
2019. HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 (2019).
[51] Luoying Yang, Zhou Xu, and Jiebo Luo. 2020. Measuring Female Representation
and Impact in Films over Time. ACM Transactions on Data Science 1, 4 (2020),
1–14.
