Title: Interpreting Deep Learning Models in Natural Language Processing: A Review
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.10470v2
--------------------------------------------------

Interpreting Deep Learning Models in Natural Language Processing:
A Review
Xiaofei Sun1, Diyi Yang2, Xiaoya Li1, Tianwei Zhang3,
Yuxian Meng1, Han Qiu4, Guoyin Wang5, Eduard Hovy6, Jiwei Li1,7
1Shannon.AI, 2Georgia Institute of Technology
3Nanyang Technological University, 4Tsinghua University
5Amazon Alexa AI, 6Carnegie Mellon University, 7Zhejiang University
Abstract
Neural network models have achieved state-of-the-art performances in a wide range of natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. However, a long-standing criticism against neural network models is the lack of interpretability, which not only reduces
the reliability of neural NLP systems but also limits the scope of their applications in areas where interpretability is essential
(e.g., health care applications). In response, the increasing interest in interpreting neural NLP models has spurred a diverse array
of interpretation methods over recent years. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review of various interpretation methods
for neural models in NLP. We ﬁrst stretch out a high-level taxonomy for interpretation methods in NLP, i.e., training-based
approaches, test-based approaches and hybrid approaches. Next, we describe sub-categories in each category in detail, e.g.,
inﬂuence-function based methods, KNN-based methods, attention-based models, saliency-based methods, perturbation-based
methods, etc. We point out deﬁciencies of current methods and suggest some avenues for future research. 1
1
Introduction
Deep learning based models have achieved state-of-the-art results on a variety of natural language processing (NLP) tasks
such as tagging [127, 165, 217, 120], text classiﬁcation [100, 221, 144, 121, 32, 199], machine translation [194, 59, 222, 187],
natural language understanding [210, 110, 181, 200], dialog [4, 207, 16], and question answering [93, 97, 218, 208]. By
ﬁrst transforming each word (or each token in the general sense) into its word vector and then mapping these vectors into
higher-level representations through layer-wise interactions such as recursive nets [175, 82, 117, 27], LSTMs [77], CNNs
[95, 100], Transformers [194], deep neural networks are able to encode rich linguistic and semantic knowledge in the latent
vector space [130, 41, 78, 71], capture contextual patterns and make accurate predictions on downstream tasks. However, a
long-standing criticism against deep learning models is the lack of interpretability: in NLP, it is unclear how neural models deal
with composition in language, such as implementing afﬁrmation, negation, disambiguation and semantic combination from
different constituents of the sentence [86, 203, 188]. The uninterpretability of deep neural NLP models limits their scope of
applications which require strong controllability and interpretability.
Designing methods to interpret neural networks has gained increasing attentions. in the ﬁeld of computer vision, interpreting
neural models involves identifying the part of the input that contributes most to the model predictions, and this paradigm has
been widely studied (CV), using saliency maps [172, 211], layer-wise relevance propagation [13, 132, 102], model-agnostic
interpreting methods [152] and back-propagation [171]. These methods have improved neural model interpretability and
reliability from various perspectives, and raised the community’s awareness of the necessity of neural model interpretability
when we want to build trustworthy and controllable systems [2, 191, 131]. Different from computer vision, the basic input units
in NLP for neural models are discrete language tokens rather than continuous pixels in images [20, 38, 15]. This discrete nature
of language poses a challenge for interpreting neural NLP models, making the interpreting methods in CV hard to be directly
applied to NLP domain [22, 114]. To accommodate the discrete nature of texts, a great variety of works have rapidly emerged
over the past a few years for neural model interpretability. A systematic review is thus needed to sort out and compare different
1E-mail addresses:
xiaofei_sun@shannonai.com (X. Sun),
diyi.yang@cc.gatech.edu (D. Yang),
xiaoya_li@
shannonai.com (X. Li), tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg (T. Zhang), yuxian_meng@shannonai.com (Y. Meng), qiuhan@
tsinghua.edu.cn (H. Qiu), guoyiwan@amazon.com (G. Wang), hovy@cmu.edu (E. Hovy), jiwei_li@shannonai.com (J.
Li).
1
arXiv:2110.10470v2  [cs.CL]  25 Oct 2021
Training-based methods
Identify training instances responsible for the prediction of the current
test instance.
Test-based methods
Identify which part(s) of a test instance responsible for the model predic-
tion.
Hybrid methods
Identify because of which training instances, the model attends to which
part(s) of the test instance for its prediction.
Table 1: Summary of the high-level categories of interpretation methods for neural NLP models.
Figure 1: Difference of training-based, test-based and hybrid interpreting methods. The ﬁgure is adapted from the Figure 1 in
the work of [129]. In a nutshell, test-based methods target ﬁnding the most salient part(s) of the input; training-based methods
ﬁnd the most contributive training examples responsible for a model’s predictions; hybrid methods combine both worlds, by
ﬁrst ﬁnding the most salient part(s) of the input and then identifying the training instances responsible for the salient part(s).
methods, providing a comprehensive understanding of from which perspective a neural NLP model can be interpreted and how
the model can be interpreted effectively.
In this survey, we aim to to provide a comprehensive review of existing interpreting methods for neural NLP models. We
propose taxonomies to categorize existing interpretation methods from the perspective of (1) training-focused v.s. test-focused;
and (2) joint v.s. post-hoc. Regarding training-focused v.s. test-focused, the former denotes identifying the training instances or
elements within training instances responsible for the model’s prediction on a speciﬁc test example, while the latter denotes
ﬁnding the most salient part of the input test-example responsible for a prediction. The two perspectives can be jointly
considered: aiming to identify because of which training instances, the model attends to which part(s) of the test example for its
prediction. Based on the speciﬁc types of algorithms used, training-based methods can be further divided into inﬂuence-function
based methods, KNN-based methods, kernel-based methods, etc. Test-based methods can be divided into saliency-based
methods, perturbation-based methods, attention-based methods, etc. Figure 1 depicts the difference of training-based, test-based
and hybrid interpreting methods. Regarding joint v.s. post-hoc, for the former joint appraoch, a joint interpreting model is
trained along with the main classiﬁcation model and the interpreting tool is nested within the main model, such as attention;
for the latter post-hoc approach, an additional probing model, which is separately developed after the main model completes
training, is used for interpretation. Figure 2 depicts the difference between joint and post-hoc approaches. Categorization with
taxonomy framework naturally separates different methods and makes audience easy to locate the works of interest. Table 1
shows the high-level categories of explanations
We analyze the literature with respect to these dimensions and review some of the representative techniques regarding each of
these categories. In summary, this work:
• Categorizes interpreting methods according to training-focused v.s. test-focused and joint v.s. post-hoc.
• Provides an empirical review of up-to-date methods for interpreting neural NLP models.
• Discusses deﬁciencies of current methods and suggest avenues for future research.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows: Section 2 clariﬁes the high-level taxonomy proposed in this work. Section 3, 4
and 5 review existing training-based methods, test-based methods and hybrid methods for interpreting neural NLP models.
Section 6 discusses some open problems and directions that may be intriguing for future works. Section 7 summarizes this
survey.
2
Figure 2: An illustrative comparison between joint interpreting methods and post-hoc interpreting methods.
1.1
Related Surveys
Related to this work, [216] conducted a survey of neural network interpretability methods used in computer vision, bioin-
formatics and NLP along several different dimensions such as using passive/active interpretation approaches or focusing
on local/global effect. However, our survey provides an in-depth overview for interpreting neural NLP models for NLP
tasks. Another line of work, AllenNLP Interpret [198], provides interpretation primitives (e.g., input gradients) for AllenNLP
model and task, a suite of built-in interpretation methods, and a library of front-end visualization components; the toolkit
mainly supports gradient-based saliency maps and adversarial attacks. In contrast, our review covers more comprehensive
interpretability methods.
2
High-level Taxonomy
In this section, we provide a high-level overview of the taxonomy used in this survey. As shown in Table 2, the topmost level
categorizes existing methods by whether they aim to interpret models from the training side, from the test side, or from both
sides.
Walking into the second level, this taxonomy categorizes literature based on the basic tools they use to interpret model behaviors.
For training-based methods, they are sub-categorized into inﬂuence functions (Section 3.1), KNNs for interpretation (Section
3.2) and kernel-based explanation (Section 3.3), which are respectively related to using inﬂuence functions, k nearest neighbors
and kernel-based models for interpretation in the training side. Test-based methods (Section 4) are sub-categorized into saliency
maps (Section 4.1), attention as explanation (Section 4.2.1), and explanation generation (Section 4.3), which respectively use
saliency maps, attention distributions and explainable contexts to interpret models in the test side. Hybrid methods interpret
model predictions by jointly examining training history and test stimuli, which can be viewed as a combination of training-based
and test-based methods (Section 5). Each category is paired with whether they belong to joint or post-hoc. In the following
section of this survey, we will expound on some of the representative works from each of the categories.
3
Training-Based Interpretation
The main purpose of training-based methods is to identify which training instances or units of training instances in the training
set are responsible for the model’s prediction at a speciﬁc test example. Existing training-based techniques fall into the following
three categories:
• Inﬂuence function based interpretation: using inﬂuence functions to estimate the inﬂuence of each training point on
an input test example. The training points with the highest inﬂuences are viewed as the most contributive instances.
• Nearest Neighbor based interpretation: extracting the k nearest neighbor points in the training set that are close to an
input test example. Extracted nearest neighbors are viewed as the most contributive instances
• Landmark based interpretation: An input test sentence is fed to the classiﬁer along with landmarks, which refer to
a set of training examples used to compile the representation of any unseen test instance. The inﬂuence of training
examples on an input test example is measured by the contribution of each landmark to the model’s decision on the
3
First Level
Second Level
Technique Description
Joint/Post-
hoc
Representative Works
Inﬂuence functions
Measuring the change in model parameters when
a training point changes.
Post-hoc
[70, 103, 209, 69]
Training-based
KNNs for interpretation
Searching k nearest neighbors over a model’s
hidden representations to identify training exam-
ples closest to a given evaluation example.
Post-hoc
[197, 148]
Kernel-based explanation
Within the kernel-based framework, selecting
landmarks that the Layer-wise Relevance Prop-
agation algorithm highlights as the most active
elements responsible for the model prediction.
Joint/Post-
hoc
[47, 48]
Saliency maps
Computing the saliency score of each token or
span based on network gradient or feature attri-
bution. The part of sentence with the highest
salience score is viewed as the interpretable con-
tent.
Post-hoc
[116, 118, 184, 156, 6,
140, 61, 68, 99, 35]
Test-based
Attention as explanation
Leveraging attention distributions over tokens as
a tool of interpretation. The most attentive token
or span is regarded as the most contributive to
the model prediction.
Joint
[182, 86, 164, 203, 193,
154, 63, 41, 195, 190,
78, 30, 143, 71, 150]
Explanation generation
Generating or inducing explanations for the
model’s prediction. The explanation may come
from a subset of the input sentence, from exter-
nal knowledge or from a language model that
generates explanations from scratch.
Joint
[113, 134, 33, 185, 53,
87, 107, 149, 124, 56,
40, 79, 19, 161, 50, 153,
147]
Hybrid
Interpreting model behaviors by jointly examin-
ing training history and test stimuli.
Post-hoc
[129]
Table 2: An overview of high-level taxonomy for interpretation methods in NLP. Column 1 denotes the topmost level of the
taxonomy. Column 2 denotes the second-level categorizations. Column 3 gives brief descriptions of the techniques grouped in
the second-level categorizations. Column 4 notiﬁes whether the body of work is joint (the interpreting model is trained jointly
with the main model) or post-hoc (the interpreting method is applied to the trained main model). Column 5 contains a list of
representative references.
test example based on the Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [14] algorithm. As landmarks are organized via
kernel-based deep architectures, this method is also referred to as Kernel-based Explanation.
We will describe these methods at length in the rest of this subsection.
3.1
Inﬂuence Functions Based Interpretation
3.1.1
Inﬂuence functions
The inﬂuence of a training point can be deﬁned as the change in the model parameters when a speciﬁc training point is removed.
To measure the change of model parameters, an intuitive way is to retrain the model on the training set with the training example
left-out. However, this is prohibitively time-intensive as we need to retrain the model from scratch for every training example.
Alternatively, inﬂuence functions [45, 44, 104] provide an approximate but tractable way to track parameter change without the
need to repeatedly retrain the model.
Concisely speaking, the inﬂuence function estimates the impact on the model parameters when the loss of a particular training
point is up-weighted by a small perturbation ϵ. This can be done through ﬁrst-order approximation. Let zi(i = 1, 2, · · · , n) be
a training point in the training set. The model parameters θ is learned to minimize a given loss function L:
ˆθ = arg min
θ
1
n
n
X
i=1
L(zi; θ)
(1)
Analogously, the optimal model parameters θz,ϵ when the loss of a training point z is weighted by a small perturbation can be
4
Figure 3: Efﬁcient implementations of inﬂuence functions proposed in [103] (left) and [69] (right). The ﬁgures are borrowed
from the original literature.
derived by minimizing the following loss:
ˆθz,ϵ = arg min
θ
1
n
n
X
i=1
L(zi; θ) + ϵL(z; θ)
(2)
By referring the audience to [104] for detailed proofs, the inﬂuence of a training point z on the model parameters θ, which is
denoted by I(z, θ), is given as follows:
I(z, θ) ≜dˆθz,ϵ
dϵ
= −H−1
θ ∇θL(z; ˆθ)
(3)
where Hθ ≜1
n
P
zi ∇2
θL(zi; ˆθ) is the Hessian matrix over all training instances zi in the training set, and L(zi; ˆθ) is the loss of
z over model parameters θ. Equation 3 expresses the degree to which a small perturbation on a training point z inﬂuences the
model parameters θ. Based on Equation 3, [70] applied the chain rule to measure how this change in model parameters would
in turn affect the loss of the test input x:
I(z, x) ≜dL(x; ˆθ)
dϵz
= ∇θL(x; ˆθ) · dˆθz,ϵ
dϵ
= ∇θL(x; ˆθ) · I(z, θ) = −∇θL(x; ˆθ)⊤H−1
θ ∇θL(z; ˆθ)
(4)
[70] deﬁned the negative score −I(z, x) as the inﬂuence score. Equation 4 reveals that a positive inﬂuence score for a training
point z with respect to the input example x means that the removal of z from the training set would be expected to cause a drop
in the model’s conﬁdence when making the prediction on x. By contrast, a negative inﬂuence score means that the removal of z
from the training set would be expected to give an increase in the model’s conﬁdence when making this prediction. Experiments
and analysis from [70] validated the reliability of inﬂuence functions when applied to deep transformer-based [194] models.
3.1.2
Efﬁcient inﬂuence functions
A closer look at Equation 4 reviews the disadvantage of inﬂuence functions: the computational cost of computing the inverse-
Hessian matrix H−1
θ
and iterating over all training points z to ﬁnd the most (least) inﬂuential example is infeasible to bear
for large-scale models such as BERT [52]. Efﬁcient estimates for inﬂuence functions are thus needed to improve runtime
efﬁciency while preserving the interpretability. [103] and [69] respectively address this issue from the model side and from
the algorithm side. Figure 3 illustrates how these two methods work. [103] proposed turn-over dropout, a variant of dropout
applied to the network for each individual training instance. After training the model on the entire training dataset, turn-over
dropout generates an individual-speciﬁc dropout mask scheme m(z) for each training point z, and then feeds z into the model
for training using the proposed mask scheme m(z). The mask scheme m(z) corresponds to a sub-network f m(z), which is
updated when the model is trained on z, but the counter-part of the model f ˜
m(z), is not at all affected. Therefore, the two
sub-networks, f m(z) and f ˜
m(z), can be analogously perceived as two different networks trained on a dataset with or without z.
The inﬂuence of z on a test input example x can thus be computed as follows:
I(z, x) ≜L(x; f m(z)) −L(x; f ˜
m(z))
(5)
5
Figure 4: Overview of KNN-based (left, the ﬁgure is borrowed from the work of [148]) and kernel-based (right, the ﬁgure is
borrowed from the work of [48]) interpretation methods. KNN-based methods ﬁrst cache high-dimensional representation of
training instances and search for the k nearest neighbors with respect to the test example in the latent space. Kernel-based
methods leverage landmark instances from the training set as part of the model input, providing linguistic evidence for
interpretation.
Experimenting on the Stanford Sentiment TreeBank (SST-2) [176] and the Yahoo Answers dataset [214] with the BERT model,
the turn-over dropout technique is able to interpret erroneously classiﬁed test examples by identifying the most inﬂuential
training instances, with a more efﬁcient computation process. [69] tackled the computation issue of the original inﬂuence
functions from the algorithm perspective. Their optimization process can be divided into three aspects: (1) kNN constraint
on the search space; (2) the inverse Hessian computation speedup; and (3) parallelization. First, to avoid the global search
on the entire training dataset for the most inﬂuential data point, the search space is constrained within a small subset of the
training set. This can be achieved by selecting the top-k nearest neighbors to the test input instance x based on the l2 distance
between extracted features. Second, to speed up computation of the inverse Hessian matrix H−1
θ , [69] carefully selected the
required hyperparameters used to compute the inverse Hessian matrix so that the inverse Hessian-vector product H−1
θ ∇θL(x; ˆθ)
(Equation 4) can efﬁciently calculated. Third, [69] applied off-the-shelf multi-GPU parallelization tools to compute inﬂuence
scores in a parallel manner. The conﬂuence of all three factors leads to a speedup rate of 80x while being highly correlated with
the original inﬂuence functions. With the new fast version of inﬂuence functions, a few applications that are concerned with
model interpretation but were previously intractable are demonstrated, including examining the “explainability” of inﬂuential
data-points, visualizing data inﬂuence-interactions, correcting model predictions using original training data, and correcting
model predictions using data from a new dataset. The efﬁcient implementation of inﬂuence functions provide possibility for
new interpretable explorations that scale with the data size and model size.
The inﬂuence function based interpreting methods are along the post-hoc line, which means that they are applied for interpreta-
tion after the main model is fully trained.
3.2
KNNs Based Interpretation
KNN-based interpretation [197, 148] retrieves k nearest training instances that are the closest to a speciﬁc test input from
the training set. After the training process completes, each training point is passed to the trained model to derive its high-
dimensional representation z, which is cached for test-time retrieval. Then at test time, the model outputs the representation of
the input example x, uses it as the query to search for k nearest training instances in the cache store. In the meantime, the
distance between the query and each retrieved training point can be calculated, and the corresponding ground-truth labels for
the retrieved training points can also be extracted. The normalized distances are treated as the weight associated with each
training point the model retrieves to interpret its prediction for the test input example, and the percentage of nearest neighbors
belonging to the predicted class, which is called the conformity score [197], can be interpreted as how much the training data
supports a classiﬁcation decision. [148] uses the conformity score to calibrate an uncertain model prediction, showing that KNN
interpretation is able to identify mislabeled examples. Figure 4 (left) provides an overview of the KNN-based interpretation
method proposed in [148].
KNN based interpretation works after the training process completes, and thus belongs to the post-hoc category.
6
Figure 5: An overview of test-based methods. Left: The saliency score is the importance or relevance of a token or a span with
respect to the model prediction. A higher saliency score denotes greater importance. Middle: Attention scores over input tokens
reﬂects how the model distributes its attention to different parts of the input. Attention distributions can thus be viewed as a
tool for interpretation. Right: Given the input, the model gives its prediction as well as the evidence supporting its decision. A
judicious decision can be explained in a way of generating the corresponding explanations.
3.3
Landmark Based Interpretation
Landmark based interpreting methods [47, 48] use landmarks, which are a set of real reference training examples, to compile
the linguistic properties of an unseen test example. This line of methods combine the Layerwise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
[13] and Kernel-based Deep Architectures (KDAs) [46] to complete interpretation. An illustration is shown in Figure 4 (right).
More formally, given an input example x and d landmarks {l1, l2, · · · , ld} sampled from the training set, the model ﬁrst
computes the similarity score K(x, li) between x and each landmark li using a kernel function K(·, ·). Then, a Nyström layer
[204] is used to map the vector of similarity scores [K(x, l1), K(x, l2), . . . , K(x, ld)] to a high-dimensional representation.
Passing through multiple ordinary hidden layers, the model last makes its prediction at the classiﬁcation layer. The expected
explanation is obtained from the network output by applying LRP to revert the propagation process, therefore linking the output
back to the similarity vector. Once LRP assigns a score to each of these landmarks (i.e., the corresponding similarity score
K(x, li)), we can select the positively active landmarks as evidence in favor of a class C. A template-based natural language
explanation is generated based on the activated landmarks. As an example given in [48], the generated explanation to the
input example “What is the capital of Zimbabwe?” that refers to Location is “since it recalls me of ‘What is the capital of
California?’, which also refers to Location”. In this example, “What is the capital of California?” is the activated landmark
used to trigger the template-based explanation, and Location is the class C the model predicts.
To decide whether the landmark–based model belonging to the joint or post-hoc category, we need to take into consideration its
two constituent components: (1) the kernel architecture component which involves the kernel function K(·, ·) and the Nyström
layer, and (2) the LRP scoring mechanism. For the former, the kernel architecture is trained together with the entire model and
therefore the landmark–based model can be viewed as along the joint interpretation line. For the latter, when computing the
importance of each landmark, LRP is a typical post-hoc interpreting method. The landmark–based model can thus be viewed as
both joint and post-hoc.
4
Test-Based Interpretation
Different from training-based methods that focus on interpreting neural NLP models by identifying the training points
responsible for the model’s prediction on a speciﬁc test input, the test-based methods, instead, aim at providing explanations
about which part(s) of the test example contribute most to the model prediction. This line of methods are rooted in the
intuition that not every token or span within the input sentence contributes equally to the prediction decision, and thus the most
contributive token or span can usually interpret the model behaviors. For example in Figure 1, the input test example “the movie
is fascinating” has a very typical adjective “fascinating” that would nudge the model to predict the class label Positive.
In this sense, the most contributive part is word “fascinating”. If we insert the negation “not” before “fascinating”, the most
contributive part would therefore be “not fascinating”, a span rather than a word in the input sentence.
Most of existing test-based methods fall into the following three categories: saliency maps, attention as explanation and
explanation generation. Saliency maps and attention provide very straightforward explanations in the form of visualized
heatmaps distributed to the input text, showing intuitive understandings of which part(s) of the input the model focuses most
on, and which part(s) of the input the model pays less attention to. The methods of textual explanation generation justify the
model prediction by generating causal evidence either from a part of the input sentence, from external knowledge resources or
7
Method
Formulation
Vanilla Gradient
Score(xi) = ∂Sy(x)
∂xi
Integrated Gradient
Score(xi) = (xi −¯xi) ·
R 1
α=0
∂Sy(˜x)
∂˜xi

˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)dα
Perturbation
Score(xi) = Sy(x) −Sy(x\{xi})
LRP
Score(xi) = r(0)
i
, r(l)
i
= P
j
zji
P
i′(zji′+bj)+ϵ·sign(P
i′(zji′+bj))r(l+1)
j
DeepLIFT
Score(xi) = r(0)
i
, r(l)
i
= P
j
zji−¯zji
P
i′ zji′−P
i′ ¯zji′ r(l+1)
j
Table 3: Mathematical formulation of different saliency methods. LRP and DeepLIFT perform in a top-down recursive manner.
completely from scratch. This test-based framework of model interpretation, in contrast to training-based methods, is concerned
with one particular input example, and conveys useful and intuitive information to end-users even without any AI background.
Figure 5 shows a high-level overview for the three different strands of test-based methods. In the rest of this subsection, we will
describe each line of methods in detail.
4.1
Saliency-based Interpretation
In natural languages, some words are more important than other words in indicating the direction to which the model predicts.
In sentiment classiﬁcation for example, the words associated with strong emotions such as “fantastic”, “scary” and “exciting”
would provide interpretable cues for the model prediction. If we could measure the importance of a word, or a span, and
examine the relationship of the most important part(s) with the model prediction, we will be able to interpret the model
behaviors through the lens of these important contents and their relationship with model predictions. The importance of each
token (or its corresponding input feature), which sometimes is also called the saliency or the attribution, deﬁnes the relevance
of that token with the model prediction. By visualizing the saliency maps, i.e., plotting the saliency scores in the form of
heatmaps, users can easily understand why model make decisions by examining the most salient part(s).
We describe four typical ways of computing the saliency score in the rest of this subsection. These methods include: gradient-
based, perturbation-based, LRP-based and DeepLIFT-based. Table 3 summarizes the mathematical formulations of these
methods.
4.1.1
Gradient-based saliency scores
Gradient-based saliency methods compute the importance of a speciﬁc input feature (e.g., vector dimension, word or span)
based on the ﬁrst-order derivative with respect to that feature. Suppose that Sy(xi) is output with respect to class label
y before applying the softmax function, and xi is the input feature, which is the ith dimension of the word embedding
x = {x1, x2, ..., xi, ..., xN} for word w in NLP tasks. We have:
Sy(xi + ∆xi) ≈Sy(xi) + ∂Sy(xi)
∂x
∆xi
(6)
∂Sy(xi)
∂xi
can be viewed as the change of Sy(xi) with respect to the change of xi. If ∂Sy(xi)
∂xi
approaches 0, it means that Sy(xi)
is not at all sensitive to the change of xi. ∂Sy(xi)
∂x
can thus be straightforwardly viewed as the importance of the word dimension
xi [116]:
Score(xi) = ∂Sy(x)
∂xi
(7)
Equation 7 computes the importance of a single dimension for the word vector. To measure the importance of a word Score(w),
we can use the norm as follows:
Score(w) =
v
u
u
tX
i

∂Sy(xi)
∂xi

2
(8)
or multiply the important vector with the input feature vector [51, 6]:
Score(w) =

X
i
xi
∂Sy(xi)
∂xi

(9)
8
Figure 6: Diagram of the perturbation based method (left, the ﬁgure is brought from [61]) and LRP (right, the ﬁgure is brought
from [64]). Left: At each step, the least important word is removed by the saliency score using the leave-one-out technique. As
shown in the ﬁgure, the heatmaps generated with leave-one-out shift drastically: the word “advertisement” is the most salient in
step one and two, but becomes the least salient in step three. Right: LRP provides decomposition of the attribute scores from
the model prediction to the input features. It does not utilize partial derivatives but rather directly decomposes the activation
function to produce the attribute score.
Both methods work well for the interpretation purpose. Albeit simple and easy to implement, this kind of vanilla gradient
saliency score assumes a linear approximation of the relationship between the input feature and the model output, which is not
the case for deep neural networks. [184] proposed the integrated gradient (IG), a modiﬁcation to the vanilla gradient saliency
score. IG computes the average gradient along the linear path of varying the input from a baseline value ¯x to itself x, which
produces a more reliable and stable result compared to the vanilla gradient approach. The baseline value is often set to zero. IG
can be formulated as the following equation:
Score(xi) = (xi −¯xi) ·
Z 1
α=0
∂Sy(˜x)
∂˜xi

˜x=¯x+α(x−¯x)dα
(10)
4.1.2
Perturbation-based saliency scores
Perturbation-based methods compute the saliency score of an input feature by removing, masking or altering that feature,
passing the altered input again into the model and measuring the output change. This technique is straightforward to understand:
if a particular input token is important, then removing it will be more likely to causing drastic prediction change and ﬂip the
model prediction.
One simple way to perturb an input is to erase a word from the input, and examine the change in the model’s prediction on the
target class label [118]. This technique is called the leave-one-out perturbation method. By iterating over all words, we can
ﬁnd the most salient word that leads to the largest prediction change. The saliency score using leave-one-out can be given as
follows:
Score(xi) = Sy(x) −Sy(x\{xi})
(11)
The token-level removal can be extended to the span level or the phrase level [155, 206]. Based on the leave-one-out technique,
[61] uses input reduction, which iteratively removes the least salient word at a time, to induce the pathological behaviors of
neural NLP models. An example is shown in Figure 6 (left).
Another way to perturb the input is to inject learnable interpretable adversaries into an input feature [160, 68]. By conforming
to speciﬁc restrictions (e.g., the direction, the magnitude or the distribution) and learning to optimize predeﬁned training
objectives, the adversarial perturbations are able to reveal some interpretable patterns within neural NLP models, such as the
word relationships, the information of each word discarded when words pass through layers, and how the model evolves during
training.
9
Figure 7: A visualization of saliency methods Integrated Gradient, DeepLIFT and Gradient×Input (the ﬁgure is borrowed from
[22]). Red denotes a positive saliency value while blue denotes negative values, and the greater the absolute value is, the darker
the color would be.
4.1.3
LRP-based saliency scores
Gradient-based and perturbation-based saliency methods directly compute inﬂuence of input layer features on the output in
an end-to-end fashion, and thus neglects the dynamic changes of word saliency in intermediate layers. Layerwise Relevance
Propagation [14], or LRP for short, provides full, layer-by-layer decomposition for the attribute values from the model prediction
backward to the input features in a recursive fashion. A sketch of the propagation ﬂow of LRP is shown in Figure 6 (right).
LRP has been applied to interpret neural NLP models for various downstream tasks [9, 10, 11, 54]. LRP deﬁnes a quantify
r(l)
i
– the “relevance” of neuron i in layer l, and starts relevance decomposition from the output layer L to the input layer 0,
redistributing each relevance r(l)
i
down to all the neurons r(l−1)
j
at its successor layer l −1. The relevance redistribution across
layers goes as follows:
r(L)
i
=
(
Sy(x),
i is the target unit of the gold class label
0,
otherwise
r(l)
i
=
X
j
zji
P
i′(zji′ + bj) + ϵ · sign(P
i′(zji′ + bj))r(l+1)
j
(12)
where zji = w(l+1,l)
ji
x(l)
i
is the weighted activation of neuron i in layer l onto neuron j in layer l + 1 and bj is the bias
term. A small ϵ is used to circumvent numerical instabilities. The saliency scores at the input layer can thus be deﬁned as
Score(xi) = r(0)
i
. Equation 12 reveals that the more relevant an input feature is to the model prediction, the larger relevance
(saliency) score it will gain backward from the output layer. A merit LRP offers is that it allows users to understand how the
relevance of each input feature ﬂows and changes across layers. This property enables interpretation from the inside of model
rather than the superﬁcial operation of associating input features with the output.
4.1.4
DeepLIFT-based saliency scores
Similar to LRP, DeepLIFT [171, 8] proceeds in a progressive backward fashion, but the relevance score is calculated in a
relative view: instead of directly propagating and redistributing the relevance score from the upper layer to the lower layer,
DeepLIFT assigns each neuron a score that represents the relative effect of the neuron at the original input x relative to some
reference input ¯x, taking the advantages of both Integrated Gradient and LRP. The mathematical formulation of DeepLIFT can
be expressed as follows:
r(L)
i
=
(
Sy(x) −Sy(¯x),
i is the target unit of the gold class label
0,
otherwise
r(l)
i
=
X
j
zji −¯zji
P
i′ zji′ −P
i′ ¯zji′ r(l+1)
j
(13)
Using the baseline input ¯x, the reference relevance values ¯zji can be computed by running with ¯x a forward pass through the
neural model. Ordinarily, the baseline is set to be zero. zji and ¯zji are computed in the same way but use different inputs:
zji = w(l+1,l)
ji
x(l)
i
and ¯zji = w(l+1,l)
ji
¯x(l)
i .
Figure 7 shows the saliency maps generated by three saliency methods: integrated gradient (IG), DeepLIFT and Gradient×Input,
with respect to the input sentence “the movie is not that bad, ringo lam sucks. i hate when van dam ##me has love in his movies,
10
Figure 8: A visualization of the attention mechanism. We show the three forms of attention proposed in [126].
van dam ##me is good only when he doesn ’ t have love in this movies.” As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the highlighted words
are very different across different methods. IG produces meaningful explanations as it correctly marks out the words “bad”,
“sucks” and “hate” that strongly guide the model prediction toward negative, whereas DeepLIFT and vanilla gradient struggle to
correctly detect the interpretable units. This is a case where IG works well while DeepLIFT and vanilla gradient do not, while
in other cases, the superiority of IG is not guaranteed. We thus should take multiple interpreting methods for full consideration.
Because saliency-based interpretation uses an independent probing model to interpret the behaviors of the main model, the
methods belong to the post-hoc category.
4.2
Attention-based Interpretation
4.2.1
Background
When humans read, they only pay attention to the key part. For example, to answer the question “What causes precipitation to
fall”, given the document context “In meteorology, precipitation is any product of the condensation of atmospheric water vapor
that falls under gravity.” humans could easily identify the correct phrase “falls under gravity” in which the answer “gravity”
resides, and other parts of the document are less attended.
The attention mechanism, grounded on the way how humans read, has been widely used in NLP [15, 126]. Take the neural
machine translation task as an example. Assume the hidden representations of the input document is s = {s1, s2, · · · , sn},
where each si is a d-dimensional vector and n is the input length, and the decoder sequentially generates one token per time
step:
p(yj|y<j, s) = softmax(W˜hj), ˜hj = Attention(hj, s), hj = f(hj−1)
(14)
W is a transformation matrix that outputs a vocabulary-size vector, f computes the current hidden state given the previous state
and can be of any recurrent structure, and Attention is the attention component that takes as input the current hidden state
and the source hidden representations and outputs a new attended hidden state, which is then fed to the softmax layer for model
prediction. The core idea of attention is to derive a context vector cj that captures the weighted source hidden representations,
and the weight notiﬁes how much should the current time step should pay attention to each of the source input token. This can
be formalized as:
aji = align(hj, si) =
exp(score(hj, si))
P
i′ exp(score(hj, si′))
(15)
Once obtaining the weight aji, the aggregated hidden state ˜hj in Equation 14 can be calculate by:
˜hj = tanh(Wc[cj; hj]), cj =
n
X
i=1
ajisi
(16)
The remaining problem is how to compute the attention weight aji in Equation 15. [126] proposed three forms of scores: the
dot form, the general form, and the concat form. We provide a ﬁgure illustration in Figure 8. They can be formalized as follows:
11
score(hj, si) =





h⊤
j si,
dot
h⊤
j Wasi,
general
v⊤
a tanh(Wa[hj; si]),
concat
(17)
[194] proposed self-attention, where attention is performed between different positions of a single sequence rather than two
separate sequences in order to compute a representation of the sequence. The expression of self-attention is very like to the dot
form of [126], but with differences that each token has three representations – the query q, the key k and the value v, and a
scaled factor √dk is used to avoid overlarge numbers:
SelfAttention(qj, ki, vi) =
exp(q⊤
j ki/√dk)
P
i′ exp(q⊤
j ki′/√dk)vi
(18)
More importantly, self-attention works in conjunction with the multi-head mechanism. Each head represents a sub-network and
runs self-attention independently. The produces results are then collected and processed as input to the next layer.
Regardless of different forms of attention, the core idea is the same: paying attention to the most crucial part in the document.
Given attention weights, we can regard the weight as a measure of importance the model assigns to each part of the input. The
following questions arise regarding model interpretation through attention weights: (1) can the learned attention patterns indeed
capture the most crucial context? (2) How the attention mechanism can be leveraged to interpret model decisions? (3)Does
attention reﬂect some linguistic knowledge when it is applied to neural models? This section describes typical works that target
the above three questions.
4.2.2
Is attention interpretable?
There has been a growing debate on the question of whether attention is interpretable [164, 143, 86, 203, 193, 30]. The debate
centers around whether higher attention weights denote more inﬂuence on the the model prediction, which is sometimes unclear.
[164, 143, 86, 30] hold negative attitude towards attention’s interpretability. [86] empirically assessed the degree to which
attention weights provide meaningful explanations for model predictions. They raised two properties attention weights should
hold if they provide faithful explanations: (1) attention weights should correlate with feature importance-based methods such as
gradient-based methods (Section 4.1); (2) altering attention weights ought to yield corresponding changes in model predictions.
However, through extensive experiments in the context of text classiﬁcation, question answer and natural language inference
using a BiLSTM model with a standard attention mechanism, they found neither property is consistently satisﬁed: for the ﬁrst
property, they observed that attention weights do not provide strong agreements with the gradient-based approach [116] or the
leave-one-out approach [118], as measured by the Kendall τ correlation; for the second property, by randomly re-assigning
attention weights or generating adversarial attention distributions, [86] found that alternative attention weights do not essentially
change the model outputs, indicating that the learned attention patterns cannot consistently provide transparent and faithful
explanations. [164] reached a similar conclusion to [86] by examining intermediate representations to assess whether attention
weights can provide consistent explanations. They used two ways to measure attention interpretability: (1) calculating the
difference between two JS divergences – one coming from the model’s output distribution after zeroing out a set of the most
attended tokens, and the other coming from the distribution after zeroing out a random set of tokens; (2) computing the fraction
of decision ﬂips caused by zeroing out the most attended tokens. Experiments demonstrate that higher attention weights has a
larger impact on neither of these two measures.
Positive opinions come from [203, 193]. [203] challenged the opinion of [86] and argued that testing the attention’s inter-
pretability needs to take into account all elements of the model, rather than solely the attention scores. To this end, [203]
proposed to assess attention’s interpretability from four perspectives (an illustration is shown in Figure 9): (1) freeze the
attention weights to be a uniform distribution and ﬁnd that this variant performs as well as learned attention weights, indicating
that the adversarial attention distributions proposed in [86] are not evidence against attention as explanation in such cases; (2)
examine the expected variance induced by multiple training runs with different initialization seeds and ﬁnd that the attention
distributions seem not to be distanced much; (3) use a simple diagnostic tool which tests attention distributions by applying
them as frozen weights in a non-contextual multi-layer perceptron model, and ﬁnd that the model achieves better performance
compared to a self-learned counterpart, demonstrating that attention indeed provides meaning model-agnostic explanations; (4)
propose a model-consistent training protocol to produce adversarial attention weights and ﬁnd that the resulting adversarial
attention does not perform well in the diagnostic MLP setting. These ﬁndings correct some of the ﬂaws in [86] and suggest that
attention can provide plausible and faithful explanations.
[193] tested attention interpretability on a bulk of NLP tasks including text classiﬁcation, pairwise text classiﬁcation and text
generation. Besides vanilla attention, self-attention is also considered for comparison. Through automatic evaluation and human
12
Figure 9: A schematic diagram of an LSTM model with attention (the ﬁgure is borrowed from [203]). [86] only manipulated
attention at the attention scores level, while [203] manipulated attention at various levels and components of the model.
evaluation, [193] concluded that for tasks involving two sequences, attention weights are consistent with feature importance
methods and human evaluation; but for single sequence tasks, attention weights do not provide faithful explanations regarding
the model performance.
Upon the time of this review, whether the attention mechanism can be straightforwardly used for model interpretation is still
debatable.
4.2.3
Attention for interpreting model decisions
Putting aside the ongoing debate, here we describe recently proposed attention-based interpretation methods. An early work
comes from [201], who learned aspect embeddings to guide the model to make aspect-speciﬁc decisions. When integrated with
different aspects, the learned attention shows different patterns for an input sentence. As an example shown in Figure 5 of the
original literature, given the input “the appetizers are ok, but the service is slow”, when the service aspect embedding is
integrated, the model attends to the content of “service is slow”, and when the food aspect embedding is integrated, the model
attends to “appetizers are ok”, displaying that the attention can, at least to some degree, learn the most essential part of the input
according to different aspects of interest.
For neural machine translation, during each decoding step, the model needs to attend to the most relevant part of the source
sentence, and then translates it into the target language [15, 126]. [62] investigated the word alignment induced by attention
and compared the similarity of the induced word alignment to traditional word alignment. They concluded that attention
agrees with traditional alignment to some extent: consistent in some cases while not in other cases. [112] built an interactive
visualization tool for manipulating attention in neural machine translation systems. This tool supports automatic and custom
attention weights and visualizes output probabilities in accordance with the attention weights. This helps users to understand
how attention affects model predictions. For natural language inference, [63] examined the attention weights and the attention
saliency, illustrating that attention heatmaps identify the alignment evidence supporting model predictions, and the attention
saliency shows how much such alignment impacts the decisions.
[123, 182] proposed self-interpreting structures that can improve model performance and interpretability at the same time. The
key idea is to learn an attention distribution over the input itself (and may be at different granularity, e.g., the word level or the
span level). Such attention distribution would be interpreted to some extend as evidence of how the model reasons about the
given input with respect to the output. The core idea behind [123] is to learn an attention distribution over the input word-level
features and average the input features according to the attention weights. They further extended the standalone attention
distribution to multiple ones, each focusing on a different aspect and leading to a speciﬁc sentence embedding. This enables
direct interpretation from the learned sentences embeddings. Suppose the input features are represented as a feature matrix
H ∈Rn×d1 where n is input length and d1 is the feature dimensionality. Two matrices W1 ∈Rd2×d1 and W2 ∈Rr×d2 are
used to transform the feature matrix into attention logits, followed by a softmax operator to derive the ﬁnal attention weights:
A = softmax(W2 tanh(W1H⊤))
(19)
The resulting attention matrix A is of size r × n, where each row is a unique attention distribution adhering to a particular
13
Figure 10: Diagrams of the self-attentive sentence embedding model [201] and attention-based self-explaining structure [182].
The ﬁgures are taken from the original literature.
aspect. Finally, the sentence embeddings M ∈Rr×d1 are obtained by applying A to the original feature matrix H:
M = AH
(20)
According to different output classes, the self-attentive model is able to capture different parts of the input responsible for the
model prediction.
[182] extended this idea to the span-level, rather than just the word-level. They ﬁrst represent each span by considering the
start-index representation and the end-index representation of that span, forming a span-speciﬁc representation h(i, j); then
they treat these spans as basic units and compute an attention distribution in a way similar to [123]; last, the spans are averaged
according to the learned attention weights for ﬁnal model decision. This span-level strategy provides better ﬂexibility to model
interpretation. An overview of the self-interpreting structures proposed in [123] and [182] is shown in Figure 10.
4.2.4
BERT attention encoding linguistic notions
Built on top of the self-attention mechanism and Transformer blocks, BERT-style pretraining models [52, 210, 93, 125, 42,
39, 145, 29, 115, 177, 55, 183] have been used as the backbone across a wide range of downstream NLP tasks. The attention
pattern behind BERT encodes meaning linguistic knowledge [154], which cannot be easily observed in LSTM based models.
BERT attention reveals part-of-speech patterns
[195] observed that BERT encodes part-of-speech (POS) tags. POS is a category of words that have similar properties and
display similar syntactic behaviors. Commonly, English part-of-speeches include noun, verb, adjective, adverb, pronoun,
preposition, conjunction, etc. [195] observed that the attention heads that focus on a particular POS tag tend to cluster by layer
depth. For example, the top heads attending to proper nouns are all in the last three layers of the model, which may be due to
that deep layers focus more on named entities; the top heads attending to determiners are all in the ﬁrst four layers of the model,
indicating that deeper layers focus on higher-level linguistic properties. [105] studied POS attention distributions on a variety
of natural language understanding tasks. They found that the nouns are the most attended except the special [SEP] token
used for classiﬁcation (as shown in Figure 11). These discoveries reveal that BERT can encode POS patterns through attention
distributions, but may vary across layers and tasks.
BERT attention reveals dependency relation patterns
Dependency relation provides a principled way to structuralize a sentence’s syntactic properties. A dependency relation between
a pair of words is a head-dependent relation, where a labeled arc links from the head to the dependent, representing their syntactic
relationship. Dependency relations depict the fundamental syntax information of a sentence and are crucial for understanding
14
Figure 11: Per-task attention weights to part-of-speeches and the special [SEP] token averaged over input length and over the
entire dataset. Except the [SEP], noun words are the most focused (the ﬁgure is brought from [105]).
Figure 12: Left: Two examples of BERT attention heads that encode dependency relations (the ﬁgure is brought from [41]).
Right: The functions of attention heads retrained after pruning (the ﬁgure is brought from [196]).
the semantics of that sentence. Extensive works show that BERT encodes dependency relations [66, 195, 41, 78, 122, 196, 150].
[66] found that BERT consistently assigns higher attention scores to the correct verb forms as opposed to the incorrect one in a
masked language modeling task, suggesting some ability to model subject-verb agreement. Similar phenomena are observed
by [122]. [41, 78] decoupled the “dependency relation encoding” ability from different heads and concluded that there is
no single attention head that does well at syntax across all types of relations, and that certain attention heads specialize to
speciﬁc dependency relations, achieving high accuracy than ﬁxed-offset baselines. Figure 12 (left) shows several examples of
dependency relations encoded in specialized attention heads. [196] investigated in depth the linguistic roles different heads play
through attention patterns on the machine translation task. They found that only a small fraction of heads encode important
linguistic features including dependency relations, and after pruning unimportant heads, the model still captures dependency
relations in the rest heads and its performance does not signiﬁcantly degrade. Figure 12 (right) shows the functions of heads
retrained after pruning. [150] proposed attention probe, in which a model-wide attention vector is formed by concatenating
the entries aij in every attention matrix from every attention head in every layer. Feeding this vector into a linear model
for dependency relation classiﬁcation, we are able to understand whether the attention patterns indeed encode dependency
information. They had an accuracy of 85.8% for binary probe and an accuracy of 71.9% for multi-class probe, indicating that
syntactic information is in fact encoded in the attention vectors.
BERT attention reveals negation scope
BERT encodes is the negation scope [220]. Negation is a grammatical structure that reverses the truth value of a proposition.
The tokens that express the presence of negation are the negation cue such as word “no”, and the tokens that are covered in
syntax by the negation cue are within the negation scope. [220] studied whether BERT pays attention to negation scope, i.e., the
tokens within the negation scope are attending to the negation cue token. They found that before ﬁne-tuning, several attention
heads consistently encode negation scope knowledge, and outperform a ﬁxed-offset baseline. After ﬁne-tuning on a negation
scope task, the average sensitivity of attention heads toward negation scope detection improves for all model variants. Their
experiment results provide evidence for BERT’s ability of encoding negation scope.
15
Figure 13: An overview of explanation generation methods. First: extractive rationale generation identiﬁes rationales in the
manner of extracting part(s) of the input. Second: abstractive rationale generation generates explanations in a sequence-to-
sequence form by leveraging language models. Third: Concept-based methods interpret neural models by ﬁnding the most
relevant concepts. Forth: Hierarchy-based methods produce semantic hierarchies of the input features.
BERT attention reveals coreference patterns
BERT attention encodes semantic patterns, such as patterns for coreference resolution. Coreference resolution is the task of
ﬁnding all mentions that refer to the same entity in text. For example, in the sentence “I voted for Nader because he was most
aligned with my values”, the mentions “I” and “my” refer to the same entity, which is the speaker, and the mentions “Nader”
and “he” both refer to the person “Nader”. Coreference resolution is a challenging semantic task because it usually requires
longer semantic dependencies than syntactic relations. [41] computed the percentage of the times the head word of a coreferent
mention attends to the head of one that mention’s antecedents. They ﬁnd that attention achieves decent performances, attaining
an improvement by over 10 accuracy points compared to a string-matching baseline and performing on par with a rule-based
model. [122] explored the reﬂexive anaphora knowledge attention encodes. They deﬁned a confusion score, which is the binary
cross entropy of the normalized attention distribution between the anaphor and its candidate antecedents. They ﬁnd that BERT
attention does indeed encode some kind of coreference relationships that render the model to preferentially attend to the correct
antecedent, though attention does not necessarily correlate with the linguistic effects we ﬁnd in natural language.
Since the attention mechanism is nested in and jointly trained with the main model, interpretation methods based on attentions
thus belong to the joint line.
4.3
Explanation Generation Based Interpretation
Saliency maps and attention distributions assign importance scores, which cannot be immediately transformed to human-
interpretable explanations. This issue is referred to as explanation indeterminacy. Explanation-based methods attempt to
address this problem by generating explanations in the form of texts.
Explanation-based methods fall into three major categories: rationale-based explanation generation, concept-based explanation
generation and hierarchical explanation generation. Rationale-based explanation generation is further sub-categorized into
extractive rationale generation and abstractive rationale generation, which respectively refer to generating rationales within
the input text in an extractive fashion, and generating rationales in a sequence-to-sequence model in a generative fashion.
Concept-based methods aim at identifying the most relevant concepts in the concept space, where each concept groups a
set of examples that share the same meaning as that concept: a concept represents a high-level common semantics over
various instances. Hierarchy-based methods construct a hierarchy of input features and provide interpretation by examining the
contribution of each identiﬁed phrase. Explanation-based methods directly produce human-interpretable explanations in the
form of texts, and thus are more straightforward to comprehend and easier to use.
Figure 13 provides a high-level overview for the four categories of generation-based methods.
4.3.1
Rationale-based explanation generation
A rationale is deﬁned to be a short yet sufﬁcient piece of text serving as justiﬁcation for the model prediction [113]. A good
rationale should conceptually satisfy the following properties [212]:
• Sufﬁciency: If the original complete input x leads to the correct model prediction, then using only the rationale should
also induce the same prediction.
• Comprehensiveness: The non-rationale counterpart should not contain sufﬁcient information to predict the correct label.
16
Figure 14: Examples of extracted rationales indicating the sentiments of various aspects (appearance:red, smell: blue, palate:
green). This ﬁgure is from [113].
• Compactness: The segments of the original input text that are included in the rationales should be sparse and consecutive,
i.e., rationales should be as concise as possible.
We describe two styles of rationale generation, extractive and abstractive, and review representative works in the rest of this
section.
Extractive rationale generation
[113] propose to extract rationales as interpretable justiﬁcations for the model prediction. The rationale generation process is
incorporated as an integral part the overall learning problem, where the model consists of two modules: the generator, which
speciﬁes a distribution over possible rationales, and the encoder, which maps any text into target values. The generator and
the encoder are jointly trained to optimize the objective that favors short, compact and sufﬁcient rationales while preserving
accurate predictions. More concretely, the encoder is used to digest the given input and output the predicted label. The encoder
can be trained using a standard loss function, say, the squared error:
Lenc(x, y) = ∥enc(x) −y∥2
2
(21)
At the meantime, a generator is employed to extract a subset of the original input text x serving as the rationale. [113] used
binary variables {z1, · · · , zi, · · · , zl} where l is the length of the input x to denote whether each word xi should be selected or
not. This process can be formalized as:
z ∼gen(x) ≜p(z|x) =
lY
i=1
p(zi|x, z<i)
(22)
Equation 22 indicates that the binary variable zi at time step i is determined by the input x as well as the previously generated
binary variables z<i, making the generation process sequentially dependent. With the extracted rationales at hand, we can
rewrite Equation 21 into the following form:
Lenc(z, x, y) = ∥enc(z, x) −y∥2
2
(23)
where enc(z, x) means that the encoder is only applied to the rationales rather than the entire input text. Equation 23 encourages
sufﬁciency of the extracted rationales. Because we would like the extracted rationales to be as concise and compact as possible,
we enforce the generator minimize the following regularizer:
Lgen(z) = λ1∥z∥+ λ2
X
i
|zi −zi−1|
(24)
17
Improvement
Representative works
Decoupling rationale selection and label prediction.
[87]
Improving masking strategies.
[19, 50]
Extracting rationales according to or conditioning on different
classes.
[33, 212]
Incorporating the information bottleneck theory.
[138]
Extracting rationales through matching.
[185, 79]
Table 4: Improvements of extractive explanation generation over [113].
The ﬁrst term encourages conciseness and the second term encourages consecutiveness. Overall, Equation 24 compactness of
the extracted rationales.
Combining Equation 23 and Equation 24 together leads to the ﬁnal training objective:
min
θenc,θgen
X
(x,y)
Ez∼gen(x)[Lenc(z, x, y) + Lgen(z)]
(25)
Equation 25 is optimized by doubly stochastic gradient descent, a variant of the REINFORCE algorithm [205] as a sampled
approximation to the gradient of Equation 25. Figure 14 shows several examples of the extracted rationales associated with the
sentiments of different aspects. The proposed method successfully extracts interpretable rationales that can sufﬁciently explain
the model predictions, and the extraction text snippets are generally concise and compact.
A large strand of works are motivated by [113] and propose to improve extractive rationale generation from various perspectives.
We introduce some typical directions in the following contents. A summary of these improvements is provided in Table 4.
Decoupling rationale selection and label prediction [87]. A drawback of the vanilla extractive rationale generation approach
is the difﬁculty of training the two components – the encoder and the generator simultaneously using only instance-level
supervision, as shown in Equation 25. To tackle this issue, [87] proposed to decouple the rationale selection process and
the label prediction process, separately training the two modules and respectively applying them for rationale extraction and
label prediction. The proposed pipeline works as follows: (1) train a support model to assign importance scores (Section 4.1
and Section 4.2.1) to input features, and discretize them into binary labels similar to the latent binary labels z in [113]; (2)
treating the original text as input and the binarized labels as gold output, train an extraction model to extract rationales; (3)
treating the extracted rationales as input and the gold class label as output, train a classiﬁer for label prediction. The training
pipeline introduces independent modules for rationale extraction and label prediction, naturally bypassing heavy recourse to
reinforcement learning and mitigating the training difﬁculty.
Improving masking strategies [19, 50]. This line of methods improve the masking strategy, i.e., how to assign binary variables
as in [113] to avoid sophisticated model training. The basic idea is to impose differentiability on the binary latent variables
and the sparsity-inducing regularization, making solving Equation 25 tractable even without REINFORCE. [19] proposed
to use the Kumaraswamy distribution [108], a family of distributions that exhibit both discreteness and continuity, to allow
for reparameterized gradient estimates and support for binary outcomes. [50] proposed to learn to mask out subsets while
maintaining differentiability by pushing close the output predicted using the original input text and the output predicted using
the extracted rationales. An overview of the proposed model in [50] is shown in Figure 15 (left).
Extracting rationales according to or conditioning on different classes [33, 212]. The common paradigm we have introduced
above is to make an overall selection of a subset of the input that maximally explains the model decision, but rationales can
be multi-faceted regarding different classes. To tackle this issue, [33] proposed class-wise rationales, where different sets of
rationales are generated to support the decisions on different classes. [212] similarly proposed to generate class-wise rationales,
and more importantly they explicitly control the rationale complement via an adversarial model so as not to leave any useful
information out of the rationale selection. The ﬁne-grained control of rationale complement remedies the comprehensiveness
property missed by the vanilla extractive model. An overview of the model proposed by [212] is shown in Figure 15 (right).
Incorporating the information bottleneck theory [37, 138]. The reduction of the original input text inevitably results in
performance degradation because the rationale complement usually contains non-essential but useful information. The trade-off
between concise explanations (rationales) and high task accuracy can be better managed by incorporating the information
bottleneck objective, where a rationale is expected to be (1) minimally informative about the original input and (2) maximally
informative about the output class. A prior distribution provides ﬂexible controls over the sparsity level, i.e., the fraction of the
extracted rationales among the entire input text. Figure 16 (left) provides an overview of this method.
18
Figure 15: Diagrams of the differentiable masking strategy (left, the ﬁgure is brought from [50]) and class-dependent method
(right, the ﬁgure is brought from [212]). Left: Hidden states up to layer ℓare fed to a classiﬁer to predict the mask, which is
then used to run a forward pass with the input masked. The objective is to minimize the divergence. Right: An introspective
generator ﬁrst predicts the possible output ˜y and then generates rationales and rationale complements based on x and ˜y.
Figure 16: Diagrams of the information bottleneck enhanced model (left, the ﬁgure is brought from [138]) and the distribution
matching model (right, the ﬁgure is brought from [79]). Left: An explainer ﬁrst extracts rationales from the input and then a
classiﬁer predicts the output based only on the rationale. The explainer leverages the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization [88]
to reparameterize the Bernoulli variables. The full model is optimized by an information bottleneck guided objective. Right:
The generator is enforced to generate rationales that match the full input feature in the feature space and match the full input
prediction in the output space.
Extracting rationales through matching [185, 79]. Intuitively, similar inputs should have similar rationales, and the extracted
rationales should also get close to the original input in the feature space. Motivated by this intuition, better rationales can be
extracted by matching similar inputs, or matching the distributions in the latent space. [185] proposed to employ Optimal
Transport (OT) [49] to ﬁnd a minimal cost alignment between a pair of inputs, providing a mathematical justiﬁcation for
rationale selection. [79] did not perform matching in the textual level, but rather in the feature space and the output space.
In the feature space, they imposed a regularizer that minimizes the central moment discrepancy [213] between the full input
feature and the rationale feature. In the output space, they minimized the cross entropy loss between the full input prediction
and the rationale prediction, acting in a way similar to knowledge distillation [76]. Figure 16 (right) shows the method of [79].
Abstractive rationale generation
The extractive style rationale generation limits the space of rationales to the segments of the input text. In some cases, we
would like the rationale to reﬂect the reasoning process of the model decision. For example, when predicting the input “the
movie is fantastic” as label positive, the model should be able to reason that “fantastic is a very positive word, and there is
no negation that pushes the sentiment to the other side”. Extractive rationale generation would only, however, highlight the
word “fantastic”, but cannot explain why to select that word. In such cases, the model needs to provide free-text rationales by
means of generating from scratch based on the input and the output. This type of rationale generation is called abstractive
rationale generation, relative to extractive rationale generation.
19
Figure 17: Diagrams of the e-InferSent architecture (left, the ﬁgure is brought from [31]) and the CSRM (Commonsense
Reasoning Model) (right, the ﬁgure is brought from [149]). Left: Given a pair of premise and hypothesis, the e-InferSent
architecture jointly models the label and the corresponding explanation. Right: A language model is ﬁrst used to generate
explanations based on the question Q and candidate answers {A0, · · · , An}, and CSRM is then used to predict the right answer.
Figure 18: The workﬂow of the proposed model in [107]. Given a pair of premise and hypothesis, the generator ﬁrst produces
label-speciﬁc explanations, which are then fed into the processor to infer label scores using the evidence present in these
explanations. The ﬁgure is taken from the original literature.
The abstractive style rationale generation is usually implemented by natural language generation models, e.g., language models
and sequence-to-sequence models. A common practice is to ﬁrst craft datasets including the input instances as well as the
corresponding human-annotated rationales, and then train language models in a supervised manner. For example, [31] crafted
the e-SNLI dataset, which is an extension of SNLI [26] focusing on providing human-labeled explanations for entailment
relations; [149] created CoS-E (Common Sense Explanations), an extension of CommonsenseQA [189], providing human
explanations for commonsense reasoning. Both datasets offer direct supervision for model training, endowing the generation
model with the ability to reason about its prediction and produce free-text rationales. Figure 17 shows the model architectures
proposed in [31] and [149].
Similar to extractive rationale generation, the abstractive model can also generate label-speciﬁc explanations and then examine
the faithfulness of the generated explanation with respect to the corresponding label [124, 107, 202]. A typical work comes
from [107], the workﬂow of which is depicted in Figure 18. A merit that label-speciﬁc explanations offer is that it allows for
re-examination on the generated rationales and on the whether these rationales can faithfully interpret the labels. This rationale
generation approach supports testable explanations of the decisions and improves classiﬁcation accuracy, even with limited
amounts of labeled data.
An important advantage of abstractive rationale generation over extractive rationale generation is that abstractive models can be
enhanced by large-scale language model pretraining [146, 134]. Pretrained on massive unlabled general texts and ﬁnetuned on
labeled rationale-guided data, the model is able to produce more coherent and human-identiﬁable explanations.
Extractive style and abstractive style rationale generation can be bridged via commonsense knowledge, rendering both types of
explanations better [128]. The outlined pipeline works as follows: (1) extracting rationales most responsible for the prediction
(using extractive rationale generation methods); (2) expanding the extracted rationales using commonsense resources; (3) using
the expanded knowledge to generate free-text explanations. This pipeline naturally infuses commonsense knowledge into the
20
Figure 19: The workﬂow of the proposed EDUCE model in [25]. The model ﬁrst samples one excerpt per concept, then
determines whether the excerpt really activates the concept, and last feeds the binary representation for classiﬁcation. An
unsupervised concept classiﬁer is used to enforce concepts consistency and to prevent overlap of concepts. The ﬁgure is taken
from the original literature.
Figure 20: Left: The pipeline of the proposed model ConRAT in [7]. ConRAT ﬁrst extracts a set of text snippets from the input
and infers which ones are described as concepts (excerpts). Then the model explains the outcome with a linear aggregation
of the concepts. Right: A comparison of the outputs produced by ConRAT and vanilla extractive rationale generation [113].
The contents marked in red, green, yellow, blue and purple are respectively for appearance, aroma, palate, taste and overall
sentiment. Vanilla extractive rationale produces spurious correlations while ConRAT extracts meaningful and non-overlapping
concepts. The ﬁgures are taken from the original literature.
process of rationale generation, therefore beneﬁting generating explanations more understandable to humans.
4.3.2
Concept-based explanation generation
Following the deﬁnition in [18], a concept [5, 119, 98] is represented as a vector in the space which groups all the set of
examples (rationales) that share the meaning of the concept. If the extracted rationale corresponds to a speciﬁc concept, that
rationale is called an excerpt [25]. For example, the phrases of “fantastic movie”, “enjoy the movie” and “the acting is very
good” share the same general concept positive, and all of these three phrases are excerpts that trigger the positive
concept. One beneﬁt provided by concept-based methods is the high-level clusterings of rationales that share the same general
semantics. A concept can be simply the class label [18], e.g., the negative concept and the positive concept; a concept
can also be more complex forms such as sub-categories of a class label [25]. For example, ask a user to classify the given
text “Retail sales bounced back a bit in July, and new claims for jobless beneﬁts fell last week, the government said.” The
user could detect “retail sales” and, say, recognize it an economy concept; she would also note “the government said” and
recognize it as an politics concept. Combining both concepts, the user can classify this input as label Business. If the model
correctly predicts the label Business, and at the same time extracts text pieces as well as their corresponding concepts, the
model prediction would be more interpretable. Extractive and abstractive rationale generations, however, cannot provide such
high-level explanations, but only aim at interpret individual-speciﬁc inputs.
21
Figure 21: An example from [173] illustrating how the explanation hierarchy works. Blue represents positive sentiment, white
is neutral and red is negative. Higher rows display phrases associated with their sentiment scores identiﬁes by the model.
Existing literature generates concepts in an unsupervised manner [25, 18, 147, 7], where the concept is selected without any
human annotation or priori. Two typical works come from [25] and [7]. [25] proposed EDUCE (Explaining model Decisions
through Unsupervised Concepts Extraction), which works in the following steps: (1) Compute p(s|x, c), the probability of
each excerpt s in the input x for each concept c, and sample one excerpt sc(x) according to the probability; (2) For each
concept, determine whether the extracted excerpt is actually the trigger, i.e. computing p(zc|sc(x), c). zc(sc(x)) = 1 means
concept c is detected as present, and absent otherwise; (3) Predict the class label y using only the binary concept vector
z(x) = (z1(s1(x)), · · · , zC(sC(x))), where C is the number of concepts. In order for semantic consistency and to avoid
overlap of the concepts, [25] jointly trained a concept classiﬁer to categorize each excerpt into one of the C classes, which
exactly performs like a multi-label classiﬁer. An overview is provided in Figure 19.
[7] proposed ConRAT, short for Concept-based Rationalizer, which could achieve stronger performance over [25] and infer
non-overlapping and human-understandable concepts. The ConRAT model consists of two modules: a generator that ﬁnds the
concepts, and a selector that detects whether a concept is present or absent. The key difference from [25] lies in the way of
forming the concepts: [25] employed a simple concept classiﬁer to decouple different concepts, whereas [7] (1) favors the
orthogonality of concepts and (2) minimizes the cosine similarity between concepts. Combining both regularizers, ConRAT is
shown to produce accurate and interpretable concepts. Figure 20 (left) illustrates the pipeline of ConRAT. Figure 20 (right)
compares the rationales output by ConRAT and the vanilla extractive rationale generation method [113].
4.3.3
Hierarchical explanation generation
The third family of generation-based methods [133, 173, 92, 36] interpret model predictions by decomposing the input into
tree-like segments at different granularity and computing the contribution of each segment to the model prediction. This forms
a contextual hierarchy from the bottom level of words to the high level of phrases, enabling intuitive observations on how
different parts of the input combine with each other and how their semantics inﬂuence the model prediction. Compared to
rationale-based and concept-based methods, hierarchical explanation generation offers the most ﬁne-grained interpretation,
as they quantitatively measure the contribution of each detected phrase to the model prediction and exhibit the interpretable
interactions between phrases.
The pioneer works [133, 173] for hierarchical explanation generation proposed Contextual Decomposition (CD), which
decomposes the input into a hierarchy of phrases and assigns relevance scores signifying the contribution of each phrases to the
model prediction. An example is shown in Figure 21. Concretely, a neural network f(x) can be formalized as a composition of
functions, followed by a softmax operator to derive the ﬁnal prediction:
f(x) = softmax(g(x)) = softmax(gL(gL−1(· · · (g1(x)))))
(26)
where g(x) is the logits produced by the neural network. The logits, however, can be decomposed into the addition of two
terms, β(x) and γ(x), where β(x) captures the importance of the each input feature xi and γ(x) captures the residue:
gi(x) = βi(x) + γi(x), ∀i = 1, 2, · · · , L
(27)
The remaining question is how to compute βi(x) and γi(x) for different neural architectures. [133] proposed to disambiguate
the interactions between gates (i.e. the output gate ot, the forget gate ft and the input gate it) in LSTMs [77] by linearizing the
22
update function. [173] extended this idea to general DNN structures including convolutional, max-pooling, ReLU and dropout
layers, etc. Besides, [133] introduced the idea of hierarchical saliency, where a cluster-level importance measure is used to
agglomeratively group features the model learns as predictive. The model is thus able to generate interpretable hierarchies more
compliant to the model prediction.
[92] pointed out two properties CD-based methods should satisfy: (1) Non-additivity: the importance of a phrase should not
simply be the sum of the importance scores of all the component words; (2) Context independence: the importance of a phrase
should be evaluated independent of its context. Unfortunately, neither the methods of [133] and [133] satisfy both properties. To
address this limitation, [92] proposed a new importance measure that satisﬁes both the non-additivity and context independence
properties, producing consistently better explanations.
[36] designed a top-down model-agnostic method of constructing hierarchical explanations via feature interaction detection.
Starting from the full input sentence, the model recursively divides the segments into smaller parts, until each segment contains
only one word. [36] deﬁned a partition score, which represents the degree of interaction between two successive segments. A
small partition score means that the two segments are weakly interacted, i.e., partitioning these two segments would not cause a
drastic semantic shift regarding interpretation. To evaluate the contribution of each new segment, [36] further deﬁned a feature
importance score, which is implemented as the difference between the predicted probability of the ground-truth label and the
maximum predicted probability among other labels, given only the segment itself as input. This top-down recursive procedure
can be applied to any neural model architecture and is free from complex mathematical derivation.
Though some explanation generation based methods can use post-hoc approaches to produce interpretation, e.g., saliency scores
can be computed to extract the rationale, most existing works jointly train the interpreting model and the main model. We thus
categorize explanation generation based interpretation into the joint line.
4.4
Miscellaneous
It is noteworthy that there are many other important miscellaneous works we do not mention in the previous sections. For
example, numerous works have proposed to improve upon vanilla gradient-based methods [174, 178, 65]; linguistic rules
such as negation, morphological inﬂection can be extracted by neural models [141, 142, 158]; probing tasks can used to
explore linguistic properties of sentences [3, 80, 43, 75, 89, 74, 34]; the hidden state dynamics in recurrent nets are analysed
to illuminate the learned long-range dependencies [73, 96, 67, 179, 94]; [169, 166, 168, 101, 57, 167] studied the ability of
neural sequence models to induce lexical, grammatical and syntactic structures; [91, 90, 12, 136, 159, 24, 151, 85] modeled the
reasoning process of the model to explain model behaviors; [157, 139, 28, 163, 219, 170, 180, 137, 106, 58, 162, 81, 111, 23]
proposed to interpret word embeddings so that each dimension corresponds to a ﬁne-grained sense and the value of that
dimension represents the relevance of the sense to the word; [1] drew on external knowledge base to derive a complete reasoning
sequence from the natural language utterance to the ﬁnal answer; [192] interpreted neural systems by combining natural
language and the human brain imaging recordings. We kindly refer the readers to the original literature of interest for details.
5
Hybrid Methods
Hybrid interpreting methods blend training-based interpretation and test-based interpretation, providing model interpretations
from a global perspective. A typical work comes from [129], which jointly examines training history and test stimuli by
associating inﬂuence functions and model gradients.
The ﬁrst question hybrid methods answer is which part(s) of the input example contribute most to the model prediction. This
question can be simply resolved by the techniques introduced in Section 4. However, as we would further like to interpret the
detected part(s) from the training side, it is preferable to employ a differentiable method with which we can directly compute the
inﬂuence functions regarding each training instance and the saliency part. [129] uses the Vanilla Gradient form for simplicity,
and other gradient-based methods such as Integrated Gradient are also applicable. The saliency score for each input token xi
can be expressed as follows:
Saliency(xi) = ∥wy(xi)∥,
wy(xi) = ∂Sy(x)
∂xi
(28)
where xi is the corresponding word embedding of that word. Recall in Equation 4 that the inﬂuence function I(z, x) measures
the inﬂuence of a training point z on an input instance x, while in this case, we would like to associate a training point z with a
part of the input, say xi. To this end, we can substitute x in Equation 4 with the partial derivative wy(xi) we just computed:
I(z, wy(xi)) = −∇θwy(xi)⊤H−1
θ ∇θL(z; ˆθ)
(29)
23
TreeLSTM
BERT
Test example 1: i loved it !
(a) if you ’re a fan of the series you ’ll love it.
(a) i loved this ﬁlm .
(b) old people will love this movie.
(b) you ’ll probably love it .
(c) ken russell would love this .
(c) a movie i loved on ﬁrst sight
(d) i loved this ﬁlm .
(d) old people will love this movie.
(e) an ideal love story for those intolerant of the more
common saccharine genre .
(e) i like this movie a lot !
Test example 2: it ’s not life-afﬁrming – its vulgar and mean , but i liked it .
(a) i like it .
(a) as an introduction to the man ’s theories and inﬂu-
ence , derrida is all but useless ; as a portrait of the
artist as an endlessly inquisitive old man , however , it
’s invaluable
(b) the more you think about the movie , the more you
will probably like it .
(b) i like it .
(c) one of the best , most understated performances of
jack nicholson ’s career
(c) i liked the movie , but i know i would have liked it
more if it had just gone that one step further .
(d) it ’s not nearly as fresh or enjoyable as its prede-
cessor , but there are enough high points to keep this
from being a complete waste of time .
(d) sillier , cuter , and shorter than the ﬁrst as best i
remember , but still a very good time at the cinema
(e) i liked it just enough .
(e) too daft by half ... but supremely good natured .
Table 5: An exmaple drawn from [129]. The most salient token in the test example regarding the golden label y is marked in
red. Each test example is paired with top 5 training examples that are the most responsible for the salient region by I(z, wy(xi))
in Equation 29. For each extracted training example, its constituent token that is the most responsible for the salient region by
I(zt, wy(xi)) in Equation 31 is marked in green.
Now for a given salient token xi, Equation 29 quantitatively measures the contribution of each training point z to the detected
part of the test input, given by I(z, wy(xi)). Moreover, the inﬂuence of perturbing a training example z into ˜z on the salient
part of a test example x can also be measured:
I(z, ˜z, wy(xi)) ≜I(˜z, wy(xi)) −I(z, wy(xi)) = −∇θwy(xi)⊤H−1
θ (∇θL(˜z; ˆθ) −∇θL(z; ˆθ))
(30)
where ˜z is a perturbed version of the original training point z. When we implement perturbation as simple token removal, we
can immediately quantify the inﬂuence of a certain token zt of a training point z on the salience part wy(xi):
I(zt, wy(xi)) = I(˜z, wy(xi)) −I(z\{zt}, wy(xi))
(31)
Jointly examining training history and test stimuli offers a more comprehensive perspective for interpreting model decisions.
Table 5 shows an example drawn from [129] illustrating the identiﬁed salient part of the test input, the identiﬁed training points
and the corresponding salient regions of these training points. Both models of TreeLSTM [186] and BERT [52] successfully
detect the salient part (i.e. “loved” and “liked”) as well as the inﬂuential training points. [129] further applied the hybrid method
to adversarial generation and model prediction ﬁxing, exhibiting a wide utility of hybrid methods.
Hybrid methods combine inﬂuence functions and saliency scores and can be categorized into the post-hoc line.
6
Open Problems and Future Directions
In spite of the variety of interpreting methods proposed for neural NLP, quite a few open problems still remain:
• What interpretability exactly means and how to deﬁne interpretability: existing works aim at proposing new and more
effective interpreting models, but few clariﬁes what exactly interpretability is, what the goal of interpretability is and how
what philosophy we can take in general to reach interpretability [131]. One can “easily” state that interpretable models
are those that produce human-understandable results with reasoning behind predictions explicitly captured by humans.
But quite a few questions arise: how we can formally deﬁne “human-understandable”? What if the produced logic can
not be recognized by some people but can be comprehended by others? The lack of a clear psychological deﬁnition and a
formal mathematical formulation harms the development of further researches in neural NLP interpretation.
24
• How to evaluate interpreting methods: The lack of formal deﬁnition for interpretability leads to a lack of a widely
accepted criterion for evaluation. Interpretability methods are currently evaluated by humans [72, 83, 202], which are
inevitably subjective: For example, to evaluate saliency-based methods, we can visualize the saliency maps generated
by different interpreting methods to see whether they correctly identify the responsible part of the input for the model
prediction; we can plot the attention distributions to interpret model decisions; we can also let the model to generate
explanations. However, there is no such standardized metrics used to automatically evaluate model interpretability.
Some datasets such as ERASER [53] have deﬁned automatically metrics, but they still require human-labeled data for
evaluation. A robust and convenient criterion for the evaluation is urgently needed to compare the effectiveness of
different interpretability models.
• Whose interpretability are we talking about? Different populations or users’ goals might affect which types of inter-
pretability to use. In certain cases, end users or model practitioners may prefer different aspects of interpretability that
may not need to be related to the task itself. We urge future work on interpretability to take into account more user
centered design when developing interpretability methods and evaluations.
• Go beyond classiﬁcation tasks. Existing interpretability methods are mainly designed for text classiﬁcation methods.
How can we extend the aforementioned interpretability methods to other tasks such as named entity recognition, text
generation or summarization? Certain interpretability methods such as attention-based interpretation might still be
applicable to some extent, however, saliency-based ones may be fragile as it is hard to connect a speciﬁc token with the
entire text sequence.
• The inconsistency between different interpreting methods: It is common that existing interpreting methods contradict
with each other when giving explanations, as shown in Figure 7. The inconsistency of different interpreting methods
makes users bewildered in terms of interpreting a model’s decisions. Future directions should explore the relations
between different perspectives that different interpreting methods take, the factors that make them diverge, and the way
of unifying them.
• The cost of model performance in exchange for interpretability: Neural interpretation aims at interpreting neural models
while preserving model performance, complexity or resource consumption [182]. Some of existing methods improve
model interpretability, but jeopardize model performance [21]. Studying such trade-offs between interpretability and
model characteristics such as model performance is crucial for understanding the relationship between interpretability
and model behaviors.
• The utility of interpretability: The most important goal of developing interpretability methods is to use them, improving a
neural model’s trustworthiness and controllability, helping improve and debug neural models, and facilitating the human
AI collaboration. Currently, there hasn’t been a systematic paradigm under which an interpretability model can be used
in practice. Future directions should explore the paradigm of how an interpretability model can be paired with its original
model, where AI systems provide not only decisions but also the human-interpretable reasoning process, helping users to
judge how much they can trust a result given by an AI system [135, 60, 109, 215, 17, 84].
7
Conclusion
This survey showcases recent advances of research in interpreting neural NLP models. We ﬁrst introduce the high-level
taxonomy of existing interpreting methods. We have categorized related literature from two perspectives: training-based v.s.
test-based, and joint v.s. post-hoc. Then, we introduce typical works of each category in detail and shed light on their difference
on the basic tools they use to interpret models. Last, we raise some open problems and future directions for this area in the hope
of providing insights encouraging the community for a deeper understanding toward neural NLP interpretation.
References
[1] ABUJABAL, A., ROY, R. S., YAHYA, M., AND WEIKUM, G. Quint: Interpretable question answering over knowledge
bases. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations (2017), pp. 61–66.
[2] ADADI, A., AND BERRADA, M. Peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai).
IEEE access 6 (2018), 52138–52160.
[3] ADI, Y., KERMANY, E., BELINKOV, Y., LAVI, O., AND GOLDBERG, Y. Fine-grained analysis of sentence embeddings
using auxiliary prediction tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04207 (2016).
25
[4] ADIWARDANA, D., LUONG, M.-T., SO, D. R., HALL, J., FIEDEL, N., THOPPILAN, R., YANG, Z., KULSHRESHTHA,
A., NEMADE, G., LU, Y., ET AL. Towards a human-like open-domain chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977
(2020).
[5] ALVAREZ-MELIS, D., AND JAAKKOLA, T. S. Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07538 (2018).
[6] ANCONA, M., CEOLINI, E., ÖZTIRELI, C., AND GROSS, M. Towards better understanding of gradient-based attribution
methods for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06104 (2017).
[7] ANTOGNINI, D., AND FALTINGS, B. Rationalization through concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04837 (2021).
[8] ARKHANGELSKAIA, E., AND DUTTA, S. Whatcha lookin’at? deeplifting bert’s attention in question answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.06431 (2019).
[9] ARRAS, L., HORN, F., MONTAVON, G., MÜLLER, K.-R., AND SAMEK, W. Explaining predictions of non-linear
classiﬁers in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07298 (2016).
[10] ARRAS, L., HORN, F., MONTAVON, G., MÜLLER, K.-R., AND SAMEK, W. "what is relevant in a text document?":
An interpretable machine learning approach. PloS one 12, 8 (2017), e0181142.
[11] ARRAS, L., MONTAVON, G., MÜLLER, K.-R., AND SAMEK, W. Explaining recurrent neural network predictions in
sentiment analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.07206 (2017).
[12] ASAI, A., HASHIMOTO, K., HAJISHIRZI, H., SOCHER, R., AND XIONG, C. Learning to retrieve reasoning paths over
wikipedia graph for question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10470 (2019).
[13] BACH, S., BINDER, A., MONTAVON, G., KLAUSCHEN, F., MÜLLER, K.-R., AND SAMEK, W. On pixel-wise
explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS one 10, 7 (2015).
[14] BACH, S., BINDER, A., MONTAVON, G., KLAUSCHEN, F., MÜLLER, K.-R., AND SAMEK, W. On pixel-wise
explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PLOS ONE 10, 7 (07 2015), 1–46.
[15] BAHDANAU, D., CHO, K., AND BENGIO, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[16] BAHETI, A., RITTER, A., LI, J., AND DOLAN, B. Generating more interesting responses in neural conversation models
with distributional constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01215 (2018).
[17] BANSAL, G., WU, T., ZHOU, J., FOK, R., NUSHI, B., KAMAR, E., RIBEIRO, M. T., AND WELD, D. Does the whole
exceed its parts? the effect of ai explanations on complementary team performance. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2021), pp. 1–16.
[18] BASHIER, H. K., KIM, M.-Y., AND GOEBEL, R. RANCC: Rationalizing neural networks via concept clustering. In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Barcelona, Spain (Online), Dec. 2020),
International Committee on Computational Linguistics, pp. 3214–3224.
[19] BASTINGS, J., AZIZ, W., AND TITOV, I. Interpretable neural predictions with differentiable binary variables. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.08160 (2019).
[20] BENGIO, Y., DUCHARME, R., VINCENT, P., AND JANVIN, C. A neural probabilistic language model. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 3, null (Mar. 2003), 1137–1155.
[21] BERTSIMAS, D., DELARUE, A., JAILLET, P., AND MARTIN, S.
The price of interpretability.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.03419 (2019).
[22] BODRIA, F., GIANNOTTI, F., GUIDOTTI, R., NARETTO, F., PEDRESCHI, D., AND RINZIVILLO, S. Benchmarking
and survey of explanation methods for black box models, 2021.
[23] BOMMASANI, R., DAVIS, K., AND CARDIE, C. Interpreting Pretrained Contextualized Representations via Reductions
to Static Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Online, July 2020), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4758–4781.
[24] BOSSELUT, A., RASHKIN, H., SAP, M., MALAVIYA, C., CELIKYILMAZ, A., AND CHOI, Y. Comet: Commonsense
transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05317 (2019).
26
[25] BOUCHACOURT, D., AND DENOYER, L. Educe: Explaining model decisions through unsupervised concepts extraction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11852 (2019).
[26] BOWMAN, S. R., ANGELI, G., POTTS, C., AND MANNING, C. D. A large annotated corpus for learning natural
language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.05326 (2015).
[27] BOWMAN, S. R., GAUTHIER, J., RASTOGI, A., GUPTA, R., MANNING, C. D., AND POTTS, C. A fast uniﬁed model
for parsing and sentence understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.06021 (2016).
[28] BRAŽINSKAS, A., HAVRYLOV, S., AND TITOV, I. Embedding words as distributions with a bayesian skip-gram model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11027 (2017).
[29] BROWN, T. B., MANN, B., RYDER, N., SUBBIAH, M., KAPLAN, J., DHARIWAL, P., NEELAKANTAN, A., SHYAM,
P., SASTRY, G., ASKELL, A., AGARWAL, S., HERBERT-VOSS, A., KRUEGER, G., HENIGHAN, T., CHILD, R.,
RAMESH, A., ZIEGLER, D. M., WU, J., WINTER, C., HESSE, C., CHEN, M., SIGLER, E., LITWIN, M., GRAY,
S., CHESS, B., CLARK, J., BERNER, C., MCCANDLISH, S., RADFORD, A., SUTSKEVER, I., AND AMODEI, D.
Language models are few-shot learners.
[30] BRUNNER, G., LIU, Y., PASCUAL, D., RICHTER, O., CIARAMITA, M., AND WATTENHOFER, R. On identiﬁability in
transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2020).
[31] CAMBURU, O.-M., ROCKTÄSCHEL, T., LUKASIEWICZ, T., AND BLUNSOM, P. e-snli: Natural language inference
with natural language explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01193 (2018).
[32] CHAI, D., WU, W., HAN, Q., WU, F., AND LI, J. Description based text classiﬁcation with reinforcement learning,
2020.
[33] CHANG, S., ZHANG, Y., YU, M., AND JAAKKOLA, T. A game theoretic approach to class-wise selective rationalization.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2019), pp. 10055–10065.
[34] CHEN, B., FU, Y., XU, G., XIE, P., TAN, C., CHEN, M., AND JING, L. Probing bert in hyperbolic spaces, 2021.
[35] CHEN, H., AND JI, Y. Learning variational word masks to improve the interpretability of neural text classiﬁers. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (Online, Nov.
2020), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4236–4251.
[36] CHEN, H., ZHENG, G., AND JI, Y. Generating hierarchical explanations on text classiﬁcation via feature interaction
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02015 (2020).
[37] CHEN, J., SONG, L., WAINWRIGHT, M. J., AND JORDAN, M. I. Learning to explain: An information-theoretic
perspective on model interpretation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07814 (2018).
[38] CHO, K., VAN MERRIËNBOER, B., GULCEHRE, C., BAHDANAU, D., BOUGARES, F., SCHWENK, H., AND BENGIO,
Y. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (Doha, Qatar, Oct. 2014),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1724–1734.
[39] CHOROMANSKI, K., LIKHOSHERSTOV, V., DOHAN, D., SONG, X., GANE, A., SARLÓS, T., HAWKINS, P., DAVIS,
J., MOHIUDDIN, A., KAISER, L., BELANGER, D., COLWELL, L., AND WELLER, A. Rethinking attention with
performers. CoRR (2020).
[40] CHRYSOSTOMOU, G., AND ALETRAS, N. Variable instance-level explainability for text classiﬁcation, 2021.
[41] CLARK, K., KHANDELWAL, U., LEVY, O., AND MANNING, C. D. What does bert look at? an analysis of bert’s
attention, 2019.
[42] CLARK, K., LUONG, M.-T., LE, Q. V., AND MANNING, C. D. Electra: Pre-training text encoders as discriminators
rather than generators. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2020).
[43] CONNEAU, A., KRUSZEWSKI, G., LAMPLE, G., BARRAULT, L., AND BARONI, M. What you can cram into a single
$&!#* vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Melbourne, Australia, July 2018), Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 2126–2136.
[44] COOK, R. D. Assessment of local inﬂuence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 48, 2
(1986), 133–155.
27
[45] COOK, R. D., AND WEISBERG, S. Residuals and inﬂuence in regression. New York: Chapman and Hall, 1982.
[46] CROCE, D., FILICE, S., CASTELLUCCI, G., AND BASILI, R. Deep learning in semantic kernel spaces. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Vancouver,
Canada, July 2017), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 345–354.
[47] CROCE, D., ROSSINI, D., AND BASILI, R. Explaining non-linear classiﬁer decisions within kernel-based deep
architectures. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks
for NLP (Brussels, Belgium, Nov. 2018), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 16–24.
[48] CROCE, D., ROSSINI, D., AND BASILI, R. Auditing deep learning processes through kernel-based explanatory models.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (2019), pp. 4028–4037.
[49] CUTURI, M. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural information
processing systems 26 (2013), 2292–2300.
[50] DE CAO, N., SCHLICHTKRULL, M., AZIZ, W., AND TITOV, I. How do decisions emerge across layers in neural
models? interpretation with differentiable masking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14992 (2020).
[51] DENIL, M., DEMIRAJ, A., AND DE FREITAS, N. Extraction of salient sentences from labelled documents, 2015.
[52] DEVLIN, J., CHANG, M.-W., LEE, K., AND TOUTANOVA, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[53] DEYOUNG, J., JAIN, S., RAJANI, N. F., LEHMAN, E., XIONG, C., SOCHER, R., AND WALLACE, B. C. ERASER:
A benchmark to evaluate rationalized NLP models. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Online, July 2020), Association for Computational Linguistics.
[54] DING, Y., LIU, Y., LUAN, H., AND SUN, M. Visualizing and understanding neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (2017), pp. 1150–
1159.
[55] DONG, L., YANG, N., WANG, W., WEI, F., LIU, X., WANG, Y., GAO, J., ZHOU, M., AND HON, H.-W. Uniﬁed
language model pre-training for natural language understanding and generation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (2019), vol. 32, Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 13063–13075.
[56] DONG, Y., LI, Z., REZAGHOLIZADEH, M., AND CHEUNG, J. C. K. EditNTS: An neural programmer-interpreter
model for sentence simpliﬁcation through explicit editing. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3393–3402.
[57] DROZDOV, A., VERGA, P., YADAV, M., IYYER, M., AND MCCALLUM, A. Unsupervised latent tree induction with
deep inside-outside recursive autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02142 (2019).
[58] DUFTER, P., AND SCHÜTZE, H. Analytical methods for interpretable ultradense word embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.08654 (2019).
[59] EDUNOV, S., OTT, M., AULI, M., AND GRANGIER, D. Understanding back-translation at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.09381 (2018).
[60] FENG, S., AND BOYD-GRABER, J. What can ai do for me? evaluating machine learning interpretations in cooperative
play. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (2019), pp. 229–239.
[61] FENG, S., WALLACE, E., GRISSOM II, A., IYYER, M., RODRIGUEZ, P., AND BOYD-GRABER, J. Pathologies of
neural models make interpretations difﬁcult. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07781 (2018).
[62] GHADER, H., AND MONZ, C. What does attention in neural machine translation pay attention to? In Proceedings of
the Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Taipei, Taiwan,
Nov. 2017), Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–39.
[63] GHAEINI, R., FERN, X. Z., AND TADEPALLI, P. Interpreting recurrent and attention-based neural models: a case study
on natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.03894 (2018).
[64] GHOLIZADEH, S., AND ZHOU, N. Model explainability in deep learning based natural language processing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.07410 (2021).
28
[65] GOH, G. S., LAPUSCHKIN, S., WEBER, L., SAMEK, W., AND BINDER, A. Understanding integrated gradients with
smoothtaylor for deep neural network attribution. In 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR)
(2021), IEEE, pp. 4949–4956.
[66] GOLDBERG, Y. Assessing bert’s syntactic abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05287 (2019).
[67] GREFF, K., SRIVASTAVA, R. K., KOUTNÍK, J., STEUNEBRINK, B. R., AND SCHMIDHUBER, J. Lstm: A search space
odyssey. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28, 10 (2016), 2222–2232.
[68] GUAN, C., WANG, X., ZHANG, Q., CHEN, R., HE, D., AND XIE, X. Towards a deep and uniﬁed understanding of
deep neural models in nlp. In International conference on machine learning (2019), PMLR, pp. 2454–2463.
[69] GUO, H., RAJANI, N. F., HASE, P., BANSAL, M., AND XIONG, C. Fastif: Scalable inﬂuence functions for efﬁcient
model interpretation and debugging, 2020.
[70] HAN, X., WALLACE, B. C., AND TSVETKOV, Y. Explaining black box predictions and unveiling data artifacts through
inﬂuence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06676 (2020).
[71] HAO, Y., DONG, L., WEI, F., AND XU, K. Visualizing and understanding the effectiveness of BERT. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 4143–4152.
[72] HASE, P., ZHANG, S., XIE, H., AND BANSAL, M. Leakage-adjusted simulatability: Can models generate non-trivial
explanations of their behavior in natural language?, 2020.
[73] HERMANS, M., AND SCHRAUWEN, B. Training and analysing deep recurrent neural networks. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (2013), pp. 190–198.
[74] HEWITT, J., AND LIANG, P. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 2733–2743.
[75] HEWITT, J., AND MANNING, C. D. A structural probe for ﬁnding syntax in word representations. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) (Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 4129–4138.
[76] HINTON, G., VINYALS, O., AND DEAN, J.
Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531 (2015).
[77] HOCHREITER, S., AND SCHMIDHUBER, J. Long short-term memory. Neural computation 9, 8 (1997), 1735–1780.
[78] HTUT, P. M., PHANG, J., BORDIA, S., AND BOWMAN, S. R. Do attention heads in bert track syntactic dependencies?,
2019.
[79] HUANG, Y., CHEN, Y., DU, Y., AND YANG, Z. Distribution matching for rationalization. Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 35, 14 (May 2021), 13090–13097.
[80] HUPKES, D., VELDHOEN, S., AND ZUIDEMA, W. Visualisation and ‘diagnostic classiﬁers’ reveal how recurrent and
recursive neural networks process hierarchical structure. J. Artif. Int. Res. 61, 1 (Jan. 2018), 907–926.
[81] HURTADO BODELL, M., ARVIDSSON, M., AND MAGNUSSON, M. Interpretable word embeddings via informative
priors. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6323–6329.
[82] IRSOY, O., AND CARDIE, C. Deep recursive neural networks for compositionality in language. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (2014), pp. 2096–2104.
[83] JACOVI, A., AND GOLDBERG, Y. Towards faithfully interpretable nlp systems: How should we deﬁne and evaluate
faithfulness? arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03685 (2020).
[84] JACOVI, A., AND GOLDBERG, Y. Aligning faithful interpretations with their social attribution. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021), 294–310.
29
[85] JACOVI, A., SWAYAMDIPTA, S., RAVFOGEL, S., ELAZAR, Y., CHOI, Y., AND GOLDBERG, Y. Contrastive explanations
for model interpretability, 2021.
[86] JAIN, S., AND WALLACE, B. C. Attention is not explanation, 2019.
[87] JAIN, S., WIEGREFFE, S., PINTER, Y., AND WALLACE, B. C. Learning to faithfully rationalize by construction.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Online, July 2020),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4459–4473.
[88] JANG, E., GU, S., AND POOLE, B.
Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01144 (2016).
[89] JAWAHAR, G., SAGOT, B., AND SEDDAH, D. What does bert learn about the structure of language? In ACL 2019-57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2019).
[90] JIANG, Y., AND BANSAL, M. Self-assembling modular networks for interpretable multi-hop reasoning. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 4474–4484.
[91] JIANG, Y., JOSHI, N., CHEN, Y.-C., AND BANSAL, M. Explore, propose, and assemble: An interpretable model for
multi-hop reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2714–2725.
[92] JIN, X., WEI, Z., DU, J., XUE, X., AND REN, X. Towards hierarchical importance attribution: Explaining composi-
tional semantics for neural sequence models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2020).
[93] JOSHI, M., CHEN, D., LIU, Y., WELD, D. S., ZETTLEMOYER, L., AND LEVY, O. Spanbert: Improving pre-training
by representing and predicting spans. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8 (2020), 64–77.
[94] KÁDÁR, A., CHRUPAŁA, G., AND ALISHAHI, A. Representation of linguistic form and function in recurrent neural
networks. Computational Linguistics 43, 4 (2017), 761–780.
[95] KALCHBRENNER, N., GREFENSTETTE, E., AND BLUNSOM, P. A convolutional neural network for modelling
sentences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.2188 (2014).
[96] KARPATHY, A., JOHNSON, J., AND FEI-FEI, L. Visualizing and understanding recurrent networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02078 (2015).
[97] KARPUKHIN, V., O ˘GUZ, B., MIN, S., LEWIS, P., WU, L., EDUNOV, S., CHEN, D., AND YIH, W.-T. Dense passage
retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906 (2020).
[98] KIM, B., WATTENBERG, M., GILMER, J., CAI, C., WEXLER, J., VIEGAS, F., ET AL. Interpretability beyond feature
attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav). In International conference on machine learning
(2018), PMLR, pp. 2668–2677.
[99] KIM, S., YI, J., KIM, E., AND YOON, S. Interpretation of NLP models through input marginalization. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (Online, Nov. 2020), Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3154–3167.
[100] KIM, Y. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882 (2014).
[101] KIM, Y., RUSH, A. M., YU, L., KUNCORO, A., DYER, C., AND MELIS, G. Unsupervised recurrent neural network
grammars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03746 (2019).
[102] KINDERMANS, P.-J., SCHÜTT, K. T., ALBER, M., MÜLLER, K.-R., ERHAN, D., KIM, B., AND DÄHNE, S. Learning
how to explain neural networks: Patternnet and patternattribution, 2017.
[103] KOBAYASHI, S., YOKOI, S., SUZUKI, J., AND INUI, K. Efﬁcient estimation of inﬂuence of a training instance.
In Proceedings of SustaiNLP: Workshop on Simple and Efﬁcient Natural Language Processing (Online, Nov. 2020),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 41–47.
[104] KOH, P. W., AND LIANG, P. Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂuence functions. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 (2017), JMLR. org, pp. 1885–1894.
30
[105] KOVALEVA, O., ROMANOV, A., ROGERS, A., AND RUMSHISKY, A. Revealing the dark secrets of BERT. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019), Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 4365–4374.
[106] KOZLOWSKI, A. C., TADDY, M., AND EVANS, J. A. The geometry of culture: Analyzing the meanings of class through
word embeddings. American Sociological Review 84, 5 (2019), 905–949.
[107] KUMAR, S., AND TALUKDAR, P. Nile: Natural language inference with faithful natural language explanations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.12116 (2020).
[108] KUMARASWAMY, P. A generalized probability density function for double-bounded random processes. Journal of
hydrology 46, 1-2 (1980), 79–88.
[109] LAI, V., AND TAN, C. On human predictions with explanations and predictions of machine learning models: A case
study on deception detection. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (2019),
pp. 29–38.
[110] LAN, Z., CHEN, M., GOODMAN, S., GIMPEL, K., SHARMA, P., AND SORICUT, R. Albert: A lite bert for self-
supervised learning of language representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942 (2019).
[111] LAURETIG, A. Identiﬁcation, interpretability, and Bayesian word embeddings. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop
on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science (Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019), Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7–17.
[112] LEE, J., SHIN, J.-H., AND KIM, J.-S. Interactive visualization and manipulation of attention-based neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations (2017), pp. 121–126.
[113] LEI, T., BARZILAY, R., AND JAAKKOLA, T. Rationalizing neural predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04155 (2016).
[114] LERTVITTAYAKUMJORN, P., AND TONI, F. Explanation-based human debugging of nlp models: A survey, 2021.
[115] LEWIS, M., LIU, Y., GOYAL, N., GHAZVININEJAD, M., MOHAMED, A., LEVY, O., STOYANOV, V., AND ZETTLE-
MOYER, L. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and
comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461 (2019).
[116] LI, J., CHEN, X., HOVY, E., AND JURAFSKY, D. Visualizing and understanding neural models in nlp. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.01066 (2015).
[117] LI, J., LUONG, M.-T., JURAFSKY, D., AND HOVY, E. When are tree structures necessary for deep learning of
representations? arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.00185 (2015).
[118] LI, J., MONROE, W., AND JURAFSKY, D. Understanding neural networks through representation erasure. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.08220 (2016).
[119] LI, O., LIU, H., CHEN, C., AND RUDIN, C. Deep learning for case-based reasoning through prototypes: A neural
network that explains its predictions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2018), vol. 32.
[120] LI, X., FENG, J., MENG, Y., HAN, Q., WU, F., AND LI, J. A uniﬁed mrc framework for named entity recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11476 (2019).
[121] LIN, Y., MENG, Y., SUN, X., HAN, Q., KUANG, K., LI, J., AND WU, F. Bertgcn: Transductive text classiﬁcation by
combining gcn and bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05727 (2021).
[122] LIN, Y., TAN, Y. C., AND FRANK, R. Open sesame: Getting inside BERT’s linguistic knowledge. In Proceedings
of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP (Florence, Italy, Aug.
2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 241–253.
[123] LIN, Z., FENG, M., SANTOS, C. N. D., YU, M., XIANG, B., ZHOU, B., AND BENGIO, Y. A structured self-attentive
sentence embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03130 (2017).
[124] LIU, H., YIN, Q., AND WANG, W. Y. Towards explainable nlp: A generative explanation framework for text
classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00196 (2018).
31
[125] LIU, X., HE, P., CHEN, W., AND GAO, J. Multi-task deep neural networks for natural language understanding. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4487–4496.
[126] LUONG, T., PHAM, H., AND MANNING, C. D. Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Lisbon, Portugal, Sept.
2015), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1412–1421.
[127] MA, X., AND HOVY, E. End-to-end sequence labeling via bi-directional lstm-cnns-crf. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01354
(2016).
[128] MAJUMDER, B. P., CAMBURU, O.-M., LUKASIEWICZ, T., AND MCAULEY, J. Rationale-inspired natural language
explanations with commonsense, 2021.
[129] MENG, Y., FAN, C., SUN, Z., HOVY, E., WU, F., AND LI, J. Pair the dots: Jointly examining training history and test
stimuli for model interpretability, 2020.
[130] MIKOLOV, T., SUTSKEVER, I., CHEN, K., CORRADO, G., AND DEAN, J. Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1310.4546 (2013).
[131] MILLER, T. Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artiﬁcial intelligence 267 (2019),
1–38.
[132] MONTAVON, G., LAPUSCHKIN, S., BINDER, A., SAMEK, W., AND MÜLLER, K.-R. Explaining nonlinear classiﬁca-
tion decisions with deep taylor decomposition. Pattern Recognition 65 (2017), 211–222.
[133] MURDOCH, W. J., LIU, P. J., AND YU, B. Beyond word importance: Contextual decomposition to extract interactions
from lstms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05453 (2018).
[134] NARANG, S., RAFFEL, C., LEE, K., ROBERTS, A., FIEDEL, N., AND MALKAN, K. Wt5?! training text-to-text models
to explain their predictions. CoRR (2020).
[135] NGUYEN, D. Comparing automatic and human evaluation of local explanations for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) (2018), pp. 1069–1078.
[136] NISHIDA, K., NISHIDA, K., NAGATA, M., OTSUKA, A., SAITO, I., ASANO, H., AND TOMITA, J. Answering while
summarizing: Multi-task learning for multi-hop qa with evidence extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08511 (2019).
[137] PANIGRAHI, A., SIMHADRI, H. V., AND BHATTACHARYYA, C. Word2Sense: Sparse interpretable word embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019),
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5692–5705.
[138] PARANJAPE, B., JOSHI, M., THICKSTUN, J., HAJISHIRZI, H., AND ZETTLEMOYER, L. An information bottleneck
approach for controlling conciseness in rationale extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00652 (2020).
[139] PARK, S., BAK, J., AND OH, A. Rotated word vector representations and their interpretability. In Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2017), pp. 401–411.
[140] POERNER, N., SCHÜTZE, H., AND ROTH, B. Evaluating neural network explanation methods using hybrid documents
and morphosyntactic agreement. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (Melbourne, Australia, July 2018), Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 340–350.
[141] PRÖLLOCHS, N., FEUERRIEGEL, S., AND NEUMANN, D. Negation scope detection in sentiment analysis: Decision
support for news-driven trading. Decision Support Systems 88 (2016), 67–75.
[142] PRÖLLOCHS, N., FEUERRIEGEL, S., AND NEUMANN, D. Learning interpretable negation rules via weak supervision
at document level: A reinforcement learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers) (Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 407–413.
[143] PRUTHI, D., GUPTA, M., DHINGRA, B., NEUBIG, G., AND LIPTON, Z. C. Learning to deceive with attention-based
explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07913 (2019).
32
[144] RADFORD, A., NARASIMHAN, K., SALIMANS, T., AND SUTSKEVER, I. Improving language understanding by
generative pre-training, 2018.
[145] RADFORD, A., WU, J., CHILD, R., LUAN, D., AMODEI, D., AND SUTSKEVER, I. Language models are unsupervised
multitask learners. OpenAI Blog 1, 8 (2019).
[146] RAFFEL, C., SHAZEER, N., ROBERTS, A., LEE, K., NARANG, S., MATENA, M., ZHOU, Y., LI, W., AND LIU, P. J.
Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683 (2019).
[147] RAJAGOPAL, D., BALACHANDRAN, V., HOVY, E., AND TSVETKOV, Y. Selfexplain: A self-explaining architecture for
neural text classiﬁers, 2021.
[148] RAJANI, N. F., KRAUSE, B., YIN, W., NIU, T., SOCHER, R., AND XIONG, C. Explaining and improving model
behavior with k nearest neighbor representations, 2020.
[149] RAJANI, N. F., MCCANN, B., XIONG, C., AND SOCHER, R. Explain yourself! leveraging language models for
commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02361 (2019).
[150] REIF, E., YUAN, A., WATTENBERG, M. M., VIEGAS, F., COENEN, A., PEARCE, A., AND KIM, B. Visualizing and
measuring the geometry of bert.
[151] REN, M., GENG, X., QIN, T., HUANG, H., AND JIANG, D. Towards interpretable reasoning over paragraph effects in
situation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)
(Online, Nov. 2020), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6745–6758.
[152] RIBEIRO, M. T., SINGH, S., AND GUESTRIN, C. "why should i trust you?": Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,
2016.
[153] RIBEIRO, M. T., SINGH, S., AND GUESTRIN, C. Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations. In AAAI
(2018), vol. 18, pp. 1527–1535.
[154] ROGERS, A., KOVALEVA, O., AND RUMSHISKY, A. A primer in bertology: What we know about how bert works,
2020.
[155] ROSA, R., AND MARE ˇCEK, D. Inducing syntactic trees from bert representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11511
(2019).
[156] ROSS, A. S., HUGHES, M. C., AND DOSHI-VELEZ, F. Right for the right reasons: Training differentiable models by
constraining their explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03717 (2017).
[157] ROTHE, S., AND SCHÜTZE, H. Word embedding calculus in meaningful ultradense subspaces. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) (2016), pp. 512–517.
[158] RUZSICS, T., SOZINOVA, O., GUTIERREZ-VASQUES, X., AND SAMARDZIC, T. Interpretability for morphological
inﬂection: from character-level predictions to subword-level rules. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume (Online, Apr. 2021), Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 3189–3201.
[159] SAP, M., LE BRAS, R., ALLAWAY, E., BHAGAVATULA, C., LOURIE, N., RASHKIN, H., ROOF, B., SMITH, N. A.,
AND CHOI, Y. Atomic: An atlas of machine commonsense for if-then reasoning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2019), vol. 33, pp. 3027–3035.
[160] SATO, M., SUZUKI, J., SHINDO, H., AND MATSUMOTO, Y. Interpretable adversarial perturbation in input embedding
space for text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02917 (2018).
[161] SCHLICHTKRULL, M. S., DE CAO, N., AND TITOV, I. Interpreting graph neural networks for nlp with differentiable
edge masking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00577 (2020).
[162] SCHWARZENBERG, R., RAITHEL, L., AND HARBECKE, D. Neural vector conceptualization for word vector space
interpretation. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Evaluating Vector Space Representations for NLP (Minneapolis,
USA, June 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–7.
[163] ¸SENEL, L. K., UTLU, I., YÜCESOY, V., KOC, A., AND CUKUR, T. Semantic structure and interpretability of word
embeddings. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 26, 10 (2018), 1769–1779.
[164] SERRANO, S., AND SMITH, N. A. Is attention interpretable? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03731 (2019).
33
[165] SHAO, Y., HARDMEIER, C., TIEDEMANN, J., AND NIVRE, J. Character-based joint segmentation and pos tagging for
chinese using bidirectional rnn-crf. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01314 (2017).
[166] SHEN, Y., LIN, Z., HUANG, C.-W., AND COURVILLE, A. Neural language modeling by jointly learning syntax and
lexicon. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02013 (2017).
[167] SHEN, Y., TAN, S., HOSSEINI, A., LIN, Z., SORDONI, A., AND COURVILLE, A. Ordered memory. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.13466 (2019).
[168] SHEN, Y., TAN, S., SORDONI, A., AND COURVILLE, A. Ordered neurons: Integrating tree structures into recurrent
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09536 (2018).
[169] SHI, X., PADHI, I., AND KNIGHT, K. Does string-based neural mt learn source syntax? In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2016), pp. 1526–1534.
[170] SHIN, J., MADOTTO, A., AND FUNG, P. Interpreting word embeddings with eigenvector analysis. In 32nd Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), IRASL workshop (2018).
[171] SHRIKUMAR, A., GREENSIDE, P., AND KUNDAJE, A. Learning important features through propagating activation
differences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02685 (2017).
[172] SIMONYAN, K., VEDALDI, A., AND ZISSERMAN, A. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image
classiﬁcation models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034 (2013).
[173] SINGH, C., MURDOCH, W. J., AND YU, B. Hierarchical interpretations for neural network predictions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.05337 (2018).
[174] SMILKOV, D., THORAT, N., KIM, B., VIÉGAS, F., AND WATTENBERG, M. Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding
noise, 2017.
[175] SOCHER, R., PERELYGIN, A., WU, J., CHUANG, J., MANNING, C. D., NG, A., AND POTTS, C. Recursive deep
models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (2013), pp. 1631–1642.
[176] SOCHER, R., PERELYGIN, A., WU, J., CHUANG, J., MANNING, C. D., NG, A., AND POTTS, C. Recursive deep
models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (Seattle, Washington, USA, Oct. 2013), Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 1631–1642.
[177] SONG, K., TAN, X., QIN, T., LU, J., AND LIU, T.-Y. Mass: Masked sequence to sequence pre-training for language
generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning (2019), pp. 5926–5936.
[178] SRINIVAS, S., AND FLEURET, F. Full-gradient representation for neural network visualization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (2019), pp. 4124–4133.
[179] STROBELT, H., GEHRMANN, S., HUBER, B., PFISTER, H., RUSH, A. M., ET AL. Visual analysis of hidden state
dynamics in recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07461 (2016).
[180] SUBRAMANIAN, A., PRUTHI, D., JHAMTANI, H., BERG-KIRKPATRICK, T., AND HOVY, E. Spine: Sparse interpretable
neural embeddings. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2018).
[181] SUN, Y., WANG, S., LI, Y., FENG, S., CHEN, X., ZHANG, H., TIAN, X., ZHU, D., TIAN, H., AND WU, H. Ernie:
Enhanced representation through knowledge integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09223 (2019).
[182] SUN, Z., FAN, C., HAN, Q., SUN, X., MENG, Y., WU, F., AND LI, J. Self-explaining structures improve nlp models,
2020.
[183] SUN, Z., LI, X., SUN, X., MENG, Y., AO, X., HE, Q., WU, F., AND LI, J. Chinesebert: Chinese pretraining enhanced
by glyph and pinyin information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.16038 (2021).
[184] SUNDARARAJAN, M., TALY, A., AND YAN, Q.
Axiomatic attribution for deep networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01365 (2017).
[185] SWANSON, K., YU, L., AND LEI, T. Rationalizing text matching: Learning sparse alignments via optimal transport.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13111 (2020).
34
[186] TAI, K. S., SOCHER, R., AND MANNING, C. D. Improved semantic representations from tree-structured long
short-term memory networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.00075 (2015).
[187] TAKASE, S., AND KIYONO, S.
Lessons on parameter sharing across layers in transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.06022 (2021).
[188] TALMOR, A., ELAZAR, Y., GOLDBERG, Y., AND BERANT, J. olmpics–on what language model pre-training captures.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13283 (2019).
[189] TALMOR, A., HERZIG, J., LOURIE, N., AND BERANT, J. CommonsenseQA: A question answering challenge targeting
commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) (Minneapolis, Minnesota,
June 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4149–4158.
[190] TENNEY, I., DAS, D., AND PAVLICK, E. Bert rediscovers the classical nlp pipeline. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05950
(2019).
[191] TJOA, E., AND GUAN, C. A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Toward medical xai. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2020).
[192] TONEVA, M., AND WEHBE, L. Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in machines) with natural
language-processing (in the brain). arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11833 (2019).
[193] VASHISHTH, S., UPADHYAY, S., TOMAR, G. S., AND FARUQUI, M. Attention interpretability across nlp tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.11218 (2019).
[194] VASWANI, A., SHAZEER, N., PARMAR, N., USZKOREIT, J., JONES, L., GOMEZ, A. N., KAISER, L. U., AND
POLOSUKHIN, I. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, I. Guyon,
U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017,
pp. 5998–6008.
[195] VIG, J., AND BELINKOV, Y. Analyzing the structure of attention in a transformer language model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.04284 (2019).
[196] VOITA, E., TALBOT, D., MOISEEV, F., SENNRICH, R., AND TITOV, I. Analyzing multi-head self-attention: Specialized
heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Florence, Italy, July 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 5797–5808.
[197] WALLACE, E., FENG, S., AND BOYD-GRABER, J. Interpreting neural networks with nearest neighbors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02847 (2018).
[198] WALLACE, E., TUYLS, J., WANG, J., SUBRAMANIAN, S., GARDNER, M., AND SINGH, S. Allennlp interpret: A
framework for explaining predictions of nlp models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09251 (2019).
[199] WANG, G., LI, C., WANG, W., ZHANG, Y., SHEN, D., ZHANG, X., HENAO, R., AND CARIN, L. Joint embedding of
words and labels for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (2018), pp. 2321–2331.
[200] WANG, S., FANG, H., KHABSA, M., MAO, H., AND MA, H. Entailment as few-shot learner. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.14690 (2021).
[201] WANG, Y., HUANG, M., ZHU, X., AND ZHAO, L. Attention-based lstm for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (2016), pp. 606–615.
[202] WIEGREFFE, S., MARASOVIC, A., AND SMITH, N. A. Measuring association between labels and free-text rationales,
2020.
[203] WIEGREFFE, S., AND PINTER, Y. Attention is not not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 11–20.
[204] WILLIAMS, C., AND SEEGER, M. Using the nyström method to speed up kernel machines. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (2001), T. Leen, T. Dietterich, and V. Tresp, Eds., vol. 13, MIT Press.
[205] WILLIAMS, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine
Learning 8 (1992), 229–256.
35
[206] WU, Z., CHEN, Y., KAO, B., AND LIU, Q. Perturbed masking: Parameter-free probing for analyzing and interpreting
bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14786 (2020).
[207] XU, J., REN, X., LIN, J., AND SUN, X. Dp-gan: diversity-promoting generative adversarial network for generating
informative and diversiﬁed text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01345 (2018).
[208] YAMADA, I., ASAI, A., SHINDO, H., TAKEDA, H., AND MATSUMOTO, Y. Luke: deep contextualized entity
representations with entity-aware self-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01057 (2020).
[209] YANG, Y., MALAVIYA, C., FERNANDEZ, J., SWAYAMDIPTA, S., BRAS, R. L., WANG, J.-P., BHAGAVATULA, C.,
CHOI, Y., AND DOWNEY, D. Generative data augmentation for commonsense reasoning, 2020.
[210] YANG, Z., DAI, Z., YANG, Y., CARBONELL, J., SALAKHUTDINOV, R. R., AND LE, Q. V. Xlnet: Generalized
autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In Advances in neural information processing systems (2019),
pp. 5753–5763.
[211] YOSINSKI, J., CLUNE, J., NGUYEN, A., FUCHS, T., AND LIPSON, H. Understanding neural networks through deep
visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06579 (2015).
[212] YU, M., CHANG, S., ZHANG, Y., AND JAAKKOLA, T. Rethinking cooperative rationalization: Introspective extraction
and complement control. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (Hong Kong, China,
Nov. 2019), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4094–4103.
[213] ZELLINGER, W., GRUBINGER, T., LUGHOFER, E., NATSCHLÄGER, T., AND SAMINGER-PLATZ, S. Central moment
discrepancy (cmd) for domain-invariant representation learning, 2019.
[214] ZHANG, X., ZHAO, J., AND LECUN, Y. Character-level convolutional networks for text classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.01626 (2015).
[215] ZHANG, Y., LIAO, Q. V., AND BELLAMY, R. K. Effect of conﬁdence and explanation on accuracy and trust calibration
in ai-assisted decision making. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
(2020), pp. 295–305.
[216] ZHANG, Y., TI ˇNO, P., LEONARDIS, A., AND TANG, K. A survey on neural network interpretability. IEEE Transactions
on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence (2021).
[217] ZHANG, Y., AND YANG, J. Chinese ner using lattice lstm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02023 (2018).
[218] ZHANG, Z., YANG, J., AND ZHAO, H. Retrospective reader for machine reading comprehension. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.09694 (2020).
[219] ZHAO, J., ZHOU, Y., LI, Z., WANG, W., AND CHANG, K.-W. Learning gender-neutral word embeddings. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.01496 (2018).
[220] ZHAO, Y., AND BETHARD, S. How does BERT’s attention change when you ﬁne-tune? an analysis methodology
and a case study in negation scope. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Online, July 2020), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4729–4747.
[221] ZHOU, C., SUN, C., LIU, Z., AND LAU, F.
A c-lstm neural network for text classiﬁcation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.08630 (2015).
[222] ZHU, J., XIA, Y., WU, L., HE, D., QIN, T., ZHOU, W., LI, H., AND LIU, T.-Y. Incorporating bert into neural machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06823 (2020).
36
