Title: Data Innovation for International Development: An overview of natural language processing for qualitative data analysis
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.05563v1
--------------------------------------------------

Data Innovation for International Development: An
overview of natural language processing for
qualitative data analysis
Philipp Broniecki
School of Public Policy
University College London
Email: philipp.broniecki.14@ucl.ac.uk
Anna Hanchar
The Data Atelier
London, UK
Email: anna.h@thedataatelier.com
Slava J. Mikhaylov
Institute for Analytics and Data Science
Department of Government
University of Essex
Email: s.mikhaylov@essex.ac.uk
Abstract—Availability, collection and access to quantitative
data, as well as its limitations, often make qualitative data the
resource upon which development programs heavily rely. Both
traditional interview data and social media analysis can provide
rich contextual information and are essential for research, ap-
praisal, monitoring and evaluation. These data may be difﬁcult
to process and analyze both systematically and at scale. This,
in turn, limits the ability of timely data driven decision-making
which is essential in fast evolving complex social systems. In
this paper, we discuss the potential of using natural language
processing to systematize analysis of qualitative data, and to
inform quick decision-making in the development context. We
illustrate this with interview data generated in a format of micro-
narratives for the UNDP Fragments of Impact project.
I. INTRODUCTION
Practitioners in the development sector have long recognized
the potential of qualitative data to inform programming and
gain a better understanding of values, behaviors and attitudes
of people and communities affected by their efforts. Some
organizations mainly rely on interview or focus group data,
some also consider policy documents and reports, and others
have started tapping into social media data. Regardless of
where the data comes from, analyzing it in a systematic way
to inform quick decision-making poses challenges, in terms of
high costs, time, or expertise required.
The application of natural language processing (NLP) and
machine learning (ML) can make feasible the speedy analysis
of qualitative data on a large scale.
We start with a brief description of the main approaches
to NLP and how they can be augmented by human coding.
We then move on to the issue of working with multiple
languages and different document formats. We then provide
an overview of the recent application of these techniques in a
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) study.
II. SUPERVISED AND UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
There are two broad approaches to NLP - supervised
learning and unsupervised learning [1]. Supervised learning
assumes that an outcome variable is known and an algorithm is
used to predict the correct variable. Classifying email as spam
based on how the user has classiﬁed previous mail is a classic
example. In social science, we may want to predict voting
behavior of a legislator with the goal of inferring ideological
positions from such behavior. In development, interest may
center around characteristics that predict successful comple-
tion of a training program based on a beneﬁciary’s previous
experience or demographic characteristics.
Supervised learning requires human coding - data must
be read and labelled correctly. This can require substantial
resources. At the same time, the advantage is that validation
of a supervised learning result is relatively straightforward as
it requires comparing prediction results with actual outcomes.
Furthermore, there is no need to label all text documents (or
interview data from each respondent) prior to analyzing them.
Rather, a sufﬁciently large set of documents can be labelled
to train an algorithm and then used to classify the remaining
documents.
In unsupervised learning, the outcome variable is unknown.
The exercise is, therefore, of a more exploratory nature. Here
the purpose is to reveal patterns in the data that allow us
to distinguish distinct groups whose differences are small,
while variations across groups are large. In a set of text
documents, we may be interested in the main topics about
which respondents are talking. In social sciences, we may
look for groups of nations within the international system
that use a similar language or that describe similar issues,
like small-island states prioritizing climate change. Identifying
such groups is often referred to as ‘dimension reduction’ of
data.
Validation of unsupervised learning results is less straight-
forward than with supervised learning. We use data external
to our analysis to validate the ﬁndings [2].
A complementary approach to unsupervised and supervised
learning is the use of crowdsourced human coders. [3] show
that crowdsourcing text analysis is a way to achieve reliable
and replicable results quickly and inexpensively through the
CrowdFlower platform. This approach can work well in sup-
porting a supervised approach where outcomes need to be
labelled. For example, [3] use this technique to produce party
positions on the economic left-right and liberal-conservative
dimensions from party manifestos. Online coders receive small
arXiv:1709.05563v1  [cs.CL]  16 Sep 2017
speciﬁc tasks to reduce individual biases. Their individual
responses are then aggregated to create an overall measure
of party positions.
III. WORKING WITH MULTIPLE LANGUAGES
A common obstacle to analyzing textual data in many ﬁelds,
including the international development sector, is the plethora
of languages that practitioners and researchers need to consider
– each with subtle but meaningful differences. Fortunately,
signiﬁcant commercial interest in being able to translate large
quantities of text inexpensively has led to major advances in
recent years driven by Microsoft, Google, and Yandex with the
introduction of neural machine translation [4]. They provide
services that are free of charge that can be easily integrated
into standard programming languages like Python and R.1
Open source neural machine translation systems are also being
made available [5].
In a recent application, [6] estimate the policy preferences
of Swiss legislators using debates in the federal parliament.
With speeches delivered in multiple languages, the authors
ﬁrst translate from German, French, and Italian into English
using Google Translate API. They then estimate the positions
of legislators using common supervised learning methods from
text and compare to estimates of positions from roll-call votes.
[7] evaluate the quality of automatic translation for social
science research. The authors utilize the europarl dataset [8]
of debate transcripts in the European Parliament and compare
English, Danish, German, Spanish, French, and Polish ofﬁcial
versions of the debates with their translations performed using
Google Translate. [7] ﬁnd that features identiﬁed from texts
are very similar between automatically translated documents
and ofﬁcial manual translations. Furthermore, topic model
estimates are also similar across languages when comparing
machine and human translations of EU Parliament debates.
IV. WORKING WITH DOCUMENTS
In recent years, great strides have been made into lever-
aging information from text documents. For example, re-
searchers have analyzed speeches, legislative bills, religious
texts, press communications, newspaper articles, stakeholder
consultations, policy documents, and regulations. Such docu-
ments often contain many different dimensions or aspects of
information and it is usually impossible to manually process
them for systematic analysis. The analytical methods used
to research the content of such documents are similar. We
introduce prominent applications from the social sciences to
provide an intuition about what can be done with such data.
A. Open-ended survey questions
Open-ended questions are a rich source of information that
should be leveraged to inform decision-making. We could be
interested in several aspects of such a text document. One
useful approach would be to ﬁnd common, recurring topics
1Bing, Google, and Yandex place character limits on single document
translations, with the latter allowing for slightly longer text chunks. For longer
documents, commercial alternatives would have to be used.
across multiple respondents. This is an unsupervised learning
task because we do not know what the topics are. Such models
are known as topic models. They summarize multiple text
documents into a number of common, semantic topics. [9] use
a structural topic model (STM) that allows for the evaluation
of the effects of structural covariates on topical structure, with
the aim of analyzing several survey experiments and open-
ended questions in the American National Election Study.
B. Religious statements
[10] analyze Islamic fatwas to determine whether Jihadist
clerics write about different topics to those by non-Jihadists.
Using an STM model, they uncover ﬁfteen topics within
the collection of religious writings. The model successfully
identiﬁes characteristic words in each topic that are common
within the topic but occur infrequently in the fourteen other
topics. The ﬁfteen topics are labelled manually where the
labels are human interpretations of the common underlying
meaning of the characteristic words within each topic. Some
of the topics deal with ﬁghting, excommunication, prayer,
or Ramadan. While the topics are relatively distinct, there
is some overlap, i.e. the distance between them varies. This
information can be leveraged to map out rhetorical network.
C. Public debates
[11] uses topic modeling to link the content of parlia-
mentary speeches in the UK’s House of Commons with the
number of signatures of constituency-level petitions. He then
investigates whether the signatures have any bearing on the
responsiveness of representatives, i.e. whether Members of
Parliament take up an issue if more people sign a petition
on that issue. Also using speeches from the UK House of
Commons, [12] produces evidence for the female role-model
hypothesis. He shows that the appointment of female ministers
leads to more speaking time and speech centrality of female
backbenchers.
D. News reports
[13] uses supervised machine learning to generate data on
UN peacekeeping activities in Cote d’Ivoire. The text data
inputs are news articles from the website of the UN peacekeep-
ing mission in Cote d’Ivoire. Based on a manually classiﬁed
subset of articles, an algorithm is trained to classify terms
into activity categories. Based on this algorithm, the remaining
articles are then categorized. Analyzing these data yields new
micro-level insights into the activities of peacekeepers on the
ground and their effects.
[14] take a similar approach to researching the effective-
ness of self-promotion strategies of politicians. They analyze
170,000 press releases from the U.S. House of Representatives.
First, 500 documents are classiﬁed by hand into ﬁve categories
of credit claiming, next the supervised learning algorithm,
ReadMe [15], is used to code the remaining documents auto-
matically. Using this data, they show that the number of times
legislators claim credit generates more support than whether
or not the subject they claim credit for amounts to much.
E. Sentiment analysis
Instead of uncovering topics, we may want to know of a
positive or negative tone of any given document. In an open-
ended survey response, we could be interested in how the
respondent rates the experience with the program. Sentiment
analysis is a common tool for such a task. It is based on
dictionaries of words that are associated with positive or
negative emotions. The sentiment of a document such as an
open-ended question would then be based on relative word
counts and the sentiment scores with which these words are
associated. [16] ﬁnd positive and negative keywords and count
their frequency in Chinese newspaper articles that mention the
United States. With this data, they identify attitudes towards
the United States in China.
F. Text reuse
Another application is to study text reuse in order to
trace the ﬂow of ideas. [17] analyze bill sections to identify
whether two sections of a bill propose similar ideas. The
algorithm they use was devised to trance gene sequencing
and takes the frequency and order of words into account.
Using this technique, they can measure the inﬂuence of one
bill on another. Similarly, [18] studies policy diffusion by
shedding light on how the American Supreme Court and
Courts of Appeals inﬂuence diffusion of state policies. He
uses plagiarism software to quantify the exact degree to which
an existing law is reﬂected in a new proposal. Tracing ideas
or inﬂuence over time and space can generate insights into
the sources of information, the degree of spillover, and the
inﬂuence of certain actors, ideas, or policies. It can shed
light on network structures and long-term effects that would
otherwise be hidden to us.
G. Estimating preferences of actors
In the social sciences, text is often used to infer preferences.
Various scaling techniques have been developed and reﬁned
over recent years. Wordﬁsh is a scaling algorithm that enables
us to estimate policy positions based on word frequencies
[19]. Researchers have used this approach to measure policy
positions on European integration in the European Parliament
[20], on austerity preferences in Ireland [21], and intra-
party preferences in the energy debate in Switzerland [22].
Recent developments in the ﬁeld allow researchers to estimate
attitudes in multiple issue dimensions and, therefore, allow for
more ﬁne-grained preference estimates [23].
H. Taking context into account
More recent developments in NLP depart from frequencies
of single words or groupings of multiple words. Instead, each
word is an observation and its variables are other words or
characters. Thus, each word is represented by a vector that
describes words and their frequencies in the neighborhood.
This approach allows for the capture of text semantics [24].
[25] apply this to evaluating real estate in the U.S. by
comparing property descriptions with words that are associated
with high quality. [26] collected all country statements made
during the United Nations General Debate where heads of
state and government make statements that they consider to
be important for their countries. Using this data, [27] run a
neural network. They construct an index of similarity between
nations and policy themes that allows us to identify preference
alliances. This enables them to identify major players using
network centrality and show that speeches contain information
that goes beyond mere voting records.
In a large exploratory effort, [28] use dynamic topic
modeling which captures the evolution of topics over time,
along with topological analytical techniques that allow for the
analysis of multidimensional data in a scale invariant way.
This enables them to understand political institutions, in this
case through the use of speeches from the UK House of
Commons. They classify representatives into groups according
to speech content and verbosity, and identify a general pattern
of political cohesion. They further show that it is feasible to
track the performance of politicians with regard to speciﬁc
issues using text. Topological techniques are especially useful
to discover networks of relations using text. [27] apply this to
uncover ideological communities in the network of states in the
international system using UN General Assembly speeches.
V. WORKING WITH SHORT TEXT, MICRO-BLOGS, SOCIAL
MEDIA
Social media networks such as Twitter, the microblogging
service, or the social network, Facebook, connect a vast
amount of people in most societies. They generally contain
shorter text excerpts compared to the sources of text previously
discussed. However, their size and dynamic nature make
them a compelling source of information. Furthermore, social
networks online reﬂect social networks ofﬂine [29]. They
provide a rare and cheap source of information on dynamic
micro-level processes.
A. Twitter
Similar to our discussion above, topic models can be used
to analyze social media data. [10] use such a model to analyze
how the United States is viewed in China and in Arabic-
speaking countries in response to the disclosure of classiﬁed
information by Edward Snowden. They collect tweets con-
taining the word “Snowden” in both languages. The tweets
are then translated to English using machine translation. [10]
show that Chinese posts are concerned more about attacks
in terms of spying, while Arabic posts discuss human rights
violations.
We can use social media to analyze networks and senti-
ments. Similar to word counts, volume of posts can carry
information. [30] collect tweets originating from and referring
to political actors around the 2014 elections to the Euro-
pean Parliament. They consider the language and national
distribution as well as the dynamics of social media usage.
Using network graphs depicting the conversations within and
between countries, they identify topics debated nationally,
and also ﬁnd evidence for a Europe-wide debate around
the EP elections and the European Union generally. Using
sentiment analysis, they further show that positive statements
were correlated with pro-integration attitudes whereas negative
debates were more national and anti-integration.
This EU example translates well to national conversations
involving multiple ethnic or linguistic groups elsewhere. More-
over, we can learn how information spreads from social net-
works. Consequently, within ethical boundaries, we may also
be able to target information more efﬁciently. An analysis of
Twitter data from the Arab Spring suggests that coordination
that originated from the periphery of a network rather than the
center sparked more protest [31]. Coordination was measured
as a Gini index of Hashtags while centrality was measured by
a count of followers of an account.
B. Facebook
Social media has been used to estimate preferences as well.
The advantage of social media compared to speeches or any
other preference indicator is coverage. [32] use endorsement
of ofﬁcial pages on Facebook to scale ideological positions of
politicians from different levels of government and the public
into a common space. Their method extends to other social
media such as Twitter where endorsements and likes could be
leveraged.
C. Weibo, RenRen, and Chinese microblogs
The most prominent example of supervised classiﬁcation
with social media data involves the ﬁrst large scale study of
censorship in China. [33] automatically downloaded Chinese
blogposts as they appeared online. Later they returned to
the same posts and checked whether or not they had been
censored. Furthermore, they analyzed the content of the blog
posts and showed that rather than banning critique directed
at the government, censorship efforts concentrate on calls for
collective expression, such as demonstrations.
Further investigations of Chinese censorship were made
possible by leaked correspondence from the Chinese Zhang-
gong District. The leaks are emails in which individuals claim
credit for propaganda posts in the name of the regime. The
emails contain social media posts and account names. [34]
used the leaked posts as training data for a classiﬁcation
algorithm that subsequently helped them to identify more
propaganda posts. In conjunction with a follow-up survey ex-
periment they found that most content constitutes cheerleading
for the regime rather than, for example, critique of foreign
governments.
In the next section we discuss an application of natural
language processing in international development research.
VI. UNDP FRAGMENTS OF IMPACT INITIATIVE
In 2015, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Regional Hub for Europe and CIS launched a Frag-
ments of Impact Initiative (FoI) that helped to collect qual-
itative (micro-narratives) and quantitative data from multiple
countries.
Within a six-month period, around 10,000 interviews were
conducted in multiple languages. These covered the percep-
tion of the local population in countries including Tajik-
istan, Yemen, Serbia, Kyrgyzstan and Moldova on peace
and reconciliation, local and rural development, value chain,
female entrepreneurship and empowerment, and youth unem-
ployment issues. The micro-narratives were collected using
SenseMaker(r), a commercial tool for collecting qualitative
and quantitative data. The micro-narratives were individual
responses to context-tailored questions. An example of such a
question is: “Share a recent example of an event that made it
easier or harder to support how your family lives.”
While the analysis and visualization of quantitative data
was not problematic, systematic analysis and visualization
of qualitative data, collected in a format of micro-narratives,
would have been impossible.
To ﬁnd a way to deal with the expensive body of micro-
narrative data, UNDP engaged a group of students from the
School of Public Policy, University College London, under the
supervision of Prof Slava Mikhaylov (University of Essex) and
research coordination of Dr Anna Hanchar (The Data Atelier).
The objective of this work was to explore how to systematize
the analysis of country-level qualitative data, visualize the
data, and inform quick decision-making and timely experiment
design. The results of the project were presented at the Data
for Policy 2016 [35].
The UCL team had access to micro-narratives, as well as
context speciﬁc meta-data such as demographic information
and project details. For a cross-national comparison for policy-
makers, the team translated the responses in multiple lan-
guages into English using machine translation, in this case
Translate API (Yandex Technologies). As a pre-processing
step, words without functional meaning (e.g. ‘I’), rare words
that occurred in only one narrative, numbers, and punctuation
were all removed. The remaining words were stemmed to
remove plural forms of nouns or conjugations of verbs.
As part of this exploration exercise, and guided by UNDP
country project leads, the UCL team applied structural topic
modeling [9] as an NLP approach and created an online
dashboard containing data visualization per country. The dash-
board included descriptive data, as well as results. Figure 1
illustrates an example of the dashboard. The analysis also
allowed for the extraction of general themes described by
respondents in the micro-narratives, and looked for predictors
such as demographics that correlated with these themes. In
Moldova, the major topic among men was rising energy prices.
Among women the main topic was political participation and
protest, which suggests that female empowerment programs
could potentially be fruitful.
In Kyrgyzstan, the team found that the main topics revolved
around ﬁnding work, access to resources and national borders.
Using the meta-data on urbanization, it became clear that
rural respondents described losing livestock that had crossed
the border to Tajikistan, or that water sources were located
across the border. The urban population was concerned about
being able to cross the border to Russia for work. Figure 2
Fig. 1. Dashboard Interface Example of topic modeling results for Moldova
showing the highest probability words for one of the topics and corresponding
most representative micro-narratives.
Fig. 2. Comparing topic prevalence and topical content for urban and rural
areas in Kyrgyzstan.
shows word probabilities from the main “agriculture/trade”
topic across respondents from urban and rural communities.
For Serbia, the analysis compared issues faced by Roma
populations in areas of high and low Roma concentration.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between topics discussed by
Roma respondents in areas of high concentration.
[35] found that Roma respondents identiﬁed education
Fig. 3. Topic correlations in areas of high Roma concentration in Serbia.
Fig. 4. Identifying constraints on female entrepreneurship in Tajikistan
as the overarching main topic, independent of the density
of the Roma population. Differences were found between
respondents across the level of integration with society. In
areas of high Roma concentration, respondents were aware of
available channels for inclusion. In low Roma density areas,
respondents were mainly concerned with severe poverty and
discrimination preventing societal inclusion.
In Tajikistan, [35] investigated the relationship between
household labor migration and female entrepreneurship suc-
cess. They found strong regional differences between the
Sughd and Khatlon regions where topics in less successful
Khatlon revolved around red tape. Moreover, successful en-
trepreneurship was very much related to receiving remittances.
Figure 4 illustrates topics that correlate with success.
Analysis of micro-narratives from Yemen showed that the
most recurrent themes focused on family issues (Figure 5).
There are signiﬁcant differences in terms of engagement in
civil society between young people and the older population.
Young respondents emphasized pro-active behavior, political
engagement, and interest in community-driven initiatives fos-
tering political development.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this overview, our aim has been to demonstrate how
new forms of data can be leveraged to complement the
work of practitioners in international development. We have
demonstrated that a wide variety of questions can be asked.
Exploratory work can be performed to systematize large
quantities of text. Additionally, we can learn about the sen-
timent that speciﬁc groups express towards speciﬁc topics.
Networks can be uncovered, the spread of information or ideas
can be traced, and inﬂuential actors identiﬁed. We can classify
documents based on human coding of a subset of documents
and establish which topics predict/correlate with predeﬁned
outcomes such as successful employment or completion of a
program.
Marginal topic distribution and most frequent terms for topic 1 
(work and family).  We see that respondents are worried about 
the situation of their family
Fig. 5. Exploring differences in perspectives by age in Yemen
While the application used here to illustrate the discussion
focuses on texts in the form of open-ended questions, social
networks can be used and their coverage and topicality can be
leveraged.
Natural language processing has the potential to unlock
large quantities of untapped knowledge that could enhance
our understanding of micro-level processes and enable us to
make better context-tailored decisions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors’ names are listed in alphabetical order. Authors
have contributed equally to all work.
REFERENCES
[1] G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, An introduction to
statistical learning.
Springer, 2013, vol. 112.
[2] J. Grimmer and B. M. Stewart, “Text as Data: The Promise and Pitfalls
of Automatic Content Analysis Methods for Political Texts,” Political
Analysis, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 267–297, 2013.
[3] K. Benoit, D. Conway, B. E. Lauderdale, M. Laver, and S. J. Mikhaylov,
“Crowd-sourced Text Analysis: Reproducible and Agile Production of
Political Data,” American Political Science Review, vol. 110, no. 2, pp.
278–295, 2016.
[4] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey et al., “Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machine translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
[5] G. Klein, Y. Kim, Y. Deng, J. Senellart, and A. M. Rush, “Opennmt:
Open-source toolkit for neural machine translation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.02810, 2017.
[6] K. Benoit, D. Schwarz, and D. Traber, “The sincerity of political speech
in parliamentary systems: A comparison of ideal points scaling using
legislative speech and votes,” in 2nd Annual Conference of EPSA, Berlin,
2012, pp. 19–21.
[7] E. de Vries, M. Schoonvelde, and G. Schumacher, “Lost in translation?
evaluating the usefulness of machine translation for bag-of-words text
models,” 2017, Open Science Framework.
[8] P. Koehn, “Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine transla-
tion,” in MT summit, vol. 5, 2005, pp. 79–86.
[9] M. E. Roberts, B. M. Stewart, D. Tingley, C. Lucas, J. Leder-Luis, S. K.
Gadarian, B. Albertson, and D. G. Rand, “Structural Topic Models for
Open-Ended Survey Responses,” American Journal of Political Science,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1064–1082, 2014.
[10] C. Lucas, R. A. Nielsen, M. E. Roberts, B. M. Stewart, A. Storer, and
D. Tingley, “Computer assisted text analysis for comparative politics,”
Political Analysis, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 254–277, 2015.
[11] J. Blumenau, “Are E-Petitions Pointless? Evidence from the House of
Commons,” 2017, unpublished.
[12] ——, “Legislative Role Models: Female Ministers , Participation , and
Inﬂuence in the UK House of Commons,” unpublished, 2017.
[13] H. Smidt, “Peacekeeping activities in cote d’ivoire,” unpublished.
[14] J. Grimmer, S. Messing, and S. J. Westwood, “How Words and Money
Cultivate a Personal Vote: The Effect of Legislator Credit Claiming on
Constituent Credit Allocation,” American Political Science Review, vol.
106, no. 4, pp. 703–719, 2012.
[15] D. J. Hopkins and G. King, “A Method of Automated Nonparametric
Content Analysis for Social Science,” American Journal of Political
Science, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 229–247, 2010.
[16] A. I. Johnston and D. Stockmann, “Chinese attitudes toward the United
States and Americans,” Anti-Americanisms in World Politics, pp. 157–
195, 2007.
[17] J. Wilkerson, D. Smith, and N. Stramp, “Tracing the Flow of Policy
Ideas in Legislatures: A Text Reuse Approach,” American Journal of
Political Science, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1002–1021, 2015.
[18] R. K. Hinkle, “Into the Words: Using Statutory Text to Explore the
Impact of Federal Courts on State Policy Diffusion,” American Journal
of Political Science, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1002–1021, 2015.
[19] J. B. Slapin and S.-O. Proksch, “A Scaling Model for Estimating
Time-Series Party Positions from Texts,” American Journal of Political
Science, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 705–722, 2008.
[20] S.-O. Proksch and J. B. Slapin, “Position Taking in European Parliament
Speeches,” British Journal of Political Science, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 587–
611, 2010.
[21] A. Herzog and K. Benoit, “The Most Unkindest Cuts: Speaker Selection
and Expressed Government Dissent during Economic Crisis,” Journal
of Politics, vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 1157–1175, 2015.
[22] D. Schwarz, D. Traber, and K. Benoit, “Estimating Intra-Party Prefer-
ences: Comparing Speeches to Votes*,” Political Science Research and
Methods, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 379–396, 2017.
[23] B. E. Lauderdale and A. Herzog, “Measuring Political Positions from
Legislative Speech,” Political Analysis, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 374–394,
2016.
[24] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781,
2013.
[25] M. Shahbazi, J. R. Barr, V. Hristidis, and N. N. Srinivasan, “Estimation
of the investability of real estate properties through text analysis,” in
Semantic Computing (ICSC), 2016 IEEE Tenth International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 301–306.
[26] A. Baturo, N. Dasandi, and S. J. Mikhaylov, “Understanding state
preferences with text as data: Introducing the UN General Debate
corpus,” Research and Politics, vol. 4, no. 2, 2017.
[27] S. Gurciullo and S. Mikhaylov, “Detecting policy preferences and
dynamics in the un general debate with neural word embeddings,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.03490, 2017.
[28] S. Gurciullo, M. Smallegan, M. Pereda, F. Battiston, A. Patania,
S. Poledna, D. Hedblom, B. T. Oztan, A. Herzog, P. John et al.,
“Complex politics: A quantitative semantic and topological analysis of
uk house of commons debates,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.03797, 2015.
[29] J. Bisbee and J. M. Larson, “Testing Social Science Network Theories
with Online Network Data: An Evaluation of External Validity,” Amer-
ican Political Science Review, vol. 111, no. 3, pp. 502–521, 2017.
[30] P. Nulty, Y. Theocharis, S. A. Popa, O. Parnet, and K. Benoit, “Social
media and political communication in the 2014 elections to the European
Parliament*,” Electoral Studies, vol. 44, pp. 429–444, 2016.
[31] Z. C. Steinert-Threlkeld, “Spontaneous Collective Action: Peripheral
Mobilization During the Arab Spring,” American Political Science
Review, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 379–403, 2017.
[32] R. Bond and S. Messing, “Quantifying Social Media’s Political Space :
Estimating Ideology from Publicly Revealed Preferences on Facebook,”
American Political Science Review, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 62–78, 2015.
[33] G. King, J. Pan, and M. E. Roberts, “How Censorship in China Allows
Government Criticism but Silences Collective Expression,” American
Political Science Review, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 326–343, 2013.
[34] ——, “How the Chinese Government Fabricates Social Media Posts
for Strategic Distraction, Not Engaged Argument,” American Journal of
Political Science, vol. 111, no. 3, pp. 484–501, 2017.
[35] C. Amato, A. Karmhus, E. C. Magrini, C. Mealings, and B. Vigreux,
“Generating policy insights from micro-narratives,” in Data for Policy
2016.
2nd Annual International Conference, September 2016.
