Title: A survey of diversity quantification in natural language processing: The why, what, where and how
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20858v3
--------------------------------------------------

A survey of diversity quantification in natural language processing:
The why, what, where and how
Louis Estève
France
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LISN∗
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe
Belgium
FNRS - UCLouvain†
Nurit Melnik
Israel
The Open University of Israel‡
Agata Savary
France
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LISN∗
Olha Kanishcheva
Germany
Heidelberg University§
Abstract
The concept of diversity has received increas-
ing attention in natural language processing
(NLP) in recent years. It became an advo-
cated property of datasets and systems, and
many measures are used to quantify it. How-
ever, it is often addressed in an ad hoc man-
ner, with few explicit justifications of its en-
dorsement and many cross-paper inconsis-
tencies. There have been very few attempts
to take a step back and understand the con-
ceptualization of diversity in NLP. To ad-
dress this fragmentation, we take inspiration
from other scientific fields where the concept
of diversity has been more thoroughly con-
ceptualized. We build upon Stirling (2007),
a unified framework adapted from ecology
and economics, which distinguishes three
dimensions of diversity: variety, balance,
and disparity. We survey over 300 recent
diversity-related papers from ACL Anthol-
ogy and build an NLP-specific framework
with 4 perspectives: why diversity is impor-
tant, what diversity is measured on, where it
is measured, and how. Our analysis increases
comparability of approaches to diversity in
NLP, reveals emerging trends and allows us
to formulate recommendations for the field.
1
Introduction
The notion of diversity has been gaining increas-
ing attention in natural language processing (NLP)
over the past few years. The top panel of Figure 1
depicts the number of papers in the ACL Anthol-
ogy from 1990 to 2024 which contain “diversity”
or “diverse” in their title or abstract.1 There are
4,357 such papers in total, 472 of them contain
∗first.last@universite-paris-saclay.fr
†marie-catherine.demarneffe@uclouvain.be
‡nuritme@openu.ac.il
§kanichshevaolga@gmail.com
1Prior to 1990, the only one such item is an erratum entitled
Diverse corrigenda and addenda to the pre-prints.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Year-wise number of papers about diversity
In abstract but not in title
In title (our study)
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Year-wise share of papers about diversity
In abstract but not in title
In title (our study)
Figure 1: ACL Anthology papers from 1990 to 2024
with “diversity” or “diverse” in their title or abstract.
one of these terms in their title (in orange), and
3,885 in their abstract but not in their title (in blue).
This increase is not only related to the rapid growth
of NLP in general. The bottom panel of Figure 1
shows the same information, but as a year-wise
share. In particular, in 2024, 13% of new papers
contained the term “diverse” or “diversity” in their
title or abstract, almost 5 points above 2023.
Diversity has become an advocated property of
datasets and systems in various NLP tasks and end-
user applications, and many specific measures are
used to quantify it. Nevertheless, to date there have
been very few attempts to take a step back and
understand the conceptualization of diversity in
NLP and the motivations behind its endorsement.
When such attempts were made, they were lim-
ited to particular areas (Tevet and Berant, 2021;
Yang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025) and diversity
aspects (Lion-Bouton et al., 2022; Ploeger et al.,
2024). Overall, the field currently suffers from the
lack of a shared vocabulary and framework, which
arXiv:2507.20858v3  [cs.CL]  13 Mar 2026
leads to conceptual fragmentation concerning diver-
sity. This suggests that NLP belongs to the “fields
[...] where diversity is prominent in discussion,
but remains undefined or analytically neglected”
(Stirling, 2007, p. 707).
The objective of this survey is to pave the way
toward addressing these shortcomings by taking
inspiration from studies outside of NLP where di-
versity has been systematically analyzed (Sarkar,
2010; Stirling, 1994). These studies revealed cross-
domain similarities and proposed unifying frame-
works. We examine to which extent these proposals
can be applied to how the concept of diversity is
used, and especially quantified, in NLP.
Our contributions are twofold. First, we pro-
pose an NLP-specific framework for conceptu-
alizing diversity quantification, which aligns with
the aforementioned cross-domain frameworks. It
consists of four perspectives: the motivations be-
hind the quest for diversity (why), the objects on
which diversity is quantified (what), the pipeline
stages and NLP areas where diversity measures are
applied (where) and the types of diversity measures
themselves (how). This framework, applied to over
300 diversity-related NLP papers, increases their
comparability and makes global tendencies emerge.
Second, we put forward recommendations for fur-
ther conceptualization of diversity in the field.
2
Cross-domain perspective on diversity
We first examine how other fields approached diver-
sity. Disciplines like ecology, biology, linguistics,
cultural studies, economics, and policy studies, use
the concept of diversity. Their experiences offer
valuable lessons, from understanding the normative
assumptions that underlie the quest for diversity to
frameworks for measuring diversity in practice and
evolution of these practices.
2.1
Normative assumptions for diversity
Sarkar (2010) examines diversity across ecological,
biological, cultural, and linguistic contexts from
a philosophical perspective. He observes that di-
versity emerges as a major value of our times and
what all studied fields have in common is richness
(the number of categories in a system), a “rather
trivial concept of diversity”, according to Sarkar
(2010, p. 136). What differs fundamentally across
fields are the justifications for endorsing diversity
as a goal. They often rest on implicit normative
assumptions, which have to be excavated.
For biodiversity, diversity is a normative goal by
design, as the discipline was created to protect it.
Two broad normative justifications are offered: (i)
intrinsic value independent of all human considera-
tions, and (ii) anthropocentric value, i.e. it serves
human interests (e.g. food, medicines). Since not
all biological entities can be preserved, choices
must be made about which to protect.
These
choices rely on these normative assumptions.
In ecology, a major motivation for endorsing
diversity is the assumption that more diverse eco-
logical communities are expected to be more stable
than less diverse ones (although counterexamples
do exist). The normative assumption is thus that
species extinction is not desirable while stability is.
The normative justification for protecting cul-
tural and linguistic diversity often mirrors biodi-
versity (e.g. preserving a “pool of knowledge” to
respond to environmental challenges). However,
the ultimate, often implicit, normative assumption
is respect for human rights, which requires protect-
ing cultural (and linguistic) diversity.
Crucially, Sarkar argues that these normative as-
sumptions dictate the selection and adequacy of
diversity measures. Different goals require differ-
ent ways of quantifying diversity. It is therefore
essential for NLP to consider why diversity is of
interest in the field and thus make educated choices
of diversity measures. Here, we take steps towards
answering this aspect.
2.2
Stirling’s cross-domain framework
Moving from normative questions to structural
ones, Stirling (2007) observes that while diversity
is studied across radically different contexts, the
underlying properties remain remarkably similar
across fields. He proposes a cross-disciplinary uni-
fied framework for characterizing diversity. Its ba-
sic premise is that diversity is a property of a system
whose elements (also called options or items) can
be apportioned into categories (also called types).
For example, in ecology, categories are typically
species and elements are specimens.
Diversity measures that rely on this ele-
ment/category dichotomy can then be positioned
along three dimensions: variety, which focuses
on the number of categories; balance, which con-
siders the evenness of the distribution of elements
in categories; and disparity, which targets the ex-
tent of the differences between categories.2 “All
2The same three dimensions were first proposed by Stirling
else being equal, the greater the variety, the greater
the diversity” (Stirling, 2007, p. 709). The same
holds for balance and disparity. For instance, a
community with 20 species has higher variety, and
therefore higher diversity, than one with 10 species.
A community with 3 species of 100 specimens
each is more balanced, and therefore more diverse,
than one hosting 3 species with 150, 100, and 50
specimens, respectively. A community with 5 bird
species and 5 insect species has higher disparity
than one with 10 insect species. Measures may
tackle one or more dimensions at once.3
2.3
Diversity measurement in ecology
Ecology provides a particularly instructive case of
how a field can move from the confusion of prolif-
erating measures to greater clarity by convergence.
Proliferation of measures
Dozens of diversity
measures were defined and applied to studies of
various species and their habitats, including both
nonparametric (Smith and Wilson, 1996) and para-
metric (Magurran, 2004).4 In developing these
measures, ecology borrowed extensively from in-
formation theory, through its use of parameterized
entropies (Patil and Taillie, 1982) and related trans-
formations (Hill, 1973). Distance measures were
used to capture functional differences (e.g. body
features, behavior) and positions in the phyloge-
netic tree (Mouchet et al., 2010).
The “nonconcept” problem
The proliferation
of diversity measures soon became overwhelming.
According to Hurlbert (1971, p. 577), “species di-
versity has been defined in such various and dis-
parate ways that it now conveys no information
other than something to do with community struc-
ture; species diversity has become a nonconcept”.
Decades later, Ricotta (2005) still spoke of a “jun-
gle of biological diversity”.
Debates and convergence
The recognition of
this problem led to productive debates. Some au-
thors argued that diversity itself remains meaning-
ful but measures should be carefully reviewed. De-
(1994) with respect to ecology only.
3In the same paper, Stirling also proposes a concrete uni-
fied formula to encompass the three dimensions and cover
diversity measures from different domains. This formula was
later shown to have flaws (Rousseau, 2018; Leydesdorff et al.,
2019), and we do not consider it here.
4Parametric approaches, contrary to nonparametric ones,
assume a particular species abundance distribution and use its
parameters to estimate diversity (Chao et al., 2014).
bates took place about desirable properties of di-
versity measures (Smith and Wilson, 1996; Jost,
2006; Hoffmann and Hoffmann, 2008; Jost, 2009)5
and a growing consensus emerged around the use
of Hill numbers (1973), a family of diversity mea-
sures that enable interpretability of diversity scores.
6 It can be shown that many commonly used di-
versity measures can be seen as special cases of
a unified formula (Rényi, 1961; Patil and Taillie,
1982; Stirling, 2007). It was also suggested that,
rather than by unique scores, diversity should be
characterized by profiles – plotting the value of the
unified formula against its parameter, which gives
more or less importance to different dimensions of
diversity (Leinster and Cobbold, 2012; Chao et al.,
2014).
While debates continue, the field has achieved
significant progress in conceptualizing and measur-
ing diversity. As a result, diversity in ecology has
become a rather mature and formalized topic with
substantial literature which we can draw from.
3
Data and methodology
Section 2 shows that diversity is valued across mul-
tiple fields, yet the normative assumptions and mea-
surement frameworks vary considerably. In NLP re-
search, while diversity is frequently invoked, there
has been no systematic attempt to understand why
it matters, how to define it, and how to measure it.
To address this gap, we analyzed papers from
the ACL Anthology7 that include “diverse” or “di-
versity” in their title. As of July 26th, 2024, the
ACL Anthology hosted 97,466 papers; we focused
on those from the last 5 years (January 1st, 2019
to July 26th, 2024) with those terms in their title.
Sec. 9 discusses the consequences of this choice.
This selection resulted in 308 papers, which were
manually analyzed. We filtered out 39 irrelevant
5These properties describe e.g. how diversity scores should
behave when: (i) a population is subdivided into two smaller
ones, (ii) two smaller dissimilar communities are merged into
one, (iii) the abundance of a more frequent species is increased
at the expense of a less frequent one, etc.
6An example for the interpretability of diversity relies on
the axiom that in a perfectly balanced community, diversity is
equal to its number of species (Jost, 2006). If a community of
n equally abundant species, has a diversity of n. Refinements
of this axiom assume that in such an maximally diverse com-
munity, all species should also be totally dissimilar (Leinster
and Cobbold, 2012). For a diversity measure D, and a com-
munity C, to have interpretability, find a perfectly balanced
community C′ such that D(C′) = D(C). The number of
species in C′ is a pivot to interpret various diversity measures.
7https://aclanthology.org/
papers.8 The remaining 269 papers were annotated
for key aspects of how diversity is addressed within
NLP research. Seven researchers participated in
the annotation. To ensure annotation quality, adju-
dication was conducted for challenging cases.
4
Initial observations
Our preliminary review of the 269 papers revealed
several recurring issues in how diversity is concep-
tualized and measured.
First, diversity is generally assumed to be im-
portant in many tasks. High diversity is desirable,
while low diversity (e.g. due to training models on
synthetic data) is a concern. However, the motiva-
tions for valuing diversity are rarely explicit.
Second, alongside the technical meaning of “di-
versity” as a shortcut for a particular quantifiable
property, we witness frequent use of the term “di-
verse” in a common everyday sense, simply mean-
ing different from one another. This is the case
in 82 papers. While such uses are of course legiti-
mate,9 they make the design of standard vocabulary
more challenging.
Third, we observe cross-paper inconsistencies.
Diversity measures vary considerably across pa-
pers, and many are ad hoc or unclear, even after
conducting in-depth analysis or consulting the pa-
pers where they were first defined. Many different
aspects of NLP are subject to diversity quantifi-
cation, yet there is no uniform terminology and
methodology, to the point of calling the same mea-
sure different names or using the same name for
different measures.
Fourth, the choice of particular diversity mea-
sures is rarely justified and their properties are
hardly addressed.
These observations motivated a more systematic
investigation of the 188 papers in which diversity is
quantified (henceforth our corpus). Inspired by the
cross-domain work of Stirling (2007) and Sarkar
(2010), we developed an analytical framework or-
ganized around four perspectives: why diversity is
important (Sec. 5), what diversity is measured on
(Sec. 6), where in the research pipeline and NLP
8Papers judged irrelevant: (i) not written in English, (ii)
about non-linguistic diversity (e.g. biodiversity, neurodiver-
sity), (iii) “diversity” in their title only because they cite the
name of a workshop/shared task or are volumes, (iv) slides, (v)
“diversity” only in the title and never in the body of the paper,
(vi) describe projects, shared tasks or event/thesis proposals.
9As a reviewer indicated, a similar shift between common
and technical meaning concerns other terms like significant.
area diversity is quantified (Sec. 7), and how this
quantification is performed (Sec. 8).
5
Why diversity is important in NLP
A large majority of papers in our corpus endorse
diversity but do not justify this stand. Following
Sarkar (2010), we uncover the normative assump-
tions behind the quest for diversity and group them
into two families: ethical and practical.
5.1
Ethical normative assumptions
Ethical normative assumptions are partly reminis-
cent of the respect for human rights (Sec. 2.1).
Equality and inclusiveness
NLP should pro-
mote digital inclusiveness (Joshi et al., 2020).
Datasets, systems, and benchmarks are expected
to equally serve all users (Khanuja et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2024a), by representing different lan-
guages, language families and scripts (Kodner et al.,
2022; Goldman et al., 2023) and mitigating the
supremacy of English and English-centric bias
(Pouran Ben Veyseh et al., 2022; Asai et al., 2022).
They should also fairly account for diverse cultures
(Yin et al., 2021; Mohamed et al., 2022; Keleg and
Magdy, 2023; Bhatia and Shwartz, 2023; Liu et al.,
2024a), human perspectives (Parrish et al., 2024)
and opinions (Zhang et al., 2024b).
Protection of users
Protection of users against
misuse of technology should be ensured. For in-
stance, pre-trained language models are fine-tuned
with diverse prompts and responses, so as to limit
the toxic and offensive content in LLM answers
(Song et al., 2024). More diverse attention vectors
in a transformer make it less sensitive to adversar-
ial attacks, which try to fool it, e.g. to misclassify
sentiment or toxicity of a text (Yang et al., 2024).
Educational quality
When used in education,
NLP should promote its high quality by covering a
large variety of topics (Hadifar et al., 2023).
Methodological rigor
NLP methods should
align with NLP deontology. Thus, more diverse
benchmarks are created to make evaluation more
reliable (Chen et al., 2023b), notably because they
show the out-of-domain performance (Pradhan
et al., 2022). As a result, the remaining challenges
in NLP are better highlighted (Kim et al., 2023c).
Moreover, a dataset’s diversity proves more critical
in evaluation than its size (Miao et al., 2020).
5.2
Practical normative assumptions
Practical normative assumptions focus on improv-
ing the functionality and performance of systems.
Meeting user expectations
One user expecta-
tion is informativeness and it was argued that more
diverse generated text is less generic and more in-
formative for users (Park et al., 2023). Since di-
versity is seen as an inherent property of human
language, it has become a user expectation also
towards machine-generated language. Thus, gener-
ation models should now operate in one-to-many
scenarios, i.e. produce a diverse spectrum of out-
puts (Li et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2020; Han et al., 2021; Shao et al., 2022; Puranik
et al., 2023; E et al., 2023; Hwang et al., 2023)
rather than a single most optimal output. Particu-
larly high diversity expectations are encountered in
dialog (Lee et al., 2022), where more diverse sys-
tem reactions increase user engagement (Akasaki
and Kaji, 2019; Kim et al., 2023a).
Machine-
generated text is also expected to be natural and
the diversity of human language is often seen as
an upper bound in this respect (Schüz et al., 2021;
Cegin et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b).
Improving performance
Expectedly, increasing
performance of NLP tools is considered desirable.
Therefore, authors increase the diversity of training
data to improve performance in parsing (Liu and
Zeldes, 2023), question answering (Yadav et al.,
2024), semantic role labeling (Tripodi et al., 2021),
solving math problems (Shen et al., 2022), natural
language generation (Zhang et al., 2021; Thomp-
son and Post, 2020; Palumbo et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2021). Ensemble models are built of diverse sub-
models, to achieve better performances than a sin-
gle model (Song et al., 2021; Kobayashi et al.,
2022). In classification, class names are extended
with diverse semantically close keywords, to in-
crease accuracy (Yano et al., 2024). This positive
impact of diversity on performance stems from a
better coverage of domains, tasks, genres, halluci-
nations types etc. (Xia et al., 2024).
5.3
Normative tensions and value conflicts
While an implicit endorsement of diversity exists
across the field, some papers in our corpus do not
share this view, but take more nuanced positions,
recognizing that diversity is not an absolute good
but often exists in tension with other salient ob-
jectives. These conflicts arise primarily when the
pursuit of diversity begins to compromise the func-
tional or ethical integrity of a system.
It is shown that simultaneously maintaining
generative quality and diversity is hard (Ma
et al., 2024).
This tension, often called the
quality/diversity trade-off (Ippolito et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021; Shao et al., 2022), or faithful-
ness/diversity trade-off (Chen et al., 2023a), shows
that diversity comes at a “price”. Consequently,
some authors propose measures which assess both
dimensions simultaneously (Narayan et al., 2022;
Alihosseini et al., 2019).
Some works posit that diversity should be ad-
justed to the task (Liu et al., 2024c). For instance,
answers to factual questions call for precision and
determinism (low diversity), while storytelling re-
quires creativity and surprise (high diversity). This
reflects Sarkar’s (2002) warning that “blanket en-
dorsement” of diversity is unjustified.
Moreover, the closeness (in diversity) of gen-
erated text to human production might not be an
objective per se. For instance, the difference in di-
versity patterns between human-generated and AI-
generated text may help distinguish these two cate-
gories. This serves bot detection on social media,
avoidance of fake news, and protection of democ-
racy (Kosmajac and Keselj, 2019).
5.4
Understanding diversity
One final reason for the interest in diversity is to
theorize it, and systematize its measurement, so
as to understand better its nature and implications
(Ploeger et al., 2024), make educated choices of
diversity measures (Lai et al., 2020b; Tevet and
Berant, 2021; Lion-Bouton et al., 2022), and offer a
reliable comparative framework for NLP (Poelman
et al., 2024). Our work falls precisely within this
motivation.
6
What objects are measured for diversity
The papers in our corpus address a wide range of
“diversities” across NLP areas. We take inspira-
tion from Stirling (2007, p. 709), who noted that it
is when the elements and categories are identified
that similarities and particularities of various under-
standings of diversity become clear. Broadly speak-
ing, the categories that emerge from our analysis
of the corpus fall into the three following classes.
6.1
In-text categories
In-text categories are associated with linguistic
properties that are implicitly assumed to be in-
herent to a text, whether it is written, spoken, or
signed. They are addressed and quantified in 119
papers (out of 188) in our dataset. For example,
Guo et al. (2024) find that through iterations of
training a model with its predecessor’s synthetic
output, texts exhibit a consistent decrease in their
lexical, semantic and syntactic diversity. Lexical
diversity is operationalized in their system with (i)
words as elements and unique words as categories
and (ii) n-grams as elements and unique n-grams
as categories. Semantic and syntactic diversity in
their approach can be understood as disparity, with
sentences being both categories and elements. Sim-
ilarly, sets of LM-generated responses (Gao et al.,
2019; Tevet and Berant, 2021; Han et al., 2022),
captions (Schüz et al., 2021), translations (Burchell
et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2020b),
paraphrases (Kumar et al., 2019; Bawden et al.,
2020; Cao and Wan, 2020) are evaluated for the
diversity of the words or word sequences that they
contain, as well as the diversity of their semantic
contents and syntactic structures. More rare but
interesting instances of in-text diversity are when
categories are not defined beforehand but emerge
automatically e.g. by clustering (Han et al., 2022).
6.2
Meta-linguistic categories
Meta-linguistic categories relate not to texts them-
selves, but to the classifications of texts within
datasets. We found them in 51 papers. Multilingual
datasets are often evaluated based on the languages
they contain. In the simplest case, languages are
categories. Diversity is characterized by variety,
the number of languages, and disparity, the distinc-
tive typological or phylogenetic properties of each
language (Pouran Ben Veyseh et al., 2022; Sarti
et al., 2022). Balance becomes relevant when the
elements within each category are texts or tokens.
In a more nuanced characterization of typologi-
cal diversity, languages are classified according to
language families and, sometimes, branches within
them (Longpre et al., 2021; Kodner et al., 2022;
Kumar et al., 2022a). In our terminology, lan-
guages in that case are the elements and the lan-
guage branches or families, the categories. How-
ever, although the term ‘typological diversity’ is
often evoked, there is a real need for adopting a
systematic approach for measuring and comparing
it (Ponti et al., 2019; Poelman et al., 2024).
Languages are categories for Dunn et al. (2020),
who draw on the meta-linguistic diversity of Twitter
data as a means for understanding the linguistic
landscape of countries. With tweets as elements
categorized into the languages in which they were
produced, the authors measure for each country its
linguistic diversity over time, and in particular the
effect of travel restrictions caused by COVID-19.
Other text classifications evaluated with regard
to diversity are genres (Liu and Zeldes, 2023) and
domains or time periods to which the texts belong
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2023). In such cases, the
elements are linguistic items, mostly tokens, and
the categories are the meta-linguistic categories
they belong to. There are also papers that target the
diversity of text producers, e.g. the racial identity
of language signers (Gueuwou et al., 2023) or the
political opinions of authors (Zhang et al., 2024b).
6.3
Processing categories
A third type of categories, addressed only in 24
papers, are associated with the processes applied to
the data. Thus, processing categories are external to
the text itself. This is a wide class; we find diversity
ascribed to annotations (Weerasooriya et al., 2023),
annotators (Parrish et al., 2024; Creanga and Dinu,
2024), to the (ensemble of) models trained (Greco
et al., 2022; Kobayashi et al., 2022), to the types
of tasks performed (Qiu et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2024a), and to the attention vectors in the design
of a model (Huang et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2024).
In most of these cases there are no higher-order
classifications, i.e., categories are elements. One
exception is Yang and Wan (2022), who investi-
gate metric diversity for long document summariza-
tion: the elements here are evaluation metrics (e.g.
BLEU, SPICE) which are classified into categories
(e.g. translation, summarization, semantics).
7
Where diversity is measured
We analyzed where diversity is quantified in two
ways. For a broad overview of whether some NLP
subfields are more concerned with diversity than
others, we examined the NLP area of each paper.
We also determined at which stage of a standard
machine learning pipeline quantification happens.
ARR area
#
Dialogue & Interactive Systems
19
Discourse & Pragmatics
1
Generation
27
Information Extraction
1
Language Modeling
8
Machine Learning for NLP
31
Machine Translation
11
Multilingualism and Cross-lingual NLP
11
Multimodality, Grounding to Vision
6
NLP Applications
16
Phonology, Morphology, Segmentation
4
Question Answering
6
Resources and Evaluation
27
Semantics: Lexical and Sentence-level
8
Summarization
8
Speech Recognition, Text-to-speech
2
Syntax
2
Computational Social Sciences; Efficient/Low-
Resource Methods; Ethics, Bias & Fairness;
Human-centered NLP; Information Retrieval
& Text Mining; Interpretability & Analysis of
Models; Linguistic theories & Cognitive Mod-
eling; Sentiment & Stylistic Analysis
0
Table 1: Number of papers per ARR area in our corpus.
7.1
NLP areas
We annotated each paper in our corpus according
to the main NLP areas defined in ARR10 that the
study targets, as shown in Table 1. Given the re-
cent uptake in NLP for generating data, it is not
surprising that one of the most frequent areas is
Generation (27 papers, thus 14% of the 188 pa-
pers surveyed in which diversity is quantified). All
papers in that area aim at generating outputs that
are “diverse” (mostly in terms of in-text diversity,
Sec. 6.1). This also holds for the areas of Dialogue,
Machine Translation, NLP Applications, Question
Answering and Summarization, in which text is of-
ten generated. Resources and Evaluation is also
an area in which diversity, mostly meta-linguistic
diversity (Sec. 6.2), is prominently used (27 papers,
14% of the total number of papers). Concerns about
diversity are also apparent in Machine Learning for
NLP (31 papers, 16% of the total number of pa-
pers) which encompasses classification tasks and
algorithms to obtain diverse generated data.
10https://aclrollingreview.org/cfp. The ARR area the paper
was submitted to was unavailable, but we used the one in the
title if present and our best guess if not.
Data
collection
(37, *1)
Annotation
(2)
Input
(25, *5)
System
construction
(21, *4)
Output data
(86, *8)
Evaluation
(4)
Figure 2: High-level stages in standard machine learning
pipelines (rectangles for processes, ellipses for states),
with numbers of papers quantifying diversity. Papers
with two-stage quantification indicated with *.
7.2
Pipeline stages
Figure 2 shows the different stages of a standard
machine learning pipeline, detailed here.
Data collection
Different methods or criteria are
used to select data with diversity in mind. Elements
are thus methods/criteria and categories are group-
ings of these. Kim et al. (2023c) focus on math
word problems and create a more diverse dataset
than previously existing ones, in terms of problem
types (arithmetic, correspondence, comparison, ge-
ometry, possibility), lexical usage (as measured by
a lexical diversity measure), languages (they in-
clude both English and Korean), and intermediate
solution forms (different equation templates).
Annotation process
The annotation is done with
diverse pools of annotators (human or machine).
Elements are the annotators, categories are some
annotator properties (e.g. perspective, sociodemo-
graphics). In NLI for example, Creanga and Dinu
(2024) consider the diversity of human annotators,
with annotators as elements and perspectives as cat-
egories, where diversity pertains thus to processing
(Sec. 6.3). The potential benefits of such an ap-
proach are to better represent different worldviews,
and consequently improve system performance.
Input data
The data given to the system is di-
verse. Elements are often occurrences of linguistic
entities and categories are in-text or meta-linguistic
groupings of these elements (e.g. token per lemma,
document per genre). An example by Liu and
Zeldes (2023) shows that the meta-linguistic di-
versity (Sec. 6.2) of training sets positively impacts
downstream performance in discourse parsing. Di-
versity is operationalized based on the number of
genres in the training sets (e.g. academic, bio, inter-
view) and the number of discourse units per genre.
System construction
The process itself is
diversity-driven. For instance, in a standard ma-
chine learning process, the loss function can be a
diversity measure. Yang et al. (2024) assume that
if a transformer-based model has diverse patterns
in its attention layers, it is less sensitive to attacks
by adversarial examples. Thus, while training the
model, the loss function is defined as the volume of
the geometry formed by attention vectors, and max-
imization of this volume is sought. Here, attention
vectors are elements and their own categories.
Output data
System’s output is measured for
diversity. For instance, Han et al. (2022) propose a
semantic diversity measure of generated answers,
which correlates better with human judgments on
answer diversity. Elements are response instances,
and categories semantic clusters.
Evaluation
Different metrics/criteria are used to
evaluate systems’ outputs, for instance to reinforce
their applicability. Elements are metrics/criteria
and categories are groupings of these. This falls
under diversity of processing (Sec. 6.3) or meta-
linguistic diversity (Sec. 6.2). For instance, Yang
and Wan (2022) use multiple metrics drawn from
multiple NLP tasks to evaluate summaries, while
Bhatia and Shwartz (2023) employ human evalua-
tors from 5 different cultures to judge efficiency of
inference models.
In which stage(s) is diversity quantified?
For
each of the 188 papers in which diversity is quanti-
fied, we identified the stage(s) in which the quan-
tification of diversity occurs. 183 papers fit the
pipeline (some survey or opinion papers do not).
Figure 2 gives, for each stage, the number of pa-
pers in which diversity is quantified in that stage
(starred * if quantification happens in two stages).
“Output data” is unsurprisingly the stage in which
diversity is most often quantified (86 out of 188 pa-
pers): 21 of these are from Machine Learning, 19
from Generation, 13 from Dialogue, 9 from NLP
Applications and 5 from Machine Translation. The
“Data collection” stage is also prominent, with 15
of the 27 papers belonging to the Resources and
Evaluation area. In 9 papers, diversity is measured
in two stages: for 4 papers, at Input data & Out-
put data; for 3, at System construction & Output
data; for 1, at Data collection & Output data; and
in another 1, at Input data & System construction.
8
How diversity is measured
Looking at all 188 papers quantifying diversity, we
found over 100 different names of diversity mea-
sures. Most are used in a handful of papers, which
makes straightforward comparisons hard. However,
when applying Stirling’s cross-domain framework
(Sec. 2.2), we can abstract away from categories
(Sec. 6), elements and distance measures (if any)
and see a high-level picture emerge.
The outcome of this effort is shown in Tables 2-
3, with a split into measures which do and do not
fit Stirling’s framework, respectively. Each bullet
point lists different names found for the same mea-
sure, with sample papers using them. Measures
based on similar mechanisms are grouped into fam-
ilies, as summarized below.
Henceforth, the set for which diversity is mea-
sured will be called the observed set.
Let n
and m be the number of its categories and ele-
ments (called observed categories and observed
elements), respectively. Let P = ⟨p1, ..., pn⟩de-
note the array of category frequencies, and D =
⟨⟨d1,1, ..., d1,n⟩, ..., ⟨dn,1, ..., dn,n⟩⟩the matrix of
distances between the categories.
8.1
Conforming measures
Over 40 diversity measures, bearing over 60 dif-
ferent names, and found in 166 papers quantifying
diversity, could successfully be mapped on Stir-
ling’s framework, which made 7 families emerge.
dRichness
This family contains two variants of
richness, i.e. simply the number of categories,
which is the most elementary variety measure:
richness (n, m, P, D) = n
(1)
Most papers found here do not explicitly mention
any measure, but simply state the number of cate-
gories. They deal most often with meta-linguistic
diversity (Sec. 6.2), e.g. the number of languages,
but sometimes also with in-text diversity, e.g. num-
ber of distinct n-grams (Dist-n).
dBalance
This family gathers pure balance mea-
sures. Only 2 examples were found but we judge
them important enough to be singled out. The
E2,1 evenness draws upon Hill numbers highly
valued in the ecological SOTA (Sec. 2.3). The
Zipfian coefficient addresses the speci-
ficity of distributions in language data.
dEntropy
The main measure here is Shannon-
Wiener (1948; 1939) entropy, i.e. the weighted
average of the surprise −ln (pi) of observing a
category with index i:
entropy (n, m, P, D) = −
n
X
i=1
pi ln (pi)
(2)
It is monotonic to n, increases with evenness and
its maximum ln (n) is reached for a uniform distri-
bution. Therefore it is considered a hybrid between
variety and balance. It applies to the distribution
of n-grams, to categories constructed automatically
by clustering (sem-ent) or to language features
(typological index).
dVBOth
Here, we group 3 variety-balance mea-
sures distinct from entropies. They are found in
only 3 papers, but draw from other fields.
dAvePairwise
These measures aggregate the dis-
tance matrix and can be cast as disparity. There
are many measure names due to different cate-
gories (sentences, words), their representations
(strings, syntax trees, vectors, kernels) and dis-
tance/similarity measures used. But they all boil
down to the pairwise average distance between
categories (higher is more diverse):
pairwise (n, m, P, D) =
2 ∗
nP
i=1
i−1
P
j=1
di,j
n(n −1)
(3)
or its complement: pairwise average similarity
(lower is more diverse).11
Many papers from
this family use measures relying on BLEU (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002), initially designed as a per-
formance measure in machine translation, and
repurposed here as the complement of diversity.
Notably, self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018) is the
average of BLEU between each pair of utter-
ances. This follows the same logic as pairwise
in (3), with BLEU as the similarity function
(lower is better), and n2 instead of n(n −1)/2
as a denominator.
Variants of self-BLEU
stem from restricting the length of n-grams com-
pared by BLEU (self-BLEU-3/4), comple-
menting BLEU to transform it into a distance
(BLEU-based discrepancy), etc. Other un-
derlying distance measures include cosine similar-
ity, BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), token overlap,
entailment score predicted by an NLI model, etc.
11Note the O
 n2
complexity.
dVolume
This is another small but interesting
family, with aggregation of the distances (disparity)
operationalized by the volume (possibly squared)
of the geometry formed by vectors representing the
categories or its main parameter (radius).
dDistOth
This family gathers other instances
of aggregations (disparities) such as (i) the sum,
rather than the average, of pairwise distances
(max dispersion, NLI diversity), (ii)
the entropy of distances between vectors (graph
entropy),
(iii) the most distant categories
(corpus lexicon diversity), etc.
8.2
Non-conforming measures
The 35 remaining measures, bearing 48 names and
found in 89 papers, have no counterparts in Stir-
ling’s framework. We grouped them into 6 families.
The first three tackle relative rather than absolute
quantification, i.e. they consider two sets: a refer-
ence set R and the observed set O, whose diversity
is estimated by comparison to R. In one version
of this scenario, R is considered diverse, e.g. it is
curated with diversity in mind, and O should be
as close as possible to R. In another version, O is
expected to differ from R, e.g. generated utterances
should be different from the training utterances.
dRelOverlap
These measures focus on how
many categories are shared by R and O. One ex-
ample is the Jaccard measure:
Jaccard (R, O) =
R ∩O

R ∪O

(4)
where R and O are the sets of categories in R and
O. It tackles the ratio of shared categories and
has the range [0, 1]. Other measures in this family
include the percentage of categories in
R which do or do not occur in O, or the F1 score.
dRelDistrib
These measures compare the refer-
ence and observed distributions of R’s and O’s
elements in categories, respectively. One example
is Jensen-Shannon Divergence:
JSD(Q ∥P) = 1
2D(Q ∥M)+ 1
2D(P ∥M) (5)
where Q is the reference distribution, P is the ob-
served distribution, M = 1
2 (Q + P) is a mixture
distribution, and D (Q ∥M) is Kullback-Leibler
divergence. Other measures in this family include
cross-entropy, area under curve, etc.
dRelDist
Here, distances, e.g. BLEU, between
the categories from O and from R are aggregated,
which yields a distance between O and R.
The 3 remaining non-conforming families con-
cern absolute quantification, like those from Tab. 2.
dTTR
This family consists of variants of
type-token-ratio (n, m, P, D) = n
m
(6)
which is the number of categories normalized by
dataset size. A frequent variant is distinct-n,
also called dist-n or diverse-n, which is
the ratio of distinct n-grams to the total number
of tokens, rather than to the number of n-grams.
Distinct-n is widely used in NLP, but it has
issues (Bestgen, 2024). Importantly for us, it is
not monotonic to the number of categories, which
questions its place in the variety dimension. Other
variants, such as MTLD and MATTR, are TTR av-
erages over sliding windows of variable or fixed
sizes, making them insensitive to text length.
dHuman
This family builds upon the assump-
tion that humans are capable of judging diversity
in text by introspection. Human annotators are pre-
sented with text samples that they have to rank
for diversity or score along a diversity scale. We
cannot know a priori whether humans rely on cate-
gories and elements for their judgment; therefore,
this family cannot be cast in Stirling’s framework.
dOther
This family gathers measures that seem
to fit neither Stirling’s framework, nor any of the
previously defined families. They are mostly quite
specific to particular tasks (e.g. ensemble classifi-
cation, sentiment or coreference resolution) and do
not seem to fit Stirling’s dimensions.
Several global observations can be made. The
most frequently used measures are those from
dRichness (77 papers), dAvePairwise (52) and
dTTR (43), with the first two being pure rich-
ness and pure disparity, respectively. There are
only 3 cases of pure balance. Variety-balance hy-
brids are relatively popular, mainly due to entropy,
but we see no hybrids with disparity.12 There are
many cases where the same measure bears different
names (listed in the same bullet point) and it hap-
pens that the same name is used for different mea-
12Hybrids with disparity do exist in ecology (Ricotta and
Szeidl, 2006; Leinster and Cobbold, 2012; Scheiner, 2012;
Chao et al., 2014).
sures (dist-n, self-BLEU). Finally, in over 20
cases relative quantification is used.
D NLP diversity measures, conforming to Stirling (2007)
Variety
dRichness (77)
• number of categories (Vylomova et al., 2020), Dist-n and Dist-S
(Park et al., 2023), vocabulary size (Cegin et al., 2023), number
of unique words (Panagiaris et al., 2020), richness (Lion-Bouton
et al., 2022)
• ave. # categories per text (Ye et al., 2021; Byrne et al., 2019)
Balance
dBalance (3)
• Hill-based E2,1 evenness (Lion-Bouton et al., 2022)
• Zipfian coefficient (Hong et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023)
Variety-balance
dEntropy (21)
• entropy (Joshi et al., 2020; Keleg and Magdy, 2023)
• sem-ent (Han et al., 2022)
• syntax/morphology typological index (Samardzic et al., 2024)
dVBOth (3)
• Herfindahl-Herschman index (Dunn et al., 2020)
• Gini-index (Raza et al., 2022)
• Simpson’s D index (Kosmajac and Keselj, 2019)
Disparity
dAvePairwise (52)
• Self-BLEU (Han et al., 2021), pairwise BLEU (E et al., 2023),
average pairwise BLEU (Shao et al., 2022), 100-BLEU (Awasthi
et al., 2022), BLEU (Aji et al., 2021)
• BLEU-based discrepancy (Shu et al., 2019), 1-BLEU (Hu et al.,
2019)
• average BLEU-based discrepancy (Shu et al., 2019)
• i-BLEU (Burchell et al., 2022)
• Self-BLEU-n (Hwang et al., 2023), BLEU-n (Weir et al., 2020)
• ave. pairwise cosine (Kim et al., 2024), ADC (Hadifar et al.,
2023), average USE similarity (Dopierre et al., 2021), or disper-
sion of sentence embeddings (Guo et al., 2024)
• average syntactic lang2vec (Poelman et al., 2024)
• self-entailment (Narayan et al., 2022)
• average tree edit distance (Hu et al., 2019; Cegin et al., 2023),
parse tree edit distance (Jegadeesan et al., 2021)
• mean tree kernel diff. (Burchell et al., 2022), ave. graph kernel
dist. (Guo et al., 2024), DStree (Bawden et al., 2020)
• i-chrF (character n-gram F-score) (Burchell et al., 2022)
• pairwise average SBERT dissimilarity (Weir et al., 2020)
• Self-BERTScore (Narayan et al., 2022)
• Self-BLEURT (Kwon et al., 2021)
• average of unique words in common (Bawden et al., 2020)
• average word-level Jaccard (Aji et al., 2021), mean Jaccard
n-gram similarity (Li et al., 2022), or average intersection over
union (Jegadeesan et al., 2021)
• average pairwise lexical token overlap (Yadav et al., 2024)
• average reverse Jaccard of n-grams (Larson et al., 2019)
• average word-error rate (Jegadeesan et al., 2021)
• inverse rank-biased overlap (Li et al., 2023)
• gate diversity (Lai et al., 2020a)
dVolume (3)
• mean of ellipsoid radii across all axes (Lai et al., 2020b)
• squared volume of vectors’ geometry (Yang et al., 2024)
• convex hull volume (Yu et al., 2022)
dDistOth (7)
• graph entropy (Yu et al., 2022)
• max dispersion (Yu et al., 2022)
• corpus lexicon diversity (Miao et al., 2020)
• intra-batch average/minimal distance (Shi et al., 2021), average
maximum (Jaccard) similarity (Hu et al., 2022)
• average outlier (Stasaski et al., 2020)
• NLI diversity (Stasaski and Hearst, 2022)
• triplet correlation loss function (Huang et al., 2019)
Table 2: Stirling’s dimensions (D) and NLP families (in
bold) of diversity measures and sample articles using
them. Number of papers per family in parentheses.
NLP diversity measures, non-conforming to Stirling (2007)
dRelOverlap (9)
• MS-Jaccard (Alihosseini et al., 2019)
• Jaccard minmax (Samardzic et al., 2024)
• % novel (Schüz et al., 2021; Park et al., 2023)
• vocabulary usage (Liu et al., 2024b), % coverage (Schüz et al.,
2021)
• number of novel (Murahari et al., 2019)
• overlap (Zhou et al., 2021)
• proportion of times a ground truth token was found in a model’s
nucleus (Sultan et al., 2020)
• F1 between model-generated categories in the reference and in
the predictions (Huang et al., 2023)
dRelDistrib (5)
• Fréchet BERT Distance (Alihosseini et al., 2019)
• Bhattacharyya (Alihosseini et al., 2019)
• Jensen-Shannon Divergence (Xia et al., 2024)
• data cross-entropy (Kumar et al., 2022b)
• average frequency rank with respect to the training set (Schüz
et al., 2021)
• binary unfair rate, unfair error rate, area under curve (Zhang et al.,
2024b)
dRelDist (8)
• Self-BLEU (Cao and Wan, 2020)
• recall (Gao et al., 2019)
• Max-BLEU (Tu et al., 2019)
• sentiment diversity in recommendation systems: SentiMRR,
Senti@5, Senti@10 (Wu et al., 2020a)
dTTR (43)
• Distinct-n (Ippolito et al., 2019), Dist-n (Liu et al., 2024b), topic
uniqueness (Li et al., 2023)
• TTRn (Schüz et al., 2021), proportion of distinct n-grams
(Nishida et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024)
• Measure of Textual Lexical Diversity (Fu and Nederhof, 2021;
Lee et al., 2022)
• Moving-Average Type–Token Ratio (Lee et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2024), Mean Segmental Type-Token Ratio (Chang et al., 2022)
• product of n-gram repetition proportions (Chen et al., 2023a)
• proportion of duplicates (Bahuleyan and El Asri, 2020)
dHuman (12)
• ranking (Eo et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Lahoti et al., 2023;
Lee et al., 2023)
• scale (Diao et al., 2021; Narayan et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023b;
Yoon and Bak, 2023)
dOther (12)
• Mean IDF (Stasaski et al., 2020)
• max-gap (Lahoti et al., 2023)
• classifier ensemble diversity measures: average Q statistic, ratio
errors, negative double fault, disagreement measure, correlation
coefficient (Kobayashi et al., 2022)
• R-QAE (Lee et al., 2020)
• average length (Panagiaris et al., 2020)
• frequency of low-frequency words (Han et al., 2022)
• demand-weighted utility (Khanuja et al., 2023)
• F1 of a baseline coreference solver (Zhukova et al., 2022)
• Honoré’s R, Sichel’s S, Yule’s K (Kosmajac and Keselj, 2019)
Table 3: Families (in bold) of diversity measures in
NLP non-conforming to Stirling’s framework. Relative
quantification in the upper part. Number of papers per
family in parentheses.
9
Discussion
Our examination of the intersections between why,
what, where and how perspectives revealed two
main prototypical, highly distinct, scenarios.
The first involves the area of “Corpus creation”.
At the “Data collection” pipeline stage, the selec-
tion of sources is guided by ethical goals of inclu-
siveness and equality, and/or by practical ones of
ensuring performance. The diversity categories are
meta-linguistic and measures from the dRichness
family (variety) are used. Papers in this scenario
range from as simple a quantification as three gen-
res by Etienne et al. (2022) to as many as dozens
of languages with two levels of categories by Vy-
lomova et al. (2020). The latter describes a shared
task on morphological inflection in which diversity
is operationalized in the choice of languages for the
dataset: 90 languages from 34 genera, grouped into
15 language families. Families are used as proxies
of different morphological systems. The task is to
generate inflected forms from a lemma and a set
of features. The systems have to generalize across
typologically distinct languages (also those unseen
in training), many of which are low-resourced.
The second scenario occurs in Generation at the
“Output data” stage, where in-text categories are
used for evaluation. Diversity is a practical goal
related to user expectations. Often the one-to-many
scenario occurs and the quality/diversity trade-off
has to be balanced. The measures are mostly from
the dTTR or dAvePairwise families. For example,
Liu et al. (2023) investigate response generation for
multiturn dialogue in generative chatbots. Their ob-
jective is to enhance chatbot responses for diversity
and relevance simultaneously. They use recurrent
neural networks (whose basic transition structure is
deterministic) into which they introduce a recurrent
summarizing latent variable (to enable variability),
to address the one-to-many challenge. The diver-
sity of the generated answers is measured with
distinct-1/2 (dTTR) and with ranking-based
human evaluation (dHuman).
Several comments can be made on the compari-
son between diversity quantification in NLP and in
other fields (Sec. 2). First, NLP shows a very weak
awareness of the longstanding literature about di-
versity in other fields (Kosmajac and Keselj, 2019;
Dunn et al., 2020; Lion-Bouton et al., 2022) but it
shares the tendency to often use richness (Sec. 2.1).
Second, there is a large difference in scale. Di-
versity considerations in ecology mostly concern
species, their habitats and communities. Processes
(contact, mutation, etc.), even if observable, are
relatively few and slow. In NLP, conversely, pro-
cesses (in data processing chains) are numerous,
are engineered by the researchers themselves, hap-
pen instantaneously and their outcomes are readily
available. This creates a profusion of radically dif-
ferent contexts in which diversity is quantified and
objects to which this quantification applies (Sec. 6-
7). Some categories (e.g. word types or syntactic
subtrees) can be very numerous, which raises the
tractability issues behind diversity measures – an
aspect not deeply addressed in other fields.
Third, NLP shows a relatively high number of
cases when diversity measures are applied directly
to elements, without apportionment into categories.
This happens most often when utterances on input
or output of the system are compared by similar-
ity measures (dAvePairwise, dVolume, dDistOther).
Such scenarios can be seen as trivial cases of dis-
parity measurement in which elements are identical
to categories. Variety is then roughly equivalent
to dataset size (and not considered a diversity di-
mension) and balance is moot. Such cases reveal
the tension between NLP, where continuous repre-
sentations are prevalent, and other fields in which
categorical modeling is standard.
Let us finally note that looking only at “diversity”
and “diverse” in titles bears the risk of missing
important papers which use these terms in their
bodies, or which use other related terms. To es-
timate this risk, we studied 100 extra papers con-
taining diversity, entropy, variety, balance, and
disparity in paper bodies. 13 We found that entropy
mostly occurred in cross-entropy as loss function,
not as a diversity measure. Diversity, diverse, dis-
parity, and variety were either unrelated to diversity
quantification or did not bring anything new to our
framework. The case of balance was more interest-
ing. This term was sometimes used to characterize
training or test corpora in which the distribution
of classes was more or less balanced, which had
consequences for the models’ performance. The
distribution was quantified but not aggregated into
a single balance score. This longstanding aspect of
balance has a long history in NLP but, interestingly,
is not related to the concept of diversity in any of
these papers.
10
Recommendations for NLP
The state of NLP with respect to diversity quan-
tification appears in our survey as comparable to
the first two stages of evolution in ecology: prolif-
eration of measures and “nonconcept” (Sec. 2.3).
13To select these 100 papers, we looked at papers in our
time range containing at least one of these terms in their bodies
and computed the average number of such occurrences. We
then selected, for each term, 20 papers not yet in our corpus
having more occurrences of this term than on average.
A few efforts, like Tevet and Berant (2021); Lion-
Bouton et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2025); Zhang
et al. (2025); Guo et al. (2025) and ours, take first
steps towards comparability of different measures.
To pursue these efforts, we suggest that new pa-
pers addressing diversity quantification position
themselves on the why, what, where and how per-
spectives, as defined in this survey. This includes
answering the following questions: (i) Is diversity
increase endorsed in your paper and if so, what are
the motivating normative assumptions behind this
stand? (ii) What are the categories and elements on
which diversity is measured? (iii) At which stage
of the processing pipeline do you quantify diver-
sity? (iv) What is your selected diversity measure?
What is its relation to other existing measures, and
to variety, balance and disparity? (v) If balance
is concerned, how to characterize the distribution
of the elements into categories? (vi) If disparity
is concerned, what is the underlying distance mea-
sure and the distance aggregation method? (vii)
What are your reasons for choosing this particular
measure and why is it a diversity measure (and not
a performance measure for instance)? One of these
perspectives may occasionally need extensions. For
instance, recent papers propose LLM-as-a-judge
instead of humans for scale-based diversity evalua-
tion (Cao et al., 2025), which extends the dOther
family.
While these steps towards a shared vocabulary
are being taken, NLP should initiate in-depth de-
bates about desirable properties of diversity mea-
sures. For instance, the status of measures non-
conforming to Stirling’s framework (Tab. 3) should
be questioned: maybe some of them, such as TTR,
average length of an utterance or relative measures
(dRelOverlap, dRelDistrib and dRelDist) should
not be considered measures of diversity but of
related properties (e.g. complexity). We should
also consider the distance measures underlying dis-
parities. Currently some of them, such as BLEU,
are not formal distance metrics (e.g. they are non-
symmetric). Also, some methods of aggregating
distances may have undesirable properties.
In
particular, computational tractability of disparities
should be addressed.
One inspiration for these debates could come
from Hill numbers, valued for their interpretability,
as well as diversity profiles (Sec. 2.3). Ecological
studies on disparities (Schleuter et al., 2010; Mag-
neville et al., 2022) could extend our understanding
of distance aggregation methods, which still remain
unexplored, as seen in Tab. 2. On the other hand,
we should address the particularities of language
data, such as the prevalence of Zipfian distributions
in the in-text diversity scenarios. On top of these ef-
forts, diversity measures and their properties should
be further studied and formalized.
Following Sarkar (2010), we also suggest that
the choice of diversity measures be dictated by
the normative assumptions behind research. This
also calls for community debates. This could be
approached by systematically integrating diversity
as an evaluation dimension, e.g. in shared tasks and
benchmarks.
References
Alham Fikri Aji, Radityo Eko Prasojo Tirana
Noor Fatyanosa, Philip Arthur, Suci Fitriany,
Salma Qonitah, Nadhifa Zulfa, Tomi Santoso,
and Mahendra Data. 2021. ParaCotta: Synthetic
multilingual paraphrase corpora from the most
diverse translation sample pair. In Proceedings
of the 35th Pacific Asia Conference on Language,
Information and Computation, pages 533–542,
Shanghai, China. Association for Computational
Lingustics.
Satoshi Akasaki and Nobuhiro Kaji. 2019. Con-
versation initiation by diverse news contents in-
troduction. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers), pages 3988–3998, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Danial
Alihosseini,
Ehsan
Montahaei,
and
Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah. 2019. Jointly
measuring diversity and quality in text genera-
tion models. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Methods for Optimizing and Evaluating Neural
Language Generation, pages 90–98, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Akari Asai, Shayne Longpre, Jungo Kasai, Chia-
Hsuan Lee, Rui Zhang, Junjie Hu, Ikuya Ya-
mada, Jonathan H. Clark, and Eunsol Choi. 2022.
MIA 2022 shared task: Evaluating cross-lingual
open-retrieval question answering for 16 diverse
languages. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Multilingual Information Access (MIA), pages
108–120, Seattle, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Abhijeet Awasthi, Ashutosh Sathe, and Sunita
Sarawagi. 2022. Diverse parallel data synthe-
sis for cross-database adaptation of text-to-SQL
parsers. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 11548–11562, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hareesh Bahuleyan and Layla El Asri. 2020. Di-
verse keyphrase generation with neural unlikeli-
hood training. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 5271–5287, Barcelona, Spain (On-
line). International Committee on Computational
Linguistics.
Rachel Bawden, Biao Zhang, Lisa Yankovskaya,
Andre Tättar, and Matt Post. 2020. A study in
improving BLEU reference coverage with di-
verse automatic paraphrasing. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020, pages 918–932, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Yves Bestgen. 2024. Measuring lexical diversity
in texts: The twofold length problem. Language
learning, 74(3):638–671.
Mehar Bhatia and Vered Shwartz. 2023.
GD-
COMET: A geo-diverse commonsense inference
model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 7993–8001, Singapore. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Pramit Bhattacharyya, Joydeep Mondal, Subhadip
Maji, and Arnab Bhattacharya. 2023. VACAS-
PATI: A diverse corpus of Bangla literature. In
Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing and
the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1118–1130,
Nusa Dua, Bali. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Laurie Burchell, Alexandra Birch, and Kenneth
Heafield. 2022.
Exploring diversity in back
translation for low-resource machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Deep
Learning for Low-Resource Natural Language
Processing, pages 67–79, Hybrid. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Bill Byrne, Karthik Krishnamoorthi, Chinnadhu-
rai Sankar, Arvind Neelakantan, Ben Goodrich,
Daniel Duckworth, Semih Yavuz, Amit Dubey,
Kyu-Young Kim, and Andy Cedilnik. 2019.
Taskmaster-1: Toward a realistic and diverse
dialog dataset.
In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4516–4525, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yilin Cao, Ruike Zhang, Penghui Wei, Qingchao
Kong, and Wenji Mao. 2025. Perspective-driven
preference optimization with entropy maximiza-
tion for diverse argument generation. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2025, pages 22479–22496,
Suzhou, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yue Cao and Xiaojun Wan. 2020. DivGAN: To-
wards diverse paraphrase generation via diversi-
fied generative adversarial network. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020, pages 2411–2421, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jan Cegin, Jakub Simko, and Peter Brusilovsky.
2023. ChatGPT to replace crowdsourcing of
paraphrases for intent classification: Higher di-
versity and comparable model robustness. In
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1889–1905, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ernie Chang, Alex Marin, and Vera Demberg. 2022.
Programmable annotation with diversed heuris-
tics and data denoising. In Proceedings of the
29th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 2681–2691, Gyeongju, Re-
public of Korea. International Committee on
Computational Linguistics.
Anne Chao, Chun-Huo Chiu, and Lou Jost. 2014.
Unifying species diversity, phylogenetic diver-
sity, functional diversity, and related similarity
and differentiation measures through Hill num-
bers. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics, 45:297–324. Publisher: Annual
Reviews.
Wei-Lin Chen, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Hsin-Hsi Chen,
and Chung-Chi Chen. 2023a. Fidelity-enriched
contrastive search: Reconciling the faithfulness-
diversity trade-off in text generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
843–851, Singapore. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yulong Chen, Yang Liu, Ruochen Xu, Ziyi Yang,
Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Yue Zhang.
2023b.
UniSumm and SummZoo: Unified
model and diverse benchmark for few-shot sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
12833–12855, Toronto, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Claudiu Creanga and Liviu P. Dinu. 2024. Design-
ing NLP systems that adapt to diverse world-
views. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Perspectivist Approaches to NLP (NLPerspec-
tives) @ LREC-COLING 2024, pages 95–99,
Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Shizhe Diao, Xinwei Shen, Kashun Shum, Yan
Song, and Tong Zhang. 2021.
TILGAN:
Transformer-based implicit latent GAN for di-
verse and coherent text generation. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 4844–4858, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Thomas Dopierre, Christophe Gravier, and Wil-
fried Logerais. 2021. PROTAUGMENT: Un-
supervised diverse short-texts paraphrasing for
intent detection meta-learning. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
2454–2466, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Jonathan Dunn, Tom Coupe, and Benjamin Adams.
2020.
Measuring linguistic diversity during
COVID-19. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Social Science, pages 1–10, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Venkatesh E, Kaushal Maurya, Deepak Kumar, and
Maunendra Sankar Desarkar. 2023. DivHSK:
Diverse headline generation using self-attention
based keyword selection. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2023, pages 1879–1891, Toronto, Canada. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Sugyeong Eo, Hyeonseok Moon, Jinsung Kim,
Yuna Hur, Jeongwook Kim, SongEun Lee,
Changwoo Chun, Sungsoo Park, and Heuiseok
Lim. 2023.
Towards diverse and effective
question-answer pair generation from children
storybooks. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages
6100–6115, Toronto, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Aline Etienne, Delphine Battistelli, and Gwénolé
Lecorvé. 2022. A (psycho-)linguistically moti-
vated scheme for annotating and exploring emo-
tions in a genre-diverse corpus. In Proceedings
of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, pages 603–612, Marseille,
France. European Language Resources Associa-
tion.
Yingxue Fu and Mark-Jan Nederhof. 2021. Au-
tomatic classification of human translation and
machine translation: A study from the perspec-
tive of lexical diversity. In Proceedings for the
First Workshop on Modelling Translation: Trans-
latology in the Digital Age, pages 91–99, online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiang Gao, Sungjin Lee, Yizhe Zhang, Chris
Brockett, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill
Dolan. 2019. Jointly optimizing diversity and
relevance in neural response generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 1229–1238, Minneapolis, Minnesota. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Omer Goldman, Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, Salam
Khalifa,
Aryaman Arora,
Garrett Nicolai,
Reut Tsarfaty, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2023.
SIGMORPHON–UniMorph 2023 shared task 0:
Typologically diverse morphological inflection.
In Proceedings of the 20th SIGMORPHON work-
shop on Computational Research in Phonetics,
Phonology, and Morphology, pages 117–125,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Claudio Greco, Alberto Testoni, Raffaella Bernardi,
and Stella Frank. 2022. A small but informed
and diverse model:
The case of the multi-
modal GuessWhat!? guessing game. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 CLASP Conference on
(Dis)embodiment, pages 1–10, Gothenburg, Swe-
den. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shester Gueuwou, Sophie Siake, Colin Leong, and
Mathias Müller. 2023. JWSign: A highly multi-
lingual corpus of Bible translations for more di-
versity in sign language processing. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2023, pages 9907–9927, Singapore. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Yanzhu Guo, Guokan Shang, and Chloé Clavel.
2025. Benchmarking linguistic diversity of large
language models. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 13:1507–
1526.
Yanzhu Guo, Guokan Shang, Michalis Vazirgian-
nis, and Chloé Clavel. 2024. The curious decline
of linguistic diversity: Training language models
on synthetic text. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024,
pages 3589–3604, Mexico City, Mexico. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Amir Hadifar, Semere Kiros Bitew, Johannes
Deleu, Veronique Hoste, Chris Develder, and
Thomas Demeester. 2023. Diverse content selec-
tion for educational question generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pages
123–133, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jiuzhou Han, Daniel Beck, and Trevor Cohn. 2021.
Generating diverse descriptions from semantic
graphs. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Natural Language Generation,
pages 1–11, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Seungju Han, Beomsu Kim, and Buru Chang. 2022.
Measuring and improving semantic diversity of
dialogue generation. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2022, pages 934–950, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Mark Oliver Hill. 1973. Diversity and evenness: A
unifying notation and its consequences. Ecology,
54(2):427–432. Number: 2 Publisher: Ecologi-
cal Society of America.
Sönke Hoffmann and Andreas Hoffmann. 2008. Is
there a “true” diversity? Ecological Economics,
65(2):213–215.
Xudong Hong, Rakshith Shetty, Asad Sayeed,
Khushboo Mehra, Vera Demberg, and Bernt
Schiele. 2020. Diverse and relevant visual sto-
rytelling with scene graph embeddings. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 420–
430, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
J. Edward Hu, Abhinav Singh, Nils Holzenberger,
Matt Post, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2019.
Large-scale, diverse, paraphrastic bitexts via
sampling and clustering. In Proceedings of the
23rd Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL), pages 44–54, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jinyi Hu, Xiaoyuan Yi, Wenhao Li, Maosong Sun,
and Xing Xie. 2022.
Recurrence boosts di-
versity! Revisiting recurrent latent variable in
transformer-based variational AutoEncoder for
diverse text generation. In Findings of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2022, pages 6306–6320, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Nannan Huang, Lin Tian, Haytham Fayek, and
Xiuzhen Zhang. 2023. Examining bias in opin-
ion summarisation through the perspective of
opinion diversity. In Proceedings of the 13th
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Sub-
jectivity, Sentiment, & Social Media Analysis,
pages 149–161, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Po-Yao Huang, Xiaojun Chang, and Alexander
Hauptmann. 2019. Multi-head attention with
diversity for learning grounded multilingual
multimodal representations.
In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
1461–1467, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Stuart H. Hurlbert. 1971.
The nonconcept of
species diversity: A critique and alternative pa-
rameters. Ecology, 52(4):577–586. Number:
4.
EunJeong Hwang, Veronika Thost, Vered Shwartz,
and Tengfei Ma. 2023. Knowledge graph com-
pression enhances diverse commonsense gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 558–572, Singapore. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Daphne Ippolito, Reno Kriz, João Sedoc, Maria
Kustikova, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2019.
Comparison of diverse decoding methods from
conditional language models. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 3752–3762,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Monisha Jegadeesan, Sachin Kumar, John Wiet-
ing, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2021. Improving the
diversity of unsupervised paraphrasing with em-
bedding outputs. In Proceedings of the 1st Work-
shop on Multilingual Representation Learning,
pages 166–175, Punta Cana, Dominican Repub-
lic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pratik Joshi, Sebastin Santy, Amar Budhiraja, Ka-
lika Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. 2020. The
state and fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion
in the NLP world. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 6282–6293, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lou Jost. 2006.
Entropy and diversity.
Oikos,
113(2):363–375.
Lou Jost. 2009. Mismeasuring biological diversity:
Response to Hoffmann and Hoffmann (2008).
Ecological Economics, 68(4):925–928.
Amr Keleg and Walid Magdy. 2023. DLAMA: A
framework for curating culturally diverse facts
for probing the knowledge of pretrained lan-
guage models. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages
6245–6266, Toronto, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Simran Khanuja, Sebastian Ruder, and Partha
Talukdar. 2023. Evaluating the diversity, equity,
and inclusion of NLP technology: A case study
for Indian languages. In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023,
pages 1763–1777, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Donghyun Kim, Youbin Ahn, Wongyu Kim,
Chanhee Lee, Kyungchan Lee, Kyong-Ho Lee,
Jeonguk Kim, Donghoon Shin, and Yeonsoo Lee.
2023a. Persona expansion with commonsense
knowledge for diverse and consistent response
generation. In Proceedings of the 17th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 1139–
1149, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Donghyun Kim, Youbin Ahn, Chanhee Lee,
Wongyu Kim, Kyong-Ho Lee, Donghoon Shin,
and Yeonsoo Lee. 2023b.
Concept-based
persona expansion for improving diversity of
persona-grounded dialogue. In Proceedings of
the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 3471–3481, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Jiwoo Kim,
Youngbin Kim,
Ilwoong Baek,
JinYeong Bak, and Jongwuk Lee. 2023c. It ain’t
over: A multi-aspect diverse math word problem
dataset. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 14984–15011, Singapore. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Yejin Kim, Scott Rome, Kevin Foley, Mayur
Nankani, Rimon Melamed, Javier Morales, Ab-
hay K. Yadav, Maria Peifer, Sardar Hamid-
ian, and H. Howie Huang. 2024. Improving
content recommendation: Knowledge graph-
based semantic contrastive learning for diver-
sity and cold-start users. In Proceedings of the
2024 Joint International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 8743–
8755, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Sosuke Kobayashi, Shun Kiyono, Jun Suzuki, and
Kentaro Inui. 2022. Diverse lottery tickets boost
ensemble from a single pretrained model. In Pro-
ceedings of BigScience Episode #5 – Workshop
on Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large
Language Models, pages 42–50, virtual+Dublin.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jordan Kodner, Salam Khalifa, Khuyagbaatar
Batsuren, Hossep Dolatian, Ryan Cotterell,
Faruk Akkus, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Taras
Andrushko, Aryaman Arora, Nona Atanalov,
Gábor
Bella,
Elena
Budianskaya,
Yusti-
nus Ghanggo Ate, Omer Goldman, David
Guriel, Simon Guriel, Silvia Guriel-Agiashvili,
Witold Kiera´s, Andrew Krizhanovsky, Na-
talia Krizhanovsky, Igor Marchenko, Mag-
dalena Markowska, Polina Mashkovtseva, Maria
Nepomniashchaya, Daria Rodionova, Karina
Scheifer, Alexandra Sorova, Anastasia Yemelina,
Jeremiah Young, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2022.
SIGMORPHON–UniMorph 2022 shared task 0:
Generalization and typologically diverse mor-
phological inflection. In Proceedings of the 19th
SIGMORPHON Workshop on Computational Re-
search in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphol-
ogy, pages 176–203, Seattle, Washington. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Dijana Kosmajac and Vlado Keselj. 2019. Twit-
ter bot detection using diversity measures. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Natural Language and Speech Processing,
pages 1–8, Trento, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Aman Kumar, Himani Shrotriya, Prachi Sahu,
Amogh Mishra, Raj Dabre, Ratish Puduppully,
Anoop Kunchukuttan, Mitesh M. Khapra, and
Pratyush Kumar. 2022a. IndicNLG benchmark:
Multilingual datasets for diverse NLG tasks in
Indic languages. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 5363–5394, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ashutosh Kumar, Satwik Bhattamishra, Manik
Bhandari, and Partha Talukdar. 2019. Submodu-
lar optimization-based diverse paraphrasing and
its effectiveness in data augmentation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 3609–3619, Minneapolis, Minnesota. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Shanu Kumar, Sandipan Dandapat, and Monojit
Choudhury. 2022b. “Diversity and uncertainty
in moderation” are the key to data selection for
multilingual few-shot transfer. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2022, pages 1042–1055, Seattle, United
States. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Heeyoung Kwon, Nathanael Chambers, and Niran-
jan Balasubramanian. 2021. Toward diverse pre-
condition generation. In Proceedings of *SEM
2021: The Tenth Joint Conference on Lexical
and Computational Semantics, pages 160–172,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Preethi Lahoti,
Nicholas Blumm,
Xiao Ma,
Raghavendra Kotikalapudi, Sahitya Potluri, Qi-
jun Tan, Hansa Srinivasan, Ben Packer, Ahmad
Beirami, Alex Beutel, and Jilin Chen. 2023. Im-
proving diversity of demographic representation
in large language models via collective-critiques
and self-voting. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 10383–10405, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Viet Dac Lai, Tuan Ngo Nguyen, and Thien Huu
Nguyen. 2020a. Event detection: Gate diver-
sity and syntactic importance scores for graph
convolution neural networks. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
5405–5411, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yi-An Lai, Xuan Zhu, Yi Zhang, and Mona Diab.
2020b.
Diversity, density, and homogeneity:
Quantitative characteristic metrics for text collec-
tions. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
1739–1746, Marseille, France. European Lan-
guage Resources Association.
Stefan
Larson,
Anish
Mahendran,
Andrew
Lee, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Parker Hill,
Michael A. Laurenzano, Johann Hauswald,
Lingjia Tang, and Jason Mars. 2019. Outlier
detection for improved data quality and diversity
in dialog systems. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers), pages 517–527, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Dong Bok Lee, Seanie Lee, Woo Tae Jeong, Dongh-
wan Kim, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2020. Generat-
ing diverse and consistent QA pairs from con-
texts with information-maximizing hierarchical
conditional VAEs. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 208–224, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Jing Yang Lee, Kong Aik Lee, and Woon Seng
Gan. 2022. A randomized link transformer for
diverse open-domain dialogue generation. In
Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on NLP for
Conversational AI, pages 1–11, Dublin, Ireland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jing Yang Lee, Kong Aik Lee, and Woon-Seng
Gan. 2023. Partially randomizing transformer
weights for dialogue response diversity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Pacific Asia Conference on
Language, Information and Computation, pages
486–498, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tom Leinster and Christina A. Cobbold. 2012.
Measuring diversity: the importance of species
similarity. Ecology, 93(3):477–489.
Loet Leydesdorff, Caroline S. Wagner, and Lutz
Bornmann. 2019. Interdisciplinarity as diversity
in citation patterns among journals: Rao-Stirling
diversity, relative variety, and the Gini coeffi-
cient. Journal of Informetrics, 13(1):255–269.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jian-
feng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2016. A diversity-
promoting objective function for neural conver-
sation models. In Proceedings of the 2016 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 110–119,
San Diego, California. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Gaole He, Jinhao Jiang, Xi-
aoxuan Hu, Puzhao Xie, Zhipeng Chen, Zhuo-
hao Yu, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen.
2021. TextBox: A unified, modularized, and ex-
tensible framework for text generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 30–39, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Raymond Li, Felipe Gonzalez-Pizarro, Linzi Xing,
Gabriel Murray, and Giuseppe Carenini. 2023.
Diversity-aware coherence loss for improving
neural topic models. In Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 1710–1722, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Wenhao Li, Xiaoyuan Yi, Jinyi Hu, Maosong Sun,
and Xing Xie. 2022. Evade the trap of medi-
ocrity: Promoting diversity and novelty in text
generation via concentrating attention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
10834–10858, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emi-
rates. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Adam Lion-Bouton, Yagmur Ozturk, Agata Savary,
and Jean-Yves Antoine. 2022. Evaluating di-
versity of multiword expressions in annotated
text. In Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
3285–3295, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguis-
tics.
Chen Liu, Fajri Koto, Timothy Baldwin, and
Iryna Gurevych. 2024a. Are multilingual LLMs
culturally-diverse reasoners? An investigation
into multicultural proverbs and sayings. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2016–
2039, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Dayiheng Liu, Yeyun Gong, Yu Yan, Jie Fu,
Bo Shao, Daxin Jiang, Jiancheng Lv, and
Nan Duan. 2020.
Diverse, controllable, and
keyphrase-aware: A corpus and method for news
multi-headline generation. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
6241–6250, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Guisheng Liu, Yi Li, Zhengcong Fei, Haiyan
Fu, Xiangyang Luo, and Yanqing Guo. 2024b.
Prefix-diffusion: A lightweight diffusion model
for diverse image captioning. In Proceedings
of the 2024 Joint International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages
12954–12965, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Mingyue Liu, Jonathan Frawley, Sarah Wyer, Hu-
bert P. H. Shum, Sara Uckelman, Sue Black, and
Chris Willcocks. 2024c. Self-regulated sample
diversity in large language models. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2024, pages 1891–1899, Mexico City,
Mexico. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yang Janet Liu and Amir Zeldes. 2023. Why can’t
discourse parsing generalize? A thorough inves-
tigation of the impact of data diversity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 3112–3130, Dubrovnik, Croa-
tia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yongkang Liu, Shi Feng, Daling Wang, Yifei
Zhang, and Hinrich Schütze. 2023. PVGRU:
Generating diverse and relevant dialogue re-
sponses via pseudo-variational mechanism. In
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3295–3310,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Shayne Longpre, Yi Lu, and Joachim Daiber. 2021.
MKQA: A linguistically diverse benchmark for
multilingual open domain question answering.
Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 9:1389–1406.
Yueen Ma,
DaFeng Chi,
Jingjing Li,
Kai
Song, Yuzheng Zhuang, and Irwin King. 2024.
VOLTA: Improving generative diversity by vari-
ational mutual information maximizing autoen-
coder. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pages 364–
378, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Camille Magneville, Nicolas Loiseau, Camille Al-
bouy, Nicolas Casajus, Thomas Claverie, Arthur
Escalas, Fabien Leprieur, Eva Maire, David
Mouillot, and Sébastien Villéger. 2022. mFD:
an R package to compute and illustrate the mul-
tiple facets of functional diversity. Ecography,
2022(1):ecog.05904.
Anne Elizabeth Magurran. 2004. Measuring bio-
logical diversity. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing
Company , 2004, Oxford.
Shen-yun Miao, Chao-Chun Liang, and Keh-Yih
Su. 2020. A diverse corpus for evaluating and
developing English math word problem solvers.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 975–984, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Youssef Mohamed, Mohamed Abdelfattah, Shyma
Alhuwaider, Feifan Li, Xiangliang Zhang, Ken-
neth Church, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2022.
ArtELingo: A million emotion annotations of
WikiArt with emphasis on diversity over lan-
guage and culture. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 8770–8785, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Maud Aline Mouchet, Sébastien Villéger, Nor-
man William Herbert Mason, and David Mouil-
lot. 2010. Functional diversity measures: an
overview of their redundancy and their ability to
discriminate community assembly rules. Func-
tional Ecology, 24(4):867–876.
Vishvak Murahari, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Dhruv
Batra, Devi Parikh, and Abhishek Das. 2019. Im-
proving generative visual dialog by answering
diverse questions. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1449–1454, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Shashi Narayan, Gonçalo Simões, Yao Zhao,
Joshua Maynez, Dipanjan Das, Michael Collins,
and Mirella Lapata. 2022. A well-composed text
is half done! Composition sampling for diverse
conditional generation. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1319–1339, Dublin, Ireland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yuto Nishida, Makoto Morishita, Hidetaka Kami-
gaito, and Taro Watanabe. 2024. Generating
diverse translation with perturbed kNN-MT. In
Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Student Research Workshop,
pages 9–31, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Enrico Palumbo, Andrea Mezzalira, Cristina
Marco, Alessandro Manzotti, and Daniele Am-
berti. 2020. Semantic diversity for natural lan-
guage understanding evaluation in dialog sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: In-
dustry Track, pages 44–49, Online. International
Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Nikolaos Panagiaris, Emma Hart, and Dimitra
Gkatzia. 2020. Improving the naturalness and
diversity of referring expression generation mod-
els using minimum risk training. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Natural
Language Generation, pages 41–51, Dublin, Ire-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages
311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jun-Hyung Park, Hyuntae Park, Youjin Kang, Eo-
jin Jeon, and SangKeun Lee. 2023. DIVE: To-
wards descriptive and diverse visual common-
sense generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 9677–9695, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alicia Parrish, Susan Hao, Sarah Laszlo, and Lora
Aroyo. 2024. Is a picture of a bird a bird? A
mixed-methods approach to understanding di-
verse human perspectives and ambiguity in ma-
chine vision models.
In Proceedings of the
3rd Workshop on Perspectivist Approaches to
NLP (NLPerspectives) @ LREC-COLING 2024,
pages 1–18, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Ganapati Patil and Charles Taillie. 1982. Diversity
as a concept and its measurement. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 77(379):548–
561. Number: 379 Publisher: [American Statis-
tical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd.].
Esther
Ploeger,
Wessel
Poelman,
Miryam
de Lhoneux, and Johannes Bjerva. 2024. What
is “typological diversity” in NLP?
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
5681–5700, Miami, Florida, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Wessel
Poelman,
Esther
Ploeger,
Miryam
de Lhoneux, and Johannes Bjerva. 2024.
A
call for consistency in reporting typological
diversity. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Research in Computational Linguistic Ty-
pology and Multilingual NLP, pages 75–77, St.
Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Edoardo Maria Ponti, Helen O’Horan, Yevgeni
Berzak, Ivan Vuli´c, Roi Reichart, Thierry
Poibeau, Ekaterina Shutova, and Anna Korho-
nen. 2019. Modeling language variation and
universals: A survey on typological linguistics
for natural language processing. Computational
Linguistics, 45(3):559–601.
Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Minh Van Nguyen,
Franck Dernoncourt, and Thien Nguyen. 2022.
MINION: a large-scale and diverse dataset for
multilingual event detection. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 2286–2299, Seattle, United States.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sameer Pradhan, Julia Bonn, Skatje Myers,
Kathryn Conger, Tim O’gorman, James Gung,
Kristin Wright-bettner, and Martha Palmer. 2022.
PropBank comes of age – larger, smarter, and
more diverse. In Proceedings of the 11th Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Se-
mantics, pages 278–288, Seattle, Washington.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vinayak Puranik, Anirban Majumder, and Vineet
Chaoji. 2023. PROTEGE: Prompt-based diverse
question generation from web articles. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5449–5463, Sin-
gapore. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yao Qiu, Jinchao Zhang, and Jie Zhou. 2021. Dif-
ferent strokes for different folks: Investigating
appropriate further pre-training approaches for
diverse dialogue tasks. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 2318–2327,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shaina Raza, Syed Raza Bashir, and Usman
Naseem. 2022. Accuracy meets diversity in a
news recommender system. In Proceedings of
the 29th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 3778–3787, Gyeongju,
Republic of Korea. International Committee on
Computational Linguistics.
Carlo Ricotta. 2005. Through the jungle of biolog-
ical diversity. Acta Biotheoretica, 53:29–38.
Carlo Ricotta and Laszlo Szeidl. 2006. Towards a
unifying approach to diversity measures: Bridg-
ing the gap between the Shannon entropy and
Rao’s quadratic index. Theoretical Population
Biology, 70(3):237–243. Number: 3.
Ronald Rousseau. 2018.
The repeat rate:
from Hirschman to Stirling.
Scientometrics,
116(1):645–653. Number: 1.
Alfréd Rényi. 1961. On measures of entropy and
information. In Proceedings of the Fourth Berke-
ley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
Probability, Volume 1: Contributions to the The-
ory of Statistics, volume 4.1, pages 547–562.
University of California Press.
Tanja Samardzic, Ximena Gutierrez, Christian
Bentz, Steven Moran, and Olga Pelloni. 2024. A
measure for transparent comparison of linguis-
tic diversity in multilingual NLP data sets. In
Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: NAACL 2024, pages 3367–3382,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sahotra Sarkar. 2002. Defining “biodiversity”; As-
sessing biodiversity. The Monist, 85(1):131–155.
Publisher: Oxford University Press.
Sahotra Sarkar. 2010. Diversity: A philosophical
perspective. Diversity, 2(1):127–141.
Gabriele Sarti, Arianna Bisazza, Ana Guerberof-
Arenas, and Antonio Toral. 2022. DivEMT: Neu-
ral machine translation post-editing effort across
typologically diverse languages. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 7795–7816,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Samuel M. Scheiner. 2012. A metric of biodiver-
sity that integrates abundance, phylogeny, and
function. Oikos, 121(8):1191–1202.
Diana Schleuter, Martin Daufresne, François Mas-
sol, and Christine Argillier. 2010. A user’s guide
to functional diversity indices. Ecological Mono-
graphs, 80(3):469–484. Number: 3.
Simeon Schüz, Ting Han, and Sina Zarrieß. 2021.
Diversity as a by-product: Goal-oriented lan-
guage generation leads to linguistic variation. In
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the
Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dia-
logue, pages 411–422, Singapore and Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Claude Elwood Shannon. 1948. A mathematical
theory of communication. The Bell System Tech-
nical Journal, 27(4):623–656.
Chenze Shao, Xuanfu Wu, and Yang Feng. 2022.
One reference is not enough: Diverse distillation
with reference selection for non-autoregressive
translation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 3779–3791,
Seattle, United States. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yibin Shen, Qianying Liu, Zhuoyuan Mao, Zhen
Wan, Fei Cheng, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2022.
Seeking diverse reasoning logic: Controlled
equation expression generation for solving math
word problems. In Proceedings of the 2nd Con-
ference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the
12th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 254–260, Online only. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tianze Shi, Adrian Benton, Igor Malioutov, and
Ozan ˙Irsoy. 2021. Diversity-aware batch active
learning for dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 2616–2626, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Raphael Shu, Hideki Nakayama, and Kyunghyun
Cho. 2019. Generating diverse translations with
sentence codes. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 1823–1827, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Benjamin Smith and John Bastow Wilson. 1996.
A consumer’s guide to evenness indices. Oikos,
76(1):70–82. Number: 1 Publisher: [Nordic
Society Oikos, Wiley].
Bingyan Song, Chunguang Pan, Shengguang
Wang, and Zhipeng Luo. 2021. DeepBlueAI
at SemEval-2021 task 7: Detecting and rating
humor and offense with stacking diverse lan-
guage model-based methods. In Proceedings
of the 15th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval-2021), pages 1130–1134,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Hao Lang, Haiyang Yu,
Fei Huang, Houfeng Wang, and Yongbin Li.
2024. Scaling data diversity for fine-tuning lan-
guage models in human alignment. In Proceed-
ings of the 2024 Joint International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024),
pages 14358–14369, Torino, Italia. ELRA and
ICCL.
Katherine Stasaski and Marti Hearst. 2022. Seman-
tic diversity in dialogue with natural language
inference. In Proceedings of the 2022 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 85–98, Seattle,
United States. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Katherine Stasaski, Grace Hui Yang, and Marti A.
Hearst. 2020. More diverse dialogue datasets
via diversity-informed data collection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages
4958–4968, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Andrew Stirling. 1994. Power technology choice:
putting the money where the mouth is?
PhD,
University of Sussex, Sussex.
Andy Stirling. 2007.
A general framework for
analysing diversity in science, technology and
society. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
4(15):707–719. Number: 15 Publisher: Royal
Society.
Md Arafat Sultan, Shubham Chandel, Ramón Fer-
nandez Astudillo, and Vittorio Castelli. 2020.
On the importance of diversity in question gener-
ation for QA. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 5651–5656, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Guy Tevet and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Evaluating
the evaluation of diversity in natural language
generation. In Proceedings of the 16th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume,
pages 326–346, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Brian Thompson and Matt Post. 2020. Paraphrase
generation as zero-shot multilingual translation:
Disentangling semantic similarity from lexical
and syntactic diversity. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Conference on Machine Translation, pages
561–570, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Rocco Tripodi, Simone Conia, and Roberto Navigli.
2021. UniteD-SRL: A unified dataset for span-
and dependency-based multilingual and cross-
lingual semantic role labeling. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2021, pages 2293–2305, Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Lifu Tu, Xiaoan Ding, Dong Yu, and Kevin Gimpel.
2019. Generating diverse story continuations
with controllable semantics. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Neural Generation and
Translation, pages 44–58, Hong Kong. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ekaterina Vylomova,
Jennifer White,
Eliza-
beth Salesky, Sabrina J. Mielke, Shijie Wu,
Edoardo Maria Ponti, Rowan Hall Maudslay,
Ran Zmigrod, Josef Valvoda, Svetlana Toldova,
Francis Tyers, Elena Klyachko, Ilya Yegorov,
Natalia Krizhanovsky, Paula Czarnowska, Irene
Nikkarinen, Andrew Krizhanovsky, Tiago Pi-
mentel, Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Christo Kirov,
Garrett Nicolai, Adina Williams, Antonios Anas-
tasopoulos, Hilaria Cruz, Eleanor Chodroff,
Ryan Cotterell, Miikka Silfverberg, and Mans
Hulden. 2020.
SIGMORPHON 2020 shared
task 0: Typologically diverse morphological in-
flection. In Proceedings of the 17th SIGMOR-
PHON Workshop on Computational Research in
Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology, pages 1–
39, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tharindu Cyril Weerasooriya, Alexander Ororbia,
Raj Bhensadadia, Ashiqur KhudaBukhsh, and
Christopher Homan. 2023. Disagreement mat-
ters: Preserving label diversity by jointly mod-
eling item and annotator label distributions with
DisCo. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 4679–
4695, Toronto, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Nathaniel Weir,
João Sedoc,
and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2020. COD3S: Diverse generation
with discrete semantic signatures. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 5199–5211, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Norbert Wiener. 1939. The ergodic theorem. Duke
Mathematical Journal, 5(1):1–18.
Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Tao Qi, and Yongfeng
Huang. 2020a. SentiRec: Sentiment diversity-
aware neural news recommendation. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 10th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, pages
44–53, Suzhou, China. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Minghao Wu, Abdul Waheed, Chiyu Zhang,
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, and Alham Fikri
Aji. 2024. LaMini-LM: A diverse herd of dis-
tilled models from large-scale instructions. In
Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Eu-
ropean Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 944–964, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Xuanfu Wu, Yang Feng, and Chenze Shao. 2020b.
Generating diverse translation from model distri-
bution with dropout. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1088–
1097, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yu Xia, Xu Liu, Tong Yu, Sungchul Kim, Ryan
Rossi, Anup Rao, Tung Mai, and Shuai Li. 2024.
Hallucination diversity-aware active learning for
text summarization. In Proceedings of the 2024
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 8665–8677, Mexico City, Mexico.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vikas Yadav, Hyuk joon Kwon, Vijay Srinivasan,
and Hongxia Jin. 2024. Explicit over implict:
Explicit diversity conditions for effective ques-
tion answer generation. In Proceedings of the
2024 Joint International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 6876–
6882, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Cai Yang and Stephen Wan. 2022. Investigating
metric diversity for evaluating long document
summarisation.
In Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing,
pages 115–125, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuming Yang, Yang Nan, Junjie Ye, Shihan Dou,
Xiao Wang, Shuo Li, Huijie Lv, Tao Gui,
Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2025. Mea-
suring data diversity for instruction tuning: A
systematic analysis and a reliable metric. In Pro-
ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 18530–18549, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yuting Yang, Pei Huang, Feifei Ma, Juan Cao, and
Jintao Li. 2024. PAD: A robustness enhance-
ment ensemble method via promoting attention
diversity. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint In-
ternational Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-COLING 2024), pages 12574–12584,
Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL.
Taro Yano, Kunihiro Takeoka, and Masafumi Oya-
mada. 2024. Relevance, diversity, and exclusiv-
ity: Designing keyword-augmentation strategy
for zero-shot classifiers. In Proceedings of the
13th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics (*SEM 2024), pages 106–119,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Jiacheng Ye, Tao Gui, Yichao Luo, Yige Xu, and
Qi Zhang. 2021. One2Set: Generating diverse
keyphrases as a set. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 4598–4608,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Da Yin, Liunian Harold Li, Ziniu Hu, Nanyun Peng,
and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Broaden the vision:
Geo-diverse visual commonsense reasoning. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 2115–2129, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Hokeun Yoon and JinYeong Bak. 2023. Diversity
enhanced narrative question generation for sto-
rybooks. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 465–482, Singapore. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yu Yu, Shahram Khadivi, and Jia Xu. 2022. Can
data diversity enhance learning generalization?
In Proceedings of the 29th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pages 4933–
4945, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea. Interna-
tional Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Huajian Zhang, Yumo Xu, and Laura Perez-
Beltrachini. 2024a.
Fine-grained natural lan-
guage inference based faithfulness evaluation
for diverse summarisation tasks. In Proceedings
of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1701–1722, St.
Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hugh Zhang, Daniel Duckworth, Daphne Ippolito,
and Arvind Neelakantan. 2021. Trading off di-
versity and quality in natural language genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Human
Evaluation of NLP Systems (HumEval), pages
25–33, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Tianhui Zhang, Bei Peng, and Danushka Bollegala.
2025. Evaluating the evaluation of diversity in
commonsense generation. In Proceedings of the
63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 24258–24275, Vienna, Austria. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore:
Evaluating text generation with BERT. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Xinran Zhang, Maosong Sun, Jiafeng Liu, and
Xiaobing Li. 2023. Lingxi: A diversity-aware
Chinese modern poetry generation system. In
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 3: System Demonstrations), pages 63–75,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yusen Zhang, Nan Zhang, Yixin Liu, Alexander
Fabbri, Junru Liu, Ryo Kamoi, Xiaoxin Lu,
Caiming Xiong, Jieyu Zhao, Dragomir Radev,
Kathleen McKeown, and Rui Zhang. 2024b.
Fair abstractive summarization of diverse per-
spectives. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 3404–3426, Mexico City, Mexico.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Qifei Li, and Chenle Li. 2021.
Learning from perturbations: Diverse and in-
formative dialogue generation with inverse ad-
versarial training. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 694–703,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo,
Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2018.
Texygen: A benchmarking platform for text gen-
eration models. In The 41st International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research & Development
in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2018, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, July 08-12, 2018, pages 1097–1100.
ACM.
Anastasia Zhukova, Felix Hamborg, and Bela Gipp.
2022. Towards evaluation of cross-document
coreference resolution models using datasets
with diverse annotation schemes. In Proceed-
ings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, pages 4884–4893, Mar-
seille, France. European Language Resources
Association.
