Title: A Natural Language Processing Framework for Hotel Recommendation Based on Users' Text Reviews
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00716v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Natural Language Processing Framework for Hotel Recommendation based on 
user’s text reviews. 
 
Lavrentia Aravani, Emmanuel Pintelas, Christos Pierrakeas, Panagiotis Pintelas  
 
L. ARAVANI  
Management Science and Technology Department, University of Patras, Patras, Greece 
E. PINTELAS 
Department of Mathematics, University of Patras, Patras, Greece 
C. PIERRAKEAS 
Management Science and Technology Department, University of Patras, Patras, Greece 
P. PINTELAS 
Department of Mathematics, University of Patras, Patras, Greece 
 
 
 
Abstract  
Recently, the application of Artificial Intelligence algorithms in hotel recommendation systems 
has become an increasingly popular topic. One such method that has proven to be effective in this field 
is Deep Learning, especially Natural Language processing models, which are able to extract semantic 
knowledge from user's text reviews to create more efficient recommendation systems. This can lead 
to the development of intelligent models that can classify a user's preferences and emotions based on 
their feedback in the form of text reviews about their hotel stay experience. In this study, we propose a 
Natural Language Processing framework that utilizes customer text reviews to provide personalized 
recommendations for the most appropriate hotel based on their preferences. The framework is based 
on Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) and a fine-tuning/validation 
pipeline that categorizes customer hotel review texts into "Bad," "Good," or "Excellent" recommended 
hotels. Our findings indicate that the hotel recommendation system we propose can significantly 
enhance the 
user 
experience of 
booking accommodations by 
providing 
personalized 
recommendations based on user preferences and previous booking history. 
 
Keywords: Hotel recommendation, Decision system, Machine learning, Deep Learning, Natural 
language Processing, Artificial intelligence 
 
1. Introduction 
The growing significance of online reviews in shaping consumer choices within the dynamic 
hospitality industry cannot be overstated. As the digital age progresses, online platforms, particularly 
travel review sites, have emerged as crucial information hubs for individuals seeking lodging. The 
widespread use of social media has accelerated the dissemination of information by allowing 
individuals to easily share their opinions, experiences, and criticisms. 
This study proposes a Natural Language Processing (NLP) framework designed to revolutionize 
the field of hotel recommendations. With an increasing number of travelers turning to online reviews 
for guidance in their decision-making, current platforms often fail to effectively filter and rank pertinent 
information. Prominent travel review websites, such as Booking.com, TripAdvisor.com, and 
Agoda.com, typically arrange reviews based on the date they were posted or the number of votes they 
have received. While this approach appears to provide some order, it unintentionally disregards more 
recent reviews, thereby diminishing their influence on users' decision-making. 
To address this limitation, our research capitalizes on the wealth of data present in user-generated 
text reviews to propose a unified recommendation framework based on natural language processing 
techniques. Our objective is to overcome the constraints of existing review ranking systems through the 
use of artificial intelligence and machine learning. This paper presents a comprehensive method for 
extracting valuable insights from textual reviews, thereby enhancing the accuracy and applicability of 
hotel recommendations. 
We analyze the state-of-the-art in text classification models in this context and draw inspiration 
from various recommender system approaches. The proposed framework integrates artificial 
intelligence (AI), machine learning classification, and sentiment analysis methods to create a reliable 
Decision Support System (DSS). This DSS, powered by natural language processing (NLP) algorithms, 
aims to comprehend and classify the sentiment and preferences conveyed in user reviews, ultimately 
assisting travelers in making well-informed decisions that align with their individual preferences. 
The main contributions of our research work are summarized as follows: 
• 
We propose a unified recommendation framework based on hotel text reviews which 
manages to achieve superior performance. 
• 
 We propose a training/validation pipeline which significantly boost the representational 
capabilities of BERT backbone in the hotel recommendation context. 
• 
Finally, our hotel recommendation framework can potentially offer a number of benefits, 
including informed decision-making, personalization, customer 
empowerment, 
increased information accessibility, quality assurance, greater customer satisfaction, 
trust, and a feedback loop between customers and hotels. 
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the state-of-the-art works 
relative to Text Classification models. Section 3 presents  a detailed discussion about the proposed 
framework while Section 4 presents our Experimental Results. Finally, Section 5 sketches our 
conclusive remarks and possible future work. 
 
2. Related Work 
Scholars have been interested in studies on hotel recommendation systems. Two classes can be 
distinguished from the studies: The hotel recommendation systems that use numerical rating data are 
included in the first class. The hotel recommendation systems that use text review data are included in 
the second class [9-15]. 
2.1 TfidfVectorizer 
TfidfVectorizer is a text vectorization technique that is commonly used in natural language 
processing (NLP) to transform text documents into numerical feature vectors that can be used as input 
to machine learning models. 
The TfidfVectorizer calculates the Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) values 
for each term in the document corpus. TF-IDF is a statistical measure that reflects the importance of a 
word in a document relative to its importance in the entire corpus of documents. To assess the link 
between each word in the collection of documents, the TF-IDF has been extensively utilized in the 
domains of text mining and information retrieval. They are specifically used to determine search 
ranking, compute comparable degrees among documents, extract core words (i.e., keywords) from 
papers, and other tasks. 
Text preprocessing, information retrieval, document clustering, and text classification are among 
the uses of TF-IDF. The TfidfVectorizer first converts each text document into a bag of words, which is 
a simple representation of the text where the order of the words is ignored and only the frequency of 
each word is considered. Then, for each word in the bag of words, the TfidfVectorizer calculates the TF-
IDF value, which is the product of the term frequency (TF) and inverse document frequency (IDF) 
values. 
The term frequency (TF) is simply the frequency of a term in a document, while the inverse 
document frequency (IDF) measures how common or rare a term is across all documents in the corpus. 
The IDF value is calculated as the logarithm of the total number of documents in the corpus divided by 
the number of documents containing the term. 
The resulting TF-IDF values for each term in each document form the feature vectors that can be 
used as input to machine learning models. The TfidfVectorizer also provides options for text 
preprocessing, such as tokenization and stop word removal, to further improve the quality of the feature 
vectors. Its benefits include feature selection, memory efficiency through sparse representation, and 
adaptability to a range of natural language processing applications.  
In summary, TfidfVectorizer is a widely used text vectorization technique that calculates TF-IDF 
values for each term in a document corpus, resulting in numerical feature vectors that can be used as 
input to machine learning models in NLP tasks such as text classification and clustering. 
 
2.2. RNNs 
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a type of neural network used to process sequential data, 
such as time series or natural language. RNNs differ from traditional deep neural networks in that they 
have the ability to retain information from previous steps and can use it to produce the current output. 
This means that it is affected by all previous inputs. These deep learning algorithms are built into well-
known programs like Siri, voice search, and Google Translate. That is, they are used for syntactic or 
temporal problems such as language translation, natural language processing (nlp), speech 
recognition, and image captioning. Recurrent neural networks also face some limitations. More 
specifically, they are unable to incorporate future data, which means that they only consider 
information from the past and not the future when forecasting. Although they have some limitations, 
their ability to leverage prior information makes them valuable in many fields. 
To help us understand RNNs, we can use a familiar expression like "feeling under the weather." 
This phrase is an English idiomatic expression and means that someone feels sick or unwell. This 
expression only makes sense if the words are placed in the correct order. RNNs must therefore take 
into account the position of each word and use this knowledge to predict the next word in the sequence.  
RNNs are also distinguished by the fact that their parameters are common to all layers of the 
network. This means that recurrent networks share the same weight parameter across all layers, unlike 
feedforward networks that have separate weights for each node. Although the weights are modified 
through processes such as gradient descent and backpropagation to support reinforcement learning, 
RNNs often face problems with exploding or vanishing gradients.  
The size of the slope determines these problems. When the slope becomes too small, the changes 
in the weight parameters become negligible, and the network stops learning. When the gradient 
becomes too large, it can explode, making the model unstable with the weights becoming too large and 
represented as NaN. Reducing the number of hidden layers can help address these issues.  
The key property of RNNs is their ability to retain and transfer information over time. This is 
achieved through recurrent connections between hidden layers, which allow the network to 
"remember" previous inputs. This memory makes RNNs suitable for tasks where the input is a 
sequence of data, such as speech recognition, language translation, and text analysis. In the 
architecture of an RNN, the input is fed to the network step by step, and at each time step, the current 
input is combined with the hidden state from the previous step to produce a new hidden state. This new 
hidden state is passed on to the next step, allowing the network to maintain a persistent memory of 
previous inputs.  
In general, RNNs are ideal for tasks where the order and temporal dimension of the data are 
important, and they can adjust their predictions based on the sequence of inputs. 
 
2.3 NLP Transformers 
NLP Transformers are a type of neural network architecture that has revolutionized the field of 
natural language processing (NLP) by enabling state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of tasks. 
Transformers are based on a self-attention mechanism, which allows the network to weigh 
different parts of the input sequence differently when making predictions. This contrasts with 
traditional recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which process input sequences one element at a time 
and maintain a hidden state that summarizes the sequence so far. 
The Transformer architecture was introduced in the paper "Attention Is All You Need" by Vaswani 
et al. (2017) [16] and has since become the de facto standard for NLP tasks such as language modeling, 
machine translation, and text classification. 
In a transformer network, the input sequence is first embedded into a high-dimensional vector 
space. The network then applies multiple layers of self-attention and feedforward neural networks to 
the embedded sequence, with residual connections and layer normalization between layers to help 
with training stability. 
One of the key advantages of transformer networks is their ability to model long-range 
dependencies in input sequences. This is achieved through the self-attention mechanism, which 
allows the network to attend to any part of the input sequence regardless of its position. 
Another advantage of transformers is their ability to be pre-trained on large amounts of unlabeled 
text data using techniques such as masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. This pre-
training can then be fine-tuned on specific downstream NLP tasks with relatively small amounts of 
labeled data, leading to state-of-the-art performance on these tasks. 
Overall, NLP transformers have significantly advanced the state of the art in natural language 
processing, enabling more accurate and efficient models for a wide range of applications. 
 
3 Proposed Framework 
In this paper, we put forth a new technique that employs text reviews from customers and 
develops a potent Decision Support System (DSS) to aid hotel guests in selecting a hotel that aligns 
with their financial and other preferences. This methodology incorporates machine learning (ML), 
artificial intelligence (AI), and natural language processing (NLP) techniques. 
In the suggested approach, a hotel feature matrix is extracted using opinion-based sentiment 
analysis and saved in a database. To ascertain how people feel about hotel amenities, our method 
combines lexical analysis with syntax analysis and semantic analysis. 
The NLP text classification framework proposed for this task is based on the pre-trained BERT 
architecture, which enables the extraction of features from raw text data and their subsequent input 
into Fully-Connected (FC) neural networks. This configuration enables the classification of client hotel 
reviews as "Bad," "Good," or "Excellent," and recommends hotels accordingly. 
In order to deliver suggestions based on dynamic data discovered concurrently with active user 
queries, the recommender system must be developed in a way that will employ dynamic auto updated 
data containing the visual views, votes, and reviews online from the external websites. Web cookies, 
customer browsing activity, and comments on the new recommended goods will all be used to 
increase the flexibility of recommender services. 
The full implementation code for this project can be accessed via the following link: 
<https://github.com/EmmanuelPintelas/BERT-V-Training-Tool-Box-for-Text-Classification>. 
More specifically, the proposed NLP text classification framework is based on the pre-trained 
BERT architecture in order to extract features from raw text data, feeding them into Fully-Connected (FC) 
neural networks in order to classify the client’s hotel review texts, into “Bad”, “Good”, or “Excellent” 
recommended hotel.  
An example of a person’s review text which was tagged as “Good” is presented below: 
“Enjoyed our stay! We enjoyed our stay at the Century City Hyatt. We booked two adjoining rooms as we 
were traveling as a family with three kids. Clearly more of a business hotel than a family oriented hotel 
but for the most part no problems with kids. Read the listing by another member that they served free 
Starbucks coffee to Gold passport members. I am a Platinum Hyatt Gold passport member and a little 
disappointed I wasn't aware of that offer! We were pleased with the rooms - nice sized with a view of the 
pool. We liked the decks off of the rooms. Very friendly service and great location. The hotel is directly in 
the middle of the two places we wanted to go while there - Hollywood and Santa Monica. The one 
disappointment - We were rather offended when we were near the spa/fitness center on the pool side 
and decided to walk through to get to the mall across the street and were treated rudely by a spa 
employee. We could see the door to exit onto the street but she insisted we walk back through the spa, 
through the pool area, and through the hotel, then walk all around the block as no children were allowed 
in the spa. Our children were not loud toddlers - they are 7, 10, and 17! First of all, there was no sign on 
the spa/fitness door asking that children not enter. Secondly, the spa front desk is right next to the main 
entrance to the spa. Therefore I am convinced that by the time we had gotten to the desk the spa clients 
would not have been inconvenienced by us continuing through. When I said we were hotel guests at the 
Hyatt and trying to save some time crossing the street to the woman at the spa she said, We are not a 
part of the Hyatt. Yet the hotel lists it as their spa and the Hyatt door attendants also appear to work their 
door as well (same outfits, etc). I had planned to book a spa service during our stay but decided against 
it due to that one interaction.  Beyond the spa staff, we were pleased with the hotel and would definitely 
stay there again.” 
An example of a person’s review text which was tagged as “Bad” is presented below: 
"Disappointed We booked this hotel entirely due to the favourable reviews on this site. And while there 
were some nice things about it (I'll get to those), overall we were quite disappointed. The whole time I 
was there, I kept thinking, I can't wait to write a review of this place on TripAdvisor.  The main problem 
was the tiny, cramped rooms (at least the one we had, it was a standard-type room with 2 queen beds). 
Everyone's face fell when we first walked in. It was claustrophobic. I have re-read many of the reviews 
now that I'm back, and even many of the favourable ones do mention the small rooms.The bathroom was 
equally cramped, with only space for a shower stall. This disappointed me further, as I am a bath person. 
Another disappointment was the lack of a fridge, something we always appreciate in a hotel 
room.Another disappointment was the size of the swimming pool (not much bigger than a bathtub) and 
the cold temperature of the water.The courtyard itself was nicely done up, in particular at night with the 
lights on the palm trees. Breakfast was fairly uninteresting (continental style danishes etc.), but I'm not 
really complaining here -- I'd rather have a simple breakfast than none at all. Cookies offered every 
afternoon at 4:00 were appreciated by my kids. Another thing I did like was the hair products, moisturizer 
and soaps. They were lovely.Next time we stay in San Fran, we will definitely try somewhere else."  
An example of a person’s review text which was tagged as “Excellent” is presented below: "Wow, 
what charm! As a Travel Agent, I've stayed at quite a few hotel, but this is the only Historic hotel so far...  
I loved it! Had to go back for a personal stay. The decor is beautiful, the lobby furniture fits the time period  
is still comfy. The city view rooms are great - love the little balconies. Great breakfast, nice people, great 
location - The Seattle Underground Tours is a 1/2 block away. I've aready sent my folk there for a stay  
have told others." 
Moreover, we developed a Validation (V) algorithm in order to efficiently train the NLP model, 
presented in Algorithm 1. During training we totally froze (no updates in network weights) the first 150 
layers of BERT backbone, while we unfroze (let the network update its weights) its last 50 layers. The first 
layers remain frozen in order to avoid overfitting and catastrophic forgetting of pre-trained network’s 
weights, while the last layers will fine-tune with respect to our hotel text reviewing classification task. 
The proposed text classification framework (BERT-V) is presented in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and Algorithm 1. 
The proposed validation algorithm mainly updates the learning rate of the training procedure with 
respect to the validation accuracy. Also, if no further improvement is performed, the model weights are 
switched back into the ones who managed to bring the highest latest score. This is performed in order to 
avoid local optimum solutions by finding the optimum network weights parameters which maximizes the 
final performance score. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Abstract presentation of proposed text classification framework. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2  Architecture of BERT-FC model 
Algorithm 1. Pseudocode of proposed Validation algorithm. 
 
1 
 global  cnt,   best_sc,   learning_rate_init   =  0,   0,   1e-4 
 
2 
 while Training == True: 
 
3 
 
Input: Text 
 
4 
  
     pred = BERT_FC. predict (Text) 
 
5 
  
     sc  =  score_metric (pred, y) 
 
6 
  
     if  sc  > best_sc: 
 
7 
 
 
  cnt = 0 
 
8 
 
 
  best_sc  =  sc   
 
9 
 
 
  best_weigths = BERT_FC. save() 
 
10 
  
     else: 
 
11 
 
 
  cnt += 1 
 
12 
 
 
  if  cnt == 1: 
 
13 
 
 
 
learning_rate = learning_rate_init / 2 
 
14 
 
 
  elif  cnt == 2: 
 
15 
 
 
 
learning_rate = learning_rate_init / 10 
 
16 
 
 
  elif  cnt == 3: 
 
17 
 
 
 
learning_rate = learning_rate_init / 100 
 
18 
 
 
  elif  cnt > 3 and cnt <= 5: 
 
19 
 
 
 
learning_rate = rand_select ([1e-4, 1e-5,  
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
1e-6, 1e-7, 5e-8]) 
 
21 
 
 
  elif  cnt == 6: 
 
22 
 
 
 
BERT_FC. load(best_weigths) 
 
23 
 
 
 
learning_rate = learning_rate_init 
 
24 
 
 
 
cnt = 0 
 
25 
 
Output learning_rate 
 
 
4. Experimental Results 
In Table 1, we present the performance results of the proposed framework comparing to other 
state of the art text classification approaches, applied into our hotel text review classification problem. 
Based on our experimental results, the proposed framework outperformed all other approaches, 
revealing the superiority of our methodology. 
We also performed a word-cloud analysis which allows as to identify and interpret the top-most 
frequent and important words with respect to the labels of our classification task (“Bad”, “Good”, or 
“Excellent”) as presented in Figs. 3-5. 
The full implementation code, alongside the dataset used in our experimental simulations can be 
found into the following link: 
https://github.com/EmmanuelPintelas/BERT-V-Training-Tool-Box-for-Text-Classification 
 
Table 1. Performance results of proposed framework comparing to other state of the art text classification approaches. 
 
TfidfVectorizer 
65.87 
RNNs 
61.12 
Transformer 
71.01 
BERT 
74.15 
BERT-V 
74.58 
 
Fig. 3 Top 50 Words: “Bad” tagged hotels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We can identify some words which indicate the hotels as a “bad” choice, such as “problem”, 
“small”, “old”. 
Fig. 4 Top 50 Words: “Good” tagged hotels 
 
 
 
 
 
We can identify some words which indicate the hotels as a “good” choice, such as “clean”, “great”, 
“nice”, “friendly”. 
Fig. 5 Top 50 Words: “Excellent” tagged hotels. 
We can identify some words which indicate the hotels as an “excellent” choice, such as “comfortable”, 
“helpful”, “nice”, “loved”. 
5. Conclusions and Future Work 
In conclusion, a hotel recommendation system can greatly enhance the user experience of 
booking accommodations by providing personalized recommendations based on user prefer-
ences and previous booking history. By utilizing machine learning algorithms and big data ana-
lytics, such a system can accurately predict user preferences and suggest hotels that best 
match their needs. Additionally, the system can also provide real-time updates on availability 
and pricing to ensure users get the best possible deals. Overall, a hotel recommendation system 
can streamline the booking process and increase user satisfaction, making it a valuable tool for 
both customers and hotels. 
The proposed approach of using Natural Language Processing (NLP) algorithms, Machine 
Learning (ML), and Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques to develop a Decision Support System 
(DSS) that analyzes customer text reviews is a promising direction for hotel recommendation 
systems. By leveraging NLP techniques, the system can extract valuable insights from customer 
reviews, such as sentiment, topics, and key phrases, and use this information to generate per-
sonalized recommendations [17-19]. 
The use of ML and AI algorithms can help to improve the accuracy of these recommenda-
tions by taking into account a range of factors, such as the user's budget, location preferences, 
and past booking history. By incorporating these factors, the DSS can provide tailored recom-
mendations that are more likely to meet the user's needs and preferences. After all, similar 
works have been done successfully in domains such as cryptocurrency price prediction, pa-
tients length of stay and anxiety disorders [20]. 
Overall, the proposed approach has the potential to greatly enhance the user experience of 
hotel booking platforms by providing more accurate and personalized recommendations. Addi-
tionally, the insights gained from analyzing customer reviews can also be used by hotel manag-
ers to improve their services and facilities, leading to increased customer satisfaction and loy-
alty. There are a few potential drawbacks to take into account, even while hotel recommenda-
tion systems based on client internet evaluations can be useful in offering insights and assis-
tance. Online reviews might be biased or manipulated. To sway the ratings, some hotels might 
publish phony testimonials that are favorable, or rival hotels might do the opposite. Users may 
be misled by this, which may also reduce the accuracy of the recommendation system. The 
quality of reviews can differ greatly. It might be difficult to determine the veracity and authenticity 
of a reviewer's perspective because some reviews may be vague or contain contradictory infor-
mation. The reliability of the recommendation system may be impacted by this inconsistency. 
Additionally, hotels with a lot of positive reviews or high ratings may be given priority by recom-
mendation systems, favoring the selections that are more widely accepted. This may reduce the 
visibility of smaller or more recent businesses that could provide just as excellent or better ex-
periences. 
Use hotel recommendation tools that take into account a range of aspects besides user 
evaluations, such as location, price range, amenities, and personal tastes, to get around some 
of these constraints. A more comprehensive evaluation of hotels can also be obtained by cross-
referencing various sources and using expert comments. 
Future research on online review-based hotel recommendation systems has several prom-
ising areas. A deeper knowledge of consumer experiences can be achieved by integrating sev-
eral data modalities, such as text reviews, photos, and videos. More thorough and precise rec-
ommendations can be produced by taking the pertinent data from these modalities and inte-
grating it with the others. Also, another future direction due to the advances in Artificial Intelli-
gence, Big Data Analytics and Deep Neural Networks is the provision of Explainability of the rec-
ommendations provided by recommender systems to the end user  [21-23]. 
Furthermore, contextual elements, such as the user's present location, the time of day, the 
weather, or nearby events, can help customize recommendations to the particular context in 
which users are making their travel selections. The utility and relevance of recommendations 
may increase as a result. Comparing various recommendation strategies and advancing the 
subject require the development of comprehensive assessment criteria that capture the effi-
cacy, user happiness, and diversity of hotel recommendations. The goal of these research direc-
tions is to improve the personalization, accuracy, and overall user experience of hotel recom-
mendation systems based on online evaluations from guests. 
 
References: 
1. Shi H, Li X (2011). A sentiment analysis model for hotel reviews based on supervised 
learning. In 2011 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, vol 3, pp 950–
954 
2. Wang, J., Zhang, X., & Zhang, H. (2018). Hotel recommendation approach based on the 
online consumer reviews using interval neutrosophic linguistic numbers. Journal of Intelligent & 
Fuzzy Systems, 34(1), 381–394. https://doi.org/10.3233/jifs-171421 
3. Kaya, B. (2019). A hotel recommendation system based on customer location: A link 
prediction 
approach. 
Multimedia 
Tools 
and 
Applications, 
79(3–4), 
1745–
1758.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-019-08270-0 
4. Veloso, B. M., Leal, F., Malheiro, B., & Burguillo, J. C. (2019). On-line guest profiling and 
hotel recommendation. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 34, Article 100832. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2019.100832 
5. Ray, B., Garain, A., & Sarkar, R. (2021). An ensemble-based hotel recommender system 
using sentiment analysis and aspect categorization of hotel reviews. Applied Soft Computing, 
98, Article 106935. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106935 
6. Forhad, M. S. A., Arefin, M. S., Kayes, A. S. M., Ahmed, K., Chowdhury, M. J. M., & Ku-
mara, I. (2021). An Effective Hotel Recommendation System through Processing Heterogene-
ous Data. Electronics, 10(16), 1920. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10161920 
7. Chen, T. (2020). A fuzzy ubiquitous traveler clustering and hotel recommendation sys-
tem by differentiating travelers’ decision-making behaviors. Applied Soft Computing, 96, Article 
106585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106585 
8. Khan, A., Abosuliman, S. S., Abdullah, S., & Ayaz, M. (2021). A Decision Support Model 
for Hotel Recommendation Based on the Online Consumer Reviews Using Logarithmic Spheri-
cal Hesitant Fuzzy Information. Entropy (Basel), 23(4), 432. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23040432 
9. Abbasi, F., Khadivar, A.,Yazdinejad, M. (2019). A Grouping Hotel Recommender System 
Based on Deep Learning and Sentiment Analysis. Journal of Information Technology Manage-
ment,11 (2), 59-78. 
10. Chen, C.-L., Wang, C.-S., Chiang, D.-J. (2019). Location-Based Hotel Recommendation 
System. In: Chen JL., Pang AC., Deng DJ. et al. (Eds.), Wireless Internet, Springer, Cham, , 225-
234. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3030-06158-6_23 
11. Lee, S., Chandra, A., Jadav, D. (2016). An Empirical Study on Hybrid Recommender Sys-
tem with Implicit Feedback. In: Bailey J., Khan L., Washio T. et al. (Eds.), Advances in Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining, Springer, Cham, 514-526. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-
31753-3_41 
12. Zhang, K., Wang, K., Wang, X., Jin, C., Zhou, A. Hotel Recommendation Based on User 
Preference Analysis. 2015 31st IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering Workshops, 
Seoul, South Korea, April 13-17, 2015,134-138. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDEW.2015.7129564 
13. Zhang, Z., Morimoto, Y. (2017). Collaborative Hotel Recommendation Based on Topic 
and Sentiment of Review Comments. The 9th Forum on Data Engineering and Information Man-
agement, Takayama, Japan, March 6-8, 2017, 1-6. 
14. Zhao, M., Li, L., Xu, Z. (2021). Study on Hotel Selection Method Based on Integrating 
Online Ratings and Reviews from Multi-Websites. Information Sciences, 2021, 572, 460-481. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.05.042 
15. Zhong, L., Luo, Y., Zhang, X., Zhang, H., Wang, J. (2021). Enhanced Hotel Recommenda-
tion Method Addressing the Deviation Between Overall Rating and Detailed Criteria Ratings on 
Tripadvisor.com. 
Journal 
of 
Intelligent 
& 
Fuzzy 
Systems, 
40 
(3), 
4705-4720. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-201577 
16. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., 
&Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (pp. 6000-6010). 
17. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J., (2013). Distributed repre-
sentations of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 26 
18. Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y (2014) Neural machine translation by jointly learning to 
align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:14090473 
19. Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B., Chess, B., Child, R., & Amodei, D., 
(2020). Scaling laws for neural language models. preprint arXiv:2001.08361. 
20. Ioannis E Livieris, Theodore Kotsilieris, Ioannis Dimopoulos, Panagiotis Pintelas, (2018). 
Decision support software for forecasting patient’s length of stay, Algorithms 11 (12), 199 
21. Emmanuel Pintelas, Ioannis E Livieris, Panagiotis Pintelas, (2020b). A grey-box ensem-
ble model exploiting black-box accuracy and white-box intrinsic interpretability, Algorithms 13 
(1), 17. 
22. Pintelas, E., Liaskos, M., Livieris, I. E., Kotsiantis, S., & Pintelas, P., (2021). A novel ex-
plainable image classification framework: Case study on skin cancer and plant disease predic-
tion. Neural Computing and Applications, 33(22), 1517115189 
23. Pintelas, E., Livieris, I. E., & Pintelas, P., (2023a). Explainable Feature Extraction and Pre-
diction Framework for 3D Image Recognition Applied to Pneumonia Detection. Electronics, 
12(12), 2663 on skin cancer and plant disease prediction. Neural Computing and Applications, 
33(22), 15171-15189 (2021). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
