Title: Putting Natural in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04572v2
--------------------------------------------------

Putting Natural in Natural Language Processing
Grzegorz Chrupała
Department of Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence
Tilburg University
grzegorz@chrupala.me
Abstract
Human language is firstly spoken and only sec-
ondarily written. Text, however, is a very con-
venient and efficient representation of language,
and modern civilization has made it ubiquitous.
Thus the field of NLP has overwhelmingly fo-
cused on processing written rather than spo-
ken language. Work on spoken language, on
the other hand, has been siloed off within the
largely separate speech processing community
which has been inordinately preoccupied with
transcribing speech into text. Recent advances
in deep learning have led to a fortuitous conver-
gence in methods between speech processing
and mainstream NLP. Arguably, the time is
ripe for a unification of these two fields, and
for starting to take spoken language seriously
as the primary mode of human communication.
Truly natural language processing could lead to
better integration with the rest of language sci-
ence and could lead to systems which are more
data-efficient and more human-like, and which
can communicate beyond the textual modality.
1
Introduction
The ACL 2023 theme track urges the community
to check the reality of the progress in NLP. This
position paper adopts an expansive interpretation
of this question. It is definitely worth inquiring into
the apparent advances of current NLP in their own
terms. Here, however, I question these terms and
argue that our field has focused on only a limited
subset of human language which happens to be
convenient to work with, and thus misses major
aspects of human communication.
1.1
Human Language is Primarily Spoken
Humans are an exceptional species in many ways,
and out of these, human language is one of the
most salient. Unlike communication systems used
by other organisms, human language is open-ended,
capable of expressing abstract concepts, and of ref-
erence to events displaced in time and space. While
the capacity to acquire language is universal and
largely innate (Darwin, 1874; Pinker and Bloom,
1990) it also is culturally mediated and likely arose
via gene-culture co-evolution (Deacon, 1998; Rich-
erson and Boyd, 2010).
One revolutionary technology which turbo-
charged human language was writing, which was
invented a handful of times in the most recent few
thousand years of the human story (Fischer, 2003).
Writing, followed by the printing press, followed
by the Internet, have made written text ubiquitous
to the extent that it is easy to forget that the primary
and universal modality for most human communi-
cation throughout history has been spoken.1
Even today many of the world’s languages do not
have a standardized written form. For those that do,
the written modality originated as a compressed,
symbolic representation of the spoken form.
Children acquire a spoken language (and not in-
frequently two or more) within the first few years
of their life with no or little explicit instruction,
largely relying on weak, noisy supervision via so-
cial interaction and perceptual grounding. In con-
trast, they require hundreds of hours of explicit
instruction and arduous conscious practice to learn
to read and write, and most are only able to learn
the written modality a couple of years at best after
becoming fluent communicators in one or more
spoken languages.
1.2
Reality check
Thus, arguably, the natural language for which we
are biologically equipped is spoken. Written lan-
guage is a secondary development, which happens
to be very useful and widespread, but is neverthe-
less derivative of speech. This appears to be the
consensus view in linguistics going back at least a
1I am using spoken language in the broad sense here, in-
cluding both the oral and gestural (signed) modes of expres-
sion, and opposing these to the written modality.
arXiv:2305.04572v2  [cs.CL]  23 May 2023
century (de Saussure, 1916; Bloomfield, 1933).2
Given these facts, is then the field of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) a misnomer? Are
we making less progress with getting machines
to communicate via human language than current
advances with processing written text would have
us believe?
2
NLP is Written Language Processing
To anyone with experience reading, reviewing and
publishing papers in NLP conferences and jour-
nals (such the ACL conferences and TACL) it is
evident that the field is very strongly focused on
processing written language. While this is evident
to practitioners, it is also largely tacit and implicit.
2.1
Unstated assumptions
The fact that a paper is concerned with written as
opposed to spoken oral or sign language is almost
invariably assumed to be the default and not ex-
plicitly stated. Furthermore, even if there is some
interest in tackling a dataset of originally spoken
language (for example in much work on dialog and
child language acquisition), the usual approach is
to use a written transcription of this data rather than
the actual audio. This is partly a matter of conve-
nience, but partly due to the assumption that the
written form of language is the canonical one while
the audio modality is just a weird, cumbersome
encoding of it.
To some extent such an implicit belief also lurks
in much work within the speech community: the
main thrust of speech research has always been on
so called Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR),
by which is meant automatically transcribing spo-
ken language into a written form. Written text
is treated as an interface and an abstraction bar-
rier between the field of speech processing and
NLP. In Sections 3 and 4 I address problems aris-
ing from the above assumptions, as well as the
challenges and opportunities we have once we dis-
card them. Firstly, however, it will be instructive
to briefly quantify the assertion that NLP is Writ-
ten Language Processing. by looking at historical
publication patterns.
2.2
Publication patterns
Figure 1 shows the proportion of NLP papers ex-
plicitly mentioning speech-related terms in their
2However see Aaron and Joshi (2006) for a dissenting
view.
1950
1970
1990
2010
Year
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Fraction of speech papers
Figure 1: The proportion of papers in the ACL anthol-
ogy up to year 2022 which mention the words speech,
spoken or audio in the title, excluding those with part(s)-
of-speech or speech act(s).
title over the years covered by the ACL anthology
(1950 through 2022), which is a comprehensive
database of NLP papers from a wide variety of rel-
evant conferences, workshops and journals.3 The
fraction of speech-focused NLP papers varies quite
a bit over the years, but mostly stays below 10%.
There is a large peak going to 20% in 1989, fol-
lowed by three years with around 10% of speech
papers. A look at the underlying data reveals that
the 1989 peak is associated with the inclusion in
the anthology of the proceedings of the Speech and
Natural Language Workshop (Hirshman, 1989) or-
ganized by the US Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), and featuring 79 pa-
pers. This workshop ran until 1992 and is thus
largely responsible for the four-year run of sizable
representation of spoken language research in the
ACL anthology.
The overview of the last edition of this event
notes the then ongoing “paradigm shift in natu-
ral language processing towards empirical, corpus
based methods” (Marcus, 1992). It is likely that
this shift in NLP methodology was at least partly
driven by this workshop, the associated DARPA
program, and the resulting increased interaction be-
tween researchers working on spoken and written
language.
In recent years (since 2010) the proportion of
NLP papers explicitly mentioning spoken language
has resolutely stayed below 6%. While the major
ACL events typically include speech processing
as a topic in their calls for papers, as well as a
track including the term speech in its name, such
as Speech and Multimodality, processing of spoken
language it clearly a rather minor concern of these
conferences. Instead, speech work is published in
different venues organized by a separate speech
3https://aclanthology.org/
processing community.
3
Spoken Language is Richer
While the primacy of the spoken modality as means
of communication is the consensus view in linguis-
tics, Section 2.1 identifies unstated assumptions
among NLP practitioners which amount to the op-
posite view. Here I outline why these assumptions
contradicting the scientific view are not only incor-
rect but also detrimental to progress on understand-
ing and processing real human language.
3.1
Key features of spoken language
Speech and writing are two different modalities
with different affordances, and there is no straight-
forward mapping between them. Some writing
systems such as those used for English, Arabic or
Chinese do not even represent the phonology of
the spoken language in a direct way. More cru-
cially, writing only captures a small proportion
of the information carried in the equivalent audio
signal. Writing discards most of the information
falling within the general category of paralinguistic
phenomena, such as that related to speaker iden-
tity, speaker emotional state and attitude; likewise,
information conveyed by speech tempo and am-
plitude, including most of suprasegmental phonol-
ogy such as intonation and rhythm is typically not
present in writing. In addition to the auditory sig-
nal, oral spoken language can also feature visual
clues in the form of accompanying gestures, fa-
cial expressions and body posture. Sign languages
rely on the visual channel exclusively, and in fact
there are no widely used writing systems for any of
them (Grushkin, 2017). Unlike most text, speech
also typically contains a variable amount of chan-
nel noise (Shannon, 1948) such as environmental
sounds.
Natural spontaneous speech contains fillers, hes-
itations, false starts, repairs and other disfluencies
(Dinkar et al., 2023) which are usually edited out in
the written form of language. Even more critically,
spontaneous speech typically takes the form of a
dialog between two or more participants. Dialog is
unlike common written genres: crucially it features
turn-taking behavior which is governed by com-
plex and incompletely understood rules (Skantze,
2021). These features of natural dialog also mean
that the traditional cascaded approach of ASR fol-
lowed by NLP faces serious limitations, not least
due to low ASR performance in this regime (Szy-
ma´nski et al., 2020), but also due to its inherently
interactive nature.
For all these reasons, spoken language is more in-
formationally rich than written language;4 the same
factors also make it more variable, complex and
noisy, and consequently more challenging for auto-
mated processing (Shriberg, 2005). Thus any un-
derstanding of language as a human faculty gained
via the written modality does not necessarily gen-
eralize to the spoken modality. The same is also
the case about language applications: for example
the successes and shortcomings of state-of-the-art
text chatbot systems (e.g. Stiennon et al., 2020) are
likely to be substantially different from those of
spoken dialog systems.
3.2
Challenges of speech
As an illustrative example, let us consider the ef-
fectiveness of self-supervision: inducing represen-
tations of words and phrases from just listening to
speech or reading text. For text, this general family
of methods has been successful since around the
time of Latent Semantic Analysis (Dumais, 2004),
and currently large written language models ex-
hibit a constantly expanding range of abilities (Wei
et al.). In contrast, self-supervision with spoken
language has met with a limited amount of success
only in the last few years (e.g. Baevski et al., 2020;
Hsu et al., 2021), and these models as of now are
usually only fine-tuned on the task of ASR. One
obvious difference is that items such as words and
morphemes are either explicitly delimited or easily
discovered in text, but finding them is an unsolved
research problem in speech, due to the inherent
variability of this modality.
On the other hand, learning spoken language be-
comes much more tractable when self-supervision
is augmented with grounding in perception. The
cross-modal correlations, though unreliable and
noisy, are often sufficient to substantially facilitate
the discovery and representation of words (Peng
and Harwath, 2022; Nikolaus et al., 2022) and syl-
lables (Peng et al., 2023) in spoken language. For
written language, grounding in the visual modality
has also been found to help in some cases (e.g. Tan
and Bansal, 2020) but it does not appear crucial,
as the dominance of text-only language models
demonstrates.
Since spoken language is richer in information
4One exception to this general pattern is the presence of
two spatial dimensions in written language, and the role of 2D
layout in textual publications.
content, it should in principle be possible to ex-
ploit this extra signal for improving performance.
One obstacle to such developments is the increased
variability and channel noise. Perhaps less obvi-
ously, a second obstacle is that widely used bench-
marks are often designed in a way which obstructs
obtaining such gains. For example the 2021 Ze-
rospeech challenge (Dunbar et al., 2021) which
aimed to benchmark spoken language modeling,
evaluates systems according to the following cri-
teria: phoneme discrimination, word recognition,
syntactic acceptability and correlation to human
judgments of word similarities. None of these met-
rics would benefit much from modeling speaker
characteristics, speech tempo, pitch, loudness or
even suprasegmental phonology. Except for the
first one, these metrics would be very well suited
for models trained exclusively on written language.
The combined effect of these two obstacles was
evident in the results of Zerospeech 2021 where
written-language toplines, such as RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019), outperformed spoken language mod-
els on the latter three metrics, often by large mar-
gins.
4
Unifying Speech Processing and NLP
As evident from the examples highlighted above,
spoken language is in some ways quite different
from written language and presents a distinct set of
challenges and potentials. In order to understand
how much progress the fields of speech and NLP
are making in understanding and implementing
human language, we need to take speech seriously
qua language, not just a cumbersome modality, and
measure our progress accordingly.
4.1
Converging methodology
The time is ripe for a closer integration of the
speech and NLP communities and for a unified
computational science of language. The set of
methodologies used in speech and text processing
used to be quite distinct in the past. Since the adop-
tion of deep learning both fields have converged to
a large extent: currently the state-of-the-art mod-
els for both spoken and written language rely on
transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017)
self-trained on large amounts of minimally prepro-
cessed data, with optional fine-tuning. The tech-
nical communication barriers across disciplinary
boundaries are thus much lower. The recent emer-
gence of the concept of textless NLP (Lakhotia
et al., 2021) exemplifies the potential of unifying
these two fields.
4.2
Opportunities
The following paragraphs outline the most impor-
tant benefits of making NLP more natural, ranging
from basic science to practical applications.
Modeling language acquisition.
An increased
attention to spoken language within NLP has the
potential to lead to a more realistic understanding
of how well our current methods can replicate key
human language abilities. Acquiring language un-
der constraints that human babies face is the big
one. There is a large amount of work on modeling
human language acquisition which uses exclusively
written data (at best transcribed from the original
audio). Hopefully by this point the reader will be
convinced that the relevance of this work to the
actual issue under consideration is highly question-
able. We stand a much better chance of figuring out
human language acquisition if we refocus attention
on spoken language.
Data efficiency.
Linzen (2020) argues convinc-
ingly for language models which are human-like in
their data-efficiency and generalization capabilities.
It is, however, unclear whether these properties
can even be properly evaluated via the medium of
written language. Since the informational density
and the signal-to-noise ratio in written vs spoken
language are so very different, it makes little sense
to compare human children with language models
trained on text. Furthermore, the challenges of pure
self-supervision may motivate us to take seriously
the impact of grounding in perception and interac-
tion, which humans use universally as a learning
signal.
Unwritten languages.
Many modes of human
communication lack standard written representa-
tion. These range from major languages spoken by
millions of people such as Hokkien (Mair, 2003),
to small or non-standard language varieties, to sign
languages. Shifting the emphasis of NLP research
from text to the primary, natural oral and gestural
modalities will benefit the communities using these
varieties.
Spoken dialog systems.
Dingemanse and Liesen-
feld (2022) argue that language technology needs
to transition from the text to talk, and provide a
roadmap of how to harness conversational corpora
in diverse languages to effect such a transition. In-
deed, one of the most obvious benefits of spoken
language NLP would be dialog systems that do not
need to rely on ASR and are able to exploit the
extra information lost when transcribing speech,
enabling them to understand humans better and
interact with them in a more natural way.
Non-textual language data.
Finally, there is a
large and increasing stream of non-textual language
data such as podcasts, audio chat channels and
video clips. Processing such content could also
benefit from an end-to-end holistic treatment with-
out the need of going through the lossy conversion
to text.
4.3
Recommendations
If you are an NLP practitioner and view spoken
language as outside the scope of your field, recon-
sider. Getting into speech processing does require
understanding its specifics, but it is not as techni-
cally daunting as it used to. Conversely, if you are
a speech researcher, consider that ASR and text-to-
speech is not all there is: we can get from sound to
meaning and back without going through the writ-
ten word. Both fields would do well to consider
the whole of human language as their purview. In-
creased collaboration would benefit both communi-
ties, and more importantly, would give us a chance
of making real progress towards understanding and
simulating natural language.
5
Limitations
The main limitation of this paper is the one ap-
plying to any opinion piece: it is subjective and
personal, as the views of the authors are inherently
limited by their expertise and experience. More
specifically, this paper argues for an increased inter-
action between the speech and NLP communities,
but the author is more strongly embedded in the
latter, and thus addresses this audience primarily.
Additionally, the short paper format imposes sig-
nificant constraints on the amount of nuance, detail
and discussion of relevant literature, and thus read-
ers may find some of the claims to be less strongly
supported and less hedged than would be ideal, or
proper in a longer treatment of this topic.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Hosein Mohebbi, Afra Al-
ishahi, Mark Dingemanse, Tanvi Dinkar, Piotr Szy-
ma´nski and three anonymous reviewers for their
valuable feedback on this paper.
References
P. G. Aaron and R. Malatesha Joshi. 2006. Written lan-
guage is as natural as spoken language: A biolinguis-
tic perspective. Reading Psychology, 27(4):263–311.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed,
and Michael Auli. 2020. wav2vec 2.0: A framework
for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:12449–12460.
Leonard Bloomfield. 1933. Language. Henry Holt,
New York.
Charles Darwin. 1874. The descent of man, and selec-
tion in relation to sex. D. Appleton and Company,
New York.
Ferdinand de Saussure. 1916. Cours de linguistique
générale. Payot, Paris.
Terrence W Deacon. 1998. The Symbolic Species: The
Co-evolution of Language and the Brain. WW Nor-
ton & Company.
Mark Dingemanse and Andreas Liesenfeld. 2022. From
text to talk: Harnessing conversational corpora for
humane and diversity-aware language technology.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 5614–5633, Dublin, Ireland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tanvi Dinkar, Chloé Clavel, and Ioana Vasilescu. 2023.
Fillers in spoken language understanding: Computa-
tional and psycholinguistic perspectives. Traitement
Automatique des Langues, 63(3).
Susan T Dumais. 2004. Latent semantic analysis. An-
nual Review of Information Science and Technology
(ARIST), 38:189–230.
Ewan Dunbar, Mathieu Bernard, Nicolas Hamilakis,
Tu Anh Nguyen, Maureen de Seyssel, Patricia
Rozé, Morgane Rivière, Eugene Kharitonov, and Em-
manuel Dupoux. 2021. The Zero Resource Speech
Challenge 2021: Spoken language modelling.
Steven Roger Fischer. 2003. History of writing. Reak-
tion books.
Donald A Grushkin. 2017. Writing signed languages:
What for? What form? American annals of the deaf,
161(5):509–527.
Lynette Hirshman. 1989.
Overview of the DARPA
speech and natural language workshop. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Speech and Natural Lan-
guage, pages 1–2.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai,
Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-
rahman Mohamed. 2021. Hubert: Self-supervised
speech representation learning by masked prediction
of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, 29:3451–3460.
Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu,
Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte, Tu-Anh
Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman
Mohamed, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2021. On gen-
erative spoken language modeling from raw audio.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 9:1336–1354.
Tal Linzen. 2020.
How can we accelerate progress
towards human-like linguistic generalization?
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5210–
5217, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach.
Victor H Mair. 2003. How to forget your mother tongue
and remember your national language.
Mitchell P Marcus. 1992. Overview of the fifth DARPA
speech and natural language workshop. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Speech and Natural Lan-
guage, pages 3–4.
Mitja Nikolaus, Afra Alishahi, and Grzegorz Chrupała.
2022. Learning English with Peppa Pig. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 10:922–936.
Puyuan Peng and David Harwath. 2022. Word Discov-
ery in Visually Grounded, Self-Supervised Speech
Models. In Proc. Interspeech 2022, pages 2823–
2827.
Puyuan Peng, Shang-Wen Li, Okko Räsänen, Abdelrah-
man Mohamed, and David Harwath. 2023. Syllable
discovery and cross-lingual generalization in a visu-
ally grounded, self-supervised speech mode. In Proc.
Interspeech 2023.
Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom. 1990. Natural language
and natural selection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
13(4):707–727.
Peter J Richerson and Robert Boyd. 2010. Why possibly
language evolved. Biolinguistics, 4(2-3):289–306.
Claude Elwood Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory
of communication. The Bell system technical journal,
27(3):379–423.
Elizabeth Shriberg. 2005. Spontaneous speech: how
people really talk and why engineers should care. In
Proc. Interspeech 2005, pages 1781–1784.
Gabriel Skantze. 2021. Turn-taking in conversational
systems and human-robot interaction: A review.
Computer Speech & Language, 67:101178.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-
ing to summarize with human feedback.
In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 3008–3021. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Piotr Szyma´nski,
Piotr
˙Zelasko,
Mikolaj Morzy,
Adrian Szymczak, Marzena ˙Zyła-Hoppe, Joanna Ba-
naszczak, Lukasz Augustyniak, Jan Mizgajski, and
Yishay Carmiel. 2020. WER we are and WER we
think we are. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3290–
3295, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. 2020. Vokenization: Im-
proving language understanding with contextualized,
visual-grounded supervision. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2066–2080,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al.
Emergent abilities of large language models. Trans-
actions on Machine Learning Research.
