Title: Explainable Natural Language Processing for Corporate Sustainability Analysis
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.17487v3
--------------------------------------------------

Explainable Natural Language Processing for Corporate
Sustainability Analysis
Keane Onga,b, Rui Maoc, Ranjan Satapathyd, Ricardo Shirota Filhod, Erik
Cambriac, Johan Sulaemanb,e,f, Gianmarco Mengaldoa,b,e,g,∗
aCollege of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering
Drive 1, 117575, Singapore
bAsian Institute of Digital Finance, National University of Singapore, Innovation 4.0, 3
Research Link, #04-03, 117602, Singapore
cCollege of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, 50
Nanyang Ave, 639798, Singapore
dInstitute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis, 138632, Singapore
eSustainable and Green Finance Institute, National University of Singapore, Innovation
4.0, 3 Research Link, #02-02, 117602, Singapore
fNUS Business School, National University of Singapore, Mochtar Riady Building, 15
Kent Ridge Dr, Mocthar Riady Building, 119245, Singapore
gHonorary Research Fellow, Imperial College London,
Abstract
Sustainability commonly refers to entities, such as individuals, companies,
and institutions, having a non-detrimental (or even positive) impact on the
environment, society, and the economy. With sustainability becoming a syn-
onym of acceptable and legitimate behaviour, it is being increasingly de-
manded and regulated. Several frameworks and standards have been pro-
posed to measure the sustainability impact of corporations, including United
Nations’ sustainable development goals and the recently introduced global
sustainability reporting framework, amongst others. However, the concept
of corporate sustainability is complex due to the diverse and intricate nature
of firm operations (i.e. geography, size, business activities, interlinks with
other stakeholders).
As a result, corporate sustainability assessments are
plagued by subjectivity both within data that reflect corporate sustainabil-
ity efforts (i.e. corporate sustainability disclosures) and the analysts evalu-
∗corresponding author
Preprint submitted to Information Fusion
October 17, 2024
arXiv:2407.17487v3  [cs.CY]  16 Oct 2024
ating them. This subjectivity can be distilled into distinct challenges, such
as incompleteness, ambiguity, unreliability and sophistication on the data
dimension, as well as limited resources and potential bias on the analyst di-
mension. Put together, subjectivity hinders effective cost attribution to en-
tities non-compliant with prevailing sustainability expectations, potentially
rendering sustainability efforts and its associated regulations futile. To this
end, we argue that Explainable Natural Language Processing (XNLP) can
significantly enhance corporate sustainability analysis. Specifically, linguistic
understanding algorithms (lexical, semantic, syntactic), integrated with XAI
capabilities (interpretability, explainability, faithfulness), can bridge gaps in
analyst resources and mitigate subjectivity problems within data.
Keywords:
Sustainability analysis, corporate sustainability, sustainability
disclosure, explainable artificial intelligence, explainable natural language
processing
1. Introduction
Sustainability, intended as having a non-detrimental impact on the en-
vironment, society, and the economy, is becoming increasingly essential for
humanity’s future. Various efforts are being undertaken at different levels of
the societal and economic hierarchy, from country-level to institutional- and
business-level entities, and in some cases, down to individuals. These efforts
are focused on making these entities sustainable, amid reputational risks [64],
and pressing challenges including global climate change, widespread inequity,
governance malpractices, and geopolitical instability [35].
In this work, we focus on sustainability analyses of entities that provide
sustainability reports (also referred to as sustainability disclosures); in partic-
ular public companies and institutions. These entities are crucial components
in the sustainable development [14], and we refer to their sustainability as
corporate sustainability.
Given that these entities have a substantial stake in global sustainabil-
ity, the analysis of their sustainability, or corporate sustainability analysis, is
critical [73]. Yet, this is extremely challenging due to the inherent complex-
ity of corporate sustainability as a concept. To elaborate, the complexities
within firms (e.g., geography, size, business activities) and outside the firms
(e.g., their global supply chains), as well as the firms’ relationships with non-
business stakeholders, lead to the evolving frameworks and guidelines put
2
forward to address corporate sustainability issues [11, 24]. Further compli-
cating the matter is the lack of globally mandated standards for sustainability
reporting [5].
For example, a firm may use a convenient corporate sustainability report-
ing framework that magnifies only certain aspects of a firm’s practices [20],
while omitting key sustainability dimensions [23]. Or, within a given regula-
tory disclosure framework that a firm shall abide to, it may provide sustain-
ability disclosures that are difficult for external parties to digest, and whose
integrity and transparency may be questionable [10].
This first aspect, that we label the data dimension, is inherently subjec-
tive, as it depends on what the firm chooses to disclose and how. However,
this data dimension is only one side of the challenge.
Indeed, today’s corporate sustainability analysis is carried out by human
analysts who read sustainability disclosures provided by companies (i.e., the
data dimension), and provide corporate sustainability evaluations based on a
combination of sustainability frameworks (e.g., Environmental, Social, Gov-
ernance (ESG) [26], Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) [54], Sustainability
Accounting Standards Board (SASB) [30], Greenhouse Gas Protocol and
Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) [68], United Nations’ Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals (SDG) [70], United Nation Global Compact (UNGC) [65]).
These evaluations require an extensive amount of human hours [62], and yet
are inevitably influenced by the inherent biases in the frameworks adopted
as well as the analysts’ own subjectivity [12, 42].
This second aspect, that we label the analyst dimension, is also inherently
subjective, similar to the data dimension.
Amid the complexities of corporate sustainability, analysts face the chal-
lenge of dealing with subjective (and likely flawed) data, and they need to
account for their own subjective perspective. The interplay between the data
and analyst dimensions is critical, as it results in a highly subjective evalua-
tion of corporate sustainability that would hamper efforts to achieve corpo-
rate sustainability goals.
We argue that, to address the subjectivity inherent to data and analysts,
it is crucial to adopt artificial intelligence (AI), specifically through linguis-
tic understanding methods enhanced by explainable AI (XAI) capabilities,
or what is termed as explainable natural language processing (XNLP) [81].
To qualify, adopting XNLP entails complementing human analysts instead
of replacing them. Within corporate sustainability analysis, analysts should
remain ‘in the loop’ – while XNLP can expeditiously process numerous sus-
3
tainability disclosures to unveil consistent and meaningful insights, analysts
can further synergise these insights to inform their corporate sustainability
assessments.
In this paper, we follow the three foundational building blocks presented
in Fig. 1, focusing on how XNLP can pave the way for effective corporate
sustainability analysis by addressing the subjectivity issues that plague the
field. We first break down the subjectivity challenge into its data and analysts
dimensions (Fig. 1(A)), characterising the problems for XNLP to address.
Next, we consolidate NLP’s distinct advantages for solving these challenges
by delineating its specialised applications (Fig. 1(B)). Finally, we lay the
groundwork for effective XNLP deployment within this domain (Fig. 1(C)).
We realise this by surveying NLP methods to match specific applications
based on their different levels of linguistic understanding, and proposing
strategies to integrate XAI capabilities. By offering insights that blend tech-
nical depth with broader viewpoints of sustainability, we pave the way for
XNLP’s adoption within corporate sustainability analysis.
Z
SUBJECTIVITY 
Challenge 
DATA
Dimension
HUMAN
Dimension
01
02
Incompleteness
Unreliability
Ambiguity
Sophistication
Human Hours
Potential Bias 
AI aids  
Analysts 
Reduces Time
Mitigates Bias
Extracting 
Insights   
Topic
Pattern
Dialogue
Rating
Impact
5 - Average
Positive
Negative
Neutral
Keywords
Frequency
Q: Carbon 
reduction 
efforts?
AI Linguistic Analysis 
Lexical
Semantic
Syntactic
BERT
tf -idf
promote clean energy
JJ
NN
VB
Interpretability
XAI Capabilities
Explainability
Faithfulness
A. Subjectivity leads to data and human challenges
B. AI addresses subjectivity by extracting insights
C. Strategies for effective XNLP deployment 
Figure 1: Proposed framework for XNLP enhanced sustainability analysis
2. The subjectivity challenge
As a result of the complexity inherent to corporate sustainability, subjec-
tivity commonly underpins corporate sustainability analysis. Specific chal-
lenges arising from subjectivity can be distilled into the data and analyst
dimensions. We expound on these dimensions to frame (X)NLP’s suitability
for corporate sustainability analysis.
4
2.1. The data dimension
Data is the first building block, or entry point, of corporate sustainabil-
ity analysis, as depicted in (Fig. 1(A)). While the data required for cor-
porate sustainability assessments can come from various sources, corporate
sustainability disclosures are a predominant source [61]. These disclosures
consist of reports released by businesses detailing their own sustainability
efforts [61]. For example, general sustainability reports typically follow es-
tablished sustainability frameworks to describe a company’s sustainability
efforts and achievements [1], and are typically accompanied by integrated
reports that aggregate the general sustainability information with financial
implications [32].
Additional data may come from government-mandated sustainability dis-
closures, where companies are required to release specific aspects of their
sustainability performance [84], such as their environmental impact [78], or
ESG (Environmental, Social, and Governance) practices [47]. Data originat-
ing from NGO sources and media coverage may also be relevant to assess
a company’s sustainability efforts [91, 4]. Yet these data are influenced by
sustainability disclosures [6, 33], underlining the importance of focusing our
discussion on the sustainability disclosures themselves.
Due to the intricacies and multi-faceted dimensions of corporate sustain-
ability, these data sources inherently contain subjectivity. They involve com-
peting notions of corporate sustainability, expressed through a vast and di-
verse array of sustainability frameworks [74, 60]. Moreover, even within a
specific framework, deciding what information to convey necessitates a value
judgement (e.g., financial vs. environmental materiality), further exacerbat-
ing the partiality involved [7]. We argue that this subjectivity at the data
level manifests itself in four data grand challenges that analysts need to face,
namely incompleteness, unreliability, ambiguity, and sophistication. These 4
data challenges are reported on the first block of (Fig. 1(A)), referred to as
data dimension. We detail them in the following.
Incompleteness. It refers to how data may not provide a comprehensive
and complete view of a firm’s sustainability efforts. As certain sus-
tainability disclosures are voluntary, companies can decide on what is
material enough to release as sustainability information, thereby raising
concerns about openness and the omission of important data [7].
Unreliability. It refers to the trustworthiness and accuracy of sustain-
ability data. Indeed, corporate and government-linked sustainability
5
disclosures may involve greenwashing, where organisations mislead-
ingly claim and exaggerate that their activities or products are more
environmentally friendly than they really are [21]. Or they use non-
transparent carbon offset products, that often do not deliver the offsets
promised [22]. In fact, such developments are particularly frequent for
firms that are of larger sizes, to contend with increased dealing with
stakeholders [46].
Ambiguity. It refers to data being vague and unclear, making negative
content less conspicuous [31]. One example is sharing information with-
out accompanying it with the appropriate context [41]. This may lead
analysts to misunderstand the sustainability efforts of companies. Am-
biguity is related, to some extent, to greenwashing [96], although it
does not explicitly refer to inaccurate or misleading data as unreliabil-
ity does.
Sophistication. It refers to sustainability disclosures being tediously lengthy,
text-heavy, and requiring specialised knowledge to comprehend, mak-
ing them an extremely sophisticated writing category [80]. As a result,
firm sustainability reports can require many hours of human effort to
understand, let alone derive useful insights [37].
2.2. The analyst dimension
Human analysts must synthesise and interpret sustainability data to pro-
duce accurate corporate sustainability assessments. To describe this process,
relevant data is collected according to the objectives and scope of the corpo-
rate sustainability analysis (i.e. evaluating all operations versus one area).
Thereafter, the analysis entails leveraging sustainability frameworks or met-
rics (i.e., carbon footprint) to measure different impact dimensions (environ-
mental, social, economic etc.) [86]. The costs and inaccuracies of this process
are exacerbated by human limitations. Specifically, human analysts cannot
deal well with the challenges of subjective data, and are not free from subjec-
tive interpretations. These human-centric issues are encapsulated by limited
human-hours and potential bias.
Limited human-hours. Analysts have a limited amount of time to pro-
duce corporate sustainability assessments. However, the process en-
tails extracting meaningful information from corporate sustainability
6
disclosures [37], which requires a significant amount of time i.e., human-
hours [62]. In particular, the disclosures are extremely time consuming
to read and understand due to the sophistication and ambiguity of
the data within them. Moreover, given the potential incompleteness
of disclosure information, analysts may analyse additional sources to
ascertain a firm’s sustainability, further increasing the human-hours
required [71].
Potential Bias. Analysts’ interpretations of sustainability data are subject
to bias. This is not least due to the complex and wide ranging factors
to be considered, such as firm characteristics, evolving sustainability
guidelines, and economic implications, amongst others, often leading
to leading to varying interpretations amongst analysts [12, 42]. To fur-
ther compound the potential for bias, data ambiguity and unreliability
hinders clear interpretation of sustainability information by obfuscating
negative content [31].
2.3. NLP to the rescue
Subjectivity pervades through the data and analyst dimensions, making
corporate sustainability analyses an onerous task. To alleviate this burden,
we argue that AI technologies, through linguistic understanding enabled by
natural language processing (NLP), can significantly aid analysts. NLP can
automatically process hundreds of sustainability disclosures [83], summaris-
ing key details and extracting insights for analysts. This reduces the human
hours required to analyse disclosures and partially addresses potential bias
by providing more consistent and replicable insights [2, 17]. We concretise
NLP’s usefulness in this domain by detailing five NLP tasks for corporate
sustainability analysis (T1-T5) that we deem critical, and that have been
partially explored in the literature.
(T1) Topic extraction.
Topic extraction allows an analyst to obtain,
from sustainability disclosures, content most pertinent to corporate
sustainability. Consequently, analysts do not need to sieve through all
information, and can focus their analysis on material information [9].
Thematic extraction involves classifying sentences within sustainabil-
ity frameworks. This includes sorting text into GRI topics [69], ESG
pillars [50], or ESG-related concepts [45]. Universal extraction filters
textual data into generic categories that are separate from sustain-
ability frameworks. For instance, labelling environmental claims [83],
7
emissions targets [76], or climate relevant information [9]. On the other
hand, topic discovery determines topics from sustainability disclosures
a posteriori. For example, sustainability topics were uncovered from
the sustainability disclosures of shipping companies [97].
(T2) Impact Classification. Impact insights can also be derived from
sustainability disclosures, providing analysts a valuable perspective on
corporate sustainability. Polarity classification determines the impact
polarity of text from sustainability disclosures. For instance, within
SEC 10k reports, sustainability related sentences can be labelled as
positive, negative or neutral in relation to their impact toward sus-
tainability [66]. Alternatively, strategic classification uncovers a text’s
prospective impact. Examples include the risk and opportunity impact
analysis of ESG-related texts [87].
(T3) Rating. A firm’s sustainability performance can be automatically
scored to expedite an analyst’s evaluation process. Aggregated rating
methods include computing the frequency of sentiment labels for ESG-
related headlines [34], and averaging the E, S, and G topic classification
probabilities of documents [82]. Direct methods explicitly score com-
panies without amalgamating already labelled data. For instance, the
prediction of ESG risk ratings from sustainability topics [49], as well
as regressing lexical features to derive ESG risk ratings [44]. Outside
of holistic sustainability frameworks (i.e. ESG), direct methods also
include estimating carbon emissions from bank transactions [38], and
constructing sustainability indices from the lexical features of disclo-
sures [85].
(T4) Dialogue. Processing sustainability disclosures into interactive dia-
logue format allows an analyst a user-friendly way for querying infor-
mation. For instance, a chatbot integrated with Retrieval-augmented
Generation (RAG) can be queried to summarise or answer analysts’
questions about disclosures, allowing analysts to extract information
without reading the copious amounts of text typically contained within
them [62, 36]. By emphasising critical information, dialogue systems
mitigate the obfuscation of key information within disclosures, poten-
tially enhancing the accuracy of sustainability analysis [79].
(T5) Linguistic Patterns. Linguistic analysis deepens an analyst’s under-
8
standing of how a disclosure’s style and structure relates with corporate
sustainability performance. For example, keyword frequency and word
relationships within oil and gas compliance reports can uncover envi-
ronmental violation patterns [8], and the syntactic complexity of CSR
reports for good CSR performers can also be distinguished [18].
3. NLP methods for linguistic understanding
Tasks T1–T5 help human analysts decode sustainability disclosures, ad-
dressing the domain’s subjectivity challenge. To successfully accomplish T1–
T5, it is useful to comprehend NLP methods according to their different
levels of linguistic understanding (lexical, semantic, and syntactic). These
three categories unpack the complexity of NLP algorithms, from simple lex-
ical evaluation to complex semantic and syntactic processing, providing in-
sight into the suitability of certain methods for specific tasks. To this end,
Tab. 1 presents a structured overview, detailing which tasks, T1–T5, have
been addressed in the literature by the three categories of NLP methods in-
troduced. We delve more into these three different approaches, providing a
concise review of what has been already done in the corporate sustainability
analysis space.
3.1. Lexical methods
Lexical-based methods focus on the statistical occurrence of keywords and
terms within sustainability data, thereby being relatively simple and easy to
interpret.
More specifically, lexical methods identify lexical terms appearing in text
through string matching, and compute their associated frequency (or rate) of
occurrence. A formalisation of this framework is given by the term frequency-
inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) equations
TF-IDF(t, d, D) = TF(t, d) · IDF(t, D),
(1a)
TF(t, d) =
ft,d
P
l′∈d fl′,d
,
(1b)
IDF(t, D) = log
N
{d ∈D : t ∈d},
(1c)
where TF is the term frequency that quantifies the rate of occurrence of a
lexical term t in a document d (e.g., sustainability disclosures), computed as
9
Table 1: Classification of NLP papers for corporate sustainability analysis, detailing the
algorithm category and tasks covered.
Paper
Lexical
Semantic
Syntactic
Topic Extraction
Impact
Classification
Rating
Dialogue
Linguistic
Patterns
Thematic
Universal
Topic Discovery
Polarity
Strategic
Aggregated
Direct
[69]
✓
✓
✓
✓
[50]
✓
✓
[83]
✓
✓
✓
[9, 76]
✓
✓
[97]
✓
✓
[45]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[66]
✓
✓
✓
[87]
✓
✓
✓
[34]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[82]
✓
✓
✓
✓
[49]
✓
✓
✓
✓
[38]
✓
✓
✓
[58]
✓
✓
[37]
✓
✓
✓
[8]
✓
✓
[18]
✓
✓
✓
[62, 36]
✓
✓
[44, 85]
✓
✓
a proportion of all terms in the document – i.e., Eq. (1b), while IDF is the
inverse document frequency that measures the importance of a term across
multiple documents Eq. (1c). A lexical term is less important if it appears in
more documents, and vice-versa. This prevents words which are commonly
used, but have relatively insignificant meaning such as ‘he, she, they’, to be
flagged as significant. The quantity TF-IDF in Eq.(1a) provides a measure
of the overall statistical significance of a keyword, by weighting Eq. (1b)
and Eq. (1c). The three quantities, TF, IDF, and TF-IDF may be utilised
independently from one another, subject to the use case.
Given their simplicity, lexical methods are appropriate for relatively un-
complicated tasks that do not require significant linguistic understanding.
For example, lexical methods can be deployed for task (T5) linguistic pat-
terns, to derive keyword (term) frequency patterns in sustainability disclo-
sures [8]. On the other hand, for more complex tasks such as T1–T4, lexical
analysis is utilised as a feature engineering tool rather than a standalone
10
method.
For example, TF-IDF vectorisation has been employed to iden-
tify companies of interest for ESG classification from news headlines [34],
while TF-IDF-extracted features have been used to detect environmental
claims [83].
3.2. Semantic methods
Semantic methods interpret textual content to understand its meaning [56].
This can extend beyond understanding the presence of individual words, to
involve contextual understanding and implicit connotations. Unlike lexical
methods that simply identify word occurrences, semantic approaches often
leverage word embeddings, which are vector representations of words within
a multi-dimensional space. We further distinguish these two approaches by
analysing the sentence “Renewable energy is sustainable, as it does not utilise
finite resources”.
A lexical approach registers the occurrences of individ-
ual words (i.e. ‘renewable’, ‘sustainability’, ‘finite’), without grasping their
deeper and interconnected meanings. On the other hand, semantic methods,
by determining the proximity of their respective word vectors, interpret ‘re-
newable’ as synonymous with ‘sustainability’ but antonymous with ‘finite’.
This helps semantic algorithms comprehend that ‘renewable’ is conceptu-
ally linked to ‘sustainability’, unlike ‘finite’ which implies that resources are
exhaustible.
Traditional methods such as GloVe derive text embeddings from word
co-occurrences, and can be leveraged to capture semantic relationships [67].
For instance, similarity methods can be employed on word embeddings to
classify sentences according to their relevance to each ESG indicator [37].
However, while useful, these traditional methods may not capture linguistic
subtleties comprehensively, paving the way for more advanced techniques.
As a significant leap in semantic understanding, deep learning models
such as BERT [25] powerfully capture the intricacies of text. BERT em-
ploys bidirectional attention mechanisms to compute the two-way influence
between words. As a result, important contextual and semantic information
of a sentence can be captured. BERT develops general language understand-
ing through pre-training on a wide variety of text corpora, and subsequently
is fine tuned for specific tasks.
As they attain a high level of semantic understanding, BERT models are
suitable for tasks within the corporate sustainability analysis field that re-
quire complex language understanding, without being specifically structured
for generative tasks. Therefore, BERT is appropriate for complex language
11
understanding tasks like (T1) topic extraction, (T2) impact classification and
(T3) rating, but not generative tasks such as (T4) dialogue. In line with this,
BERT-like models have been used for ESG label classification [50], producing
company environmental scores [58], and to derive topics and their associated
keywords for ESG-related risk factors [49] using BERT-generated text em-
beddings.
Similar to BERT, generative large language models (Gen-LLMs) such
as GPT-4 also involve the comprehension of text by exploiting deep learn-
ing based attention architectures [3], and pre-training on large text corpora.
However, by learning to predict the next word given the preceding text [27],
their focus extends beyond understanding language, to the generation of co-
herent text, as well as inference and reasoning capabilities [75]. This makes
them well-suited for generative answering and summarisation tasks found
within (T4) dialogue, and advantageous for reasoning tasks like (T3) rating
which involves complex evaluation [55]. As such, generative LLMs have been
leveraged for transforming TCFD disclosures into dialogue format, as well
as evaluating sustainability disclosures for conformity to TCFD reporting
guidelines [62]. The latter demonstrates the reasoning abilities of generative
LLMs, showing how they can be leveraged to evaluate corporate sustainabil-
ity performance from disclosures.
3.3. Syntactic methods
Syntactic approaches involve analysing the structure of sentences in terms
of grammatical and language rules [94]. This contrasts with other approaches
like analysing the occurrence of lexicons and interpreting textual meaning.
To elaborate on the latter, while semantic methods can involve a higher level
of abstraction (i.e., comprehending the hidden or implied connotations of
words), syntactic measures focus on the organisation of words and phrases
within a sentence without interpreting them more broadly.
Syntactic methods include part-of-speech (POS) tagging [15], dependency
parsing [51], and constituency parsing [92], amongst others. These methods
can augment efforts to accomplish several complex NLP tasks for corporate
sustainability analysis, although they have only seen limited application so
far. For instance, when combined with other methods like semantic analy-
sis, text can be analysed more granularly. In other domains such as finance
and economics, aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) has already been
achieved through POS tagging and semantic rules [57, 19]. Such integrated
approaches can more intricately tackle task (T2) impact classification, by
12
Classify this as 
sustainability risk or 
opportunity. Explain 
your decision.
"Company X, known for its 
portfolios in various industries, 
proposes a multi-million dollar 
project for rearing animals. This 
will be executed on land 
spanning several hundred 
acres.”
Classification: Risk
Interpretability: “Company X, known for 
its portfolios in various industries, 
proposes a multi-million dollar project 
for rearing animals. This will be executed 
on land spanning several hundred acres.” 
Explanability: Animal rearing on a large 
scale can impact the environment, due to 
deforestation for the grazing land, 
methane emissions from livestock, strain 
on water resources. 
XAI
Figure 2: Alongside outputting a decision for sustainability impact classification, XAI can
provide an interpretation and explanation
revealing impact insights toward aspects.
To illustrate with an example,
within the sentence “Company X has good emissions performance despite
having poor employee wellness”, ABSA allows for the aspect ‘emissions per-
formance’ to be labelled as positive and the aspect ‘employee wellness’ to be
labelled as negative. Distinguishing between the impact of the two aspects
enables a finer analysis of sustainability text. Additionally, syntactic anal-
ysis can also be used for identifying companies and their relationships with
respect to sustainability activities [29]. Such methodologies can be enabled
by explicit syntactic attributes (i.e., POS, dependency parsing) in addition
to semantic patterns. Topics can be derived from the extracted links be-
tween companies and their sustainability practices to solve task (T1) topic
extraction.
Additionally, these links can be further processed to evaluate
corporate sustainability performance, in the spirit of task (T3) rating. Other
applications of syntactic analysis include evaluating the grammatical clauses
of disclosure sentences [18], in line with (T5) linguistic patterns, or the pars-
ing of sustainability-related concepts, in a similar vein to the extraction of
financial concepts [28].
4. XNLP enhances subjectivity mitigation
The exploration of NLP methods from the lexical, semantic, syntactic
perspectives provides a pathway for achieving tasks T1-T5, mitigating the
13
subjectivity challenges within sustainability disclosures.
As we move for-
ward, our focus shifts toward enhancing these efforts by scaffolding the NLP
methods with XAI capabilities (interpretability, explainability and faithful-
ness), forming the core components of explainable natural language process-
ing (XNLP) as defined earlier. Despite their potential, these XAI features
are still uncommon within the domain of NLP for corporate sustainability
analysis, representing a promising research area that has yet to gain traction.
We describe these capabilities below.
Interpretability. An AI model’s capacity to provide an understanding
of its mechanism [13]. For example, scoring which keywords are most
salient for an algorithm’s classification [77].
Explainability. An AI model’s capacity to explain why it produces an
output [13].
For example, explaining the reasoning steps for model
decisions, as enabled by large language models [93].
Faithfulness.
The accuracy of an AI model’s interpretability and ex-
plainability with respect to its true workings [53, 88, 90]. For exam-
ple, the extent to which a model’s feature salience scores and pro-
vided explanations are representative of its actual workings. Analysing
faithfulness can be challenging given the lack of ground truth for a
model’s explainability or interpretability, with several approaches in-
volving dataset modification to verify the feature importance estimated
by interpretability methods [43].
Integrating XAI capabilities extends the effectiveness of NLP methods,
ensuring they further address the subjectivity challenges of the data and an-
alyst dimensions. This ultimately enhances NLP-driven corporate sustain-
ability analysis. We develop this idea by elaborating on the value of these
XAI capabilities for NLP-driven corporate sustainability analysis.
4.1. Achieving trustworthy insights
XAI capabilities allow NLP models to extend beyond classifications and
predictions, providing analysts useful insights through faithful explanations
and interpretations [52, 59]. These insights enhance NLP trustworthiness
within corporate sustainability analysis, by clarifying model decisions along
with the ambiguity of sustainability disclosures.
14
For example, figure 2 highlights how interpretability, explainability and
faithfulness enhances trust in an NLP model’s classification for sustainability
text. Interpretability allows an analyst to verify that appropriate and relevant
text features (i.e.
‘rearing animals’ instead of ‘portfolios’), are exploited
for classifying the sentence’s risk impact (similar to the concepts used in
self-interpretable image classification – e.g., [89]). Explainability explicates
the relevance of ‘rearing animals’ to sustainability risk, further justifying
the model’s classification.
It explains the link between ‘rearing animals’,
deforestation, methane emissions, and strained water resources, resolving the
ambiguity surrounding the term ‘rearing animals’. Faithfulness ensures that
the insights from interpretability and explainability are meaningful in that
they accurately reflect the model’s mechanism. Put together, interpretability,
explainability and faithfulness prove the robustness of the model’s decision-
making process, increasing an analyst’s trust in its classification output.
Integrating these capabilities within NLP has already proven to be of sig-
nificant for trust-dependent sectors like healthcare [40]. This reinforces their
broader applicability to corporate sustainability analysis, where trustworthy
and credible NLP insights are also critical [39]. Such integration will allow
NLP models to produce more actionable insights for analysts.
4.2. Inferring patterns for greenwashing research
Interpretable NLP models can afford cues on the interdependence be-
tween different features within sustainability disclosures. This can inspire
researchers to theorise and subsequently validate the causal and correlation
relationships between attributes relevant to corporate sustainability analy-
sis [52, 59]. By doing so, our understanding of under-explored issues can be
augmented, mitigating longstanding issues within the domain.
To elaborate, white-box models or intrinsically interpretable models (Naive
Bayes Classifiers, Generalised Additive Models, Decision Trees etc.), allow
us to grasp the decision-making process from feature inputs to classification,
implying the significance of specific features and their relationships with pre-
dictions. For instance, text classification models designed with interpretabil-
ity techniques can elucidate the influence of keywords for classification deci-
sions [95]. Developing a similar white-box model for classifying greenwashing
texts allows us to study how specific text features result in a positive clas-
sification. This can offer hints on the semantic and syntactic features that
characterise greenwashed texts. From a ‘machine’ based perspective, it can
powerfully reveal latent data patterns easy for an analyst to miss. This fresh
15
angle would strengthen existing greenwashing research that predominantly
involves human analysis of sustainability texts [21], making greenwashing
more understandable and detectable.
In this fashion, interpretability can
improve the unreliability and ambiguity issues in the field arising from the
greenwashing phenomenon.
4.3. Generalisability across frameworks and sources
Sustainability disclosures stem from different sources and are presented
through diverse frameworks.
As such, they can have differing linguistic
and textual features, posing a challenge for NLP models to generalise. To
elaborate, while firms can focus corporate sustainability disclosures on pos-
itive efforts [16], government-linked sustainability disclosures may mandate
firms to disclose sustainability related risks (such as U.S. Securities and Ex-
change Commission 10k reports) [48]. An impact classification model trained
on corporate sustainability disclosures may not adapt well to government-
linked sustainability disclosures, as the latter more frequently carries nega-
tive impact. On top of heterogeneous sustainability data, the generalisability
problem is further compounded by the lack of available datasets within the
field [50]. This reduces the diversity of data for training robust models. In
light of limited data availability, interpretability methods provides an alter-
native means for mitigating generalisability issues.
Specifically, interpretability allows us to understand a model’s sensitivity
to training data, providing insight into portions of data that cause overfit-
ting. Recent works such as [63] detail a method to do so through a memory
perturbation equation. The paper faithfully derives ‘shirt, pullover’ as classes
the model is most sensitive to while training on the FMNIST dataset, and
demonstrates how removing these classes can improve model generalisability
performance. Moreover, it also highlights how specific samples and training
epochs impact model sensitivity. While this method has been deployed for
computer vision, the same principles can be adapted to NLP for sustainability
analysis. Leveraging such a tool, NLP practitioners can consider removing
portions of data most prone to model overfitting. This optimises training
for general performance across the different sustainability disclosures. By
enhancing generalisability, NLP models can effectively analyse diverse types
of information associated with a firm’s sustainability efforts [50]. This po-
tentially compensates for incompleteness and unreliability data problems,
by reducing over-reliance on specific sources that omit important details or
incredible information.
16
4.4. Mitigating bias
By producing consistent and reproducible insights, NLP can partially
address the potential bias of analysts that conduct corporate sustainability
analysis. However, NLP also risks introducing its own biases if not designed
transparently.
To elaborate, NLP constructed with XAI capabilities can
elucidate its decision-making process, allowing analysts to verify its learned
features [72]. While this may still incur the partiality of analyst judgement,
an XAI enhanced model can conversely highlight potentially overlooked fea-
tures to analysts, guiding them to produce more balanced corporate sustain-
ability assessments. Consequently, XAI capabilities can enable a synergistic
interaction between NLP models and analysts for reducing potential bias.
5. Conclusion
XNLP algorithms are well equipped for sustainability analysis given that
they encompass both linguistic understanding and XAI capabilities. To elab-
orate on this, while lexical, semantic and syntactic analysis of text automates
and enhances sustainability analysis, XAI further mitigates the subjectiv-
ity challenge of sustainability assessments. However, NLP for sustainability
analysis has not yet embraced these directions, leaving its vast potential un-
tapped. This underscores an opportunity for researchers and developers to
explore the strategies highlighted—achieving trustworthy insights, inferring
patterns for greenwashing research, generalisability across frameworks and
sources, mitigating bias—to enhance NLP for tasks (T1-T5). These efforts
can not only improve sustainability analysis but potentially reshape how
businesses, investors, and regulators address corporate sustainability report-
ing and attribution.
Limitations
Given that the development of NLP methods for sustainability analysis is still
nascent, several papers that describe NLP methods for sustainability analysis
entail emerging research that have not yet undergone extensive peer-review.
Despite our attempts to filter out papers with evident shortcomings, it is
important to acknowledge that some of the discussed papers may contain
non-authoritative viewpoints.
17
References
[1] Indra Abeysekera. A framework for sustainability reporting. Sustain-
ability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, 13(6):1386–1409,
2022.
[2] Marissa Abram, Karen Mancini, and R. Parker. Methods to integrate
natural language processing into qualitative research.
International
Journal of Qualitative Methods, 19, 12 2020.
[3] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge
Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt,
Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[4] Adriana Barbeito-Caama˜no and Ricardo Chalmeta.
Using big data
to evaluate corporate social responsibility and sustainable development
practices. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Manage-
ment, 27(6):2831–2848, 2020.
[5] Florian Berg, Julian F K¨olbel, and Roberto Rigobon. Aggregate Confu-
sion: The Divergence of ESG Ratings*. Review of Finance, 26(6):1315–
1344, 05 2022.
[6] Felix Beske, Ellen Haustein, and Peter C. Lorson. Materiality analy-
sis in sustainability and integrated reports. Sustainability Accounting,
Management and Policy Journal, 11(1):162–186, 2020.
[7] Felix Beske, Ellen Haustein, and Peter C Lorson. Materiality analy-
sis in sustainability and integrated reports. Sustainability Accounting,
Management and Policy Journal, 11(1):162–186, 2020.
[8] Dan Bi, Ju-e Guo, Erlong Zhao, Shaolong Sun, and Shouyang Wang.
Using word embedding for environmental violation analysis: Evidence
from pennsylvania unconventional oil and gas compliance reports. En-
vironmental Development, 47:100905, 2023.
[9] Julia Anna Bingler, Mathias Kraus, Markus Leippold, and Nicolas We-
bersinke. Cheap talk and cherry-picking: What climatebert has to say on
corporate climate risk disclosures. Finance Research Letters, 47:102776,
2022.
18
[10] Olivier Boiral and Jean-Fran¸cois Henri. Is sustainability performance
comparable? a study of gri reports of mining organizations. Business &
Society, 56(2):283–317, 2017.
[11] Amina Buallay.
Sustainability reporting and firm’s performance:
Comparative study between manufacturing and banking sectors.
In-
ternational Journal of Productivity and Performance Management,
69(3):431–445, 2020.
[12] G¨ul¸cin B¨uy¨uk¨ozkan and Ya˘gmur Karabulut. Sustainability performance
evaluation: Literature review and future directions. Journal of environ-
mental management, 217:253–267, 2018.
[13] E. Cambria, R. Mao, M. Chen, Z. Wang, and S. Ho. Seven pillars for the
future of artificial intelligence. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 38(06):62–69,
nov 2023.
[14] Simone Cenci, Matteo Burato, Marek Rei, and Maurizio Zollo.
The
alignment of companies’ sustainability behavior and emissions with
global climate targets. Nature Communications, 14(1):7831, 2023 2023.
[15] Alebachew Chiche and Betselot Yitagesu. Part of speech tagging: a
systematic review of deep learning and machine learning approaches.
Journal of Big Data, 9(1):10, 2022.
[16] Charles H. Cho, Robin W. Roberts, and Dennis M. Patten. The language
of us corporate environmental disclosure. Accounting, Organizations and
Society, 35:431–443, 5 2010.
[17] K. R. Chowdhary.
Natural Language Processing, pages 603–649.
Springer India, New Delhi, India, 2020.
[18] Peter M Clarkson, Jordan Ponn, Gordon D Richardson, Frank Rudzicz,
Albert Tsang, and Jingjing Wang. A textual analysis of us corporate
social responsibility reports. Abacus, 56(1):3–34, 2020.
[19] Sergio Consoli, Luca Barbaglia, and Sebastiano Manzan. Fine-grained,
aspect-based sentiment analysis on economic and financial lexicon.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 247:108781, 2022.
19
[20] Nicole Darnall, Hyunjung Ji, Kazuyuki Iwata, and Toshi H. Arimura.
Do esg reporting guidelines and verifications enhance firms’ information
disclosure?
Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Man-
agement, 29:1214–1230, 9 2022.
[21] Sebasti˜ao Vieira de Freitas Netto, Marcos Felipe Falc˜ao Sobral, Ana
Regina Bezerra Ribeiro, and Gleibson Robert da Luz Soares. Concepts
and forms of greenwashing: A systematic review. Environmental Sci-
ences Europe, 32(1):1–12, 2020.
[22] Philippe Delacote, Tara L’Horty, Andreas Kontoleon, Thales AP West,
Anna Creti, Ben Filewod, Gwenole LeVelly, Alejandro Guizar-Couti˜no,
Ben Groom, and Micah Elias. Strong transparency required for carbon
credit mechanisms. Nature Sustainability, pages 1–8, 2024.
[23] James Demastus and Nancy E Landrum. Organizational sustainabil-
ity schemes align with weak sustainability. Business Strategy and the
Environment, 33(2):707–725, 2024.
[24] Bel´en Derqui. Towards sustainable development: Evolution of corporate
sustainability in multinational firms. Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environmental Management, 27(6):2712–2723, 2020.
[25] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language un-
derstanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[26] Piotr Dmuchowski,
Wojciech Dmuchowski,
Aneta H. Baczewska-
Dabrowska, and Barbara Gworek. Environmental, social, and gover-
nance (esg) model; impacts and sustainable investment – global trends
and poland’s perspective.
Journal of Environmental Management,
329:117023, 3 2023.
[27] Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaodong Liu, Yu Wang,
Jianfeng Gao, Ming Zhou, and Hsiao-Wuen Hon. Unified language model
pre-training for natural language understanding and generation. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[28] Kelvin Du, Frank Xing, Rui Mao, and Erik Cambria.
Finsenticnet:
A concept-level lexicon for financial sentiment analysis. In 2023 IEEE
20
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pages 109–
114. IEEE, 2023.
[29] Adrien Ehrhardt and Minh Tuan Nguyen. Automated esg report analy-
sis by joint entity and relation extraction. In Michael Kamp, Irena Ko-
prinska, Adrien Bibal, Tassadit Bouadi, Benoˆıt Fr´enay, Luis Gal´arraga,
Jos´e Oramas, Linara Adilova, Yamuna Krishnamurthy, Bo Kang, Chris-
tine Largeron, Jefrey Lijffijt, Tiphaine Viard, Pascal Welke, Mas-
similiano Ruocco, Erlend Aune, Claudio Gallicchio, Gregor Schiele,
Franz Pernkopf, Michaela Blott, Holger Fr¨oning, G¨unther Schindler,
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Rinzivillo, Przemyslaw
Biecek, Eirini Ntoutsi, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Bodo Rosenhahn, Christo-
pher Buckley, Daniela Cialfi, Pablo Lanillos, Maxwell Ramstead, Tim
Verbelen, Pedro M. Ferreira, Giuseppina Andresini, Donato Malerba,
Ib´eria Medeiros, Philippe Fournier-Viger, M. Saqib Nawaz, Sebastian
Ventura, Meng Sun, Min Zhou, Valerio Bitetta, Ilaria Bordino, An-
drea Ferretti, Francesco Gullo, Giovanni Ponti, Lorenzo Severini, Rita
Ribeiro, Jo˜ao Gama, Ricard Gavald`a, Lee Cooper, Naghmeh Ghazaleh,
Jonas Richiardi, Damian Roqueiro, Diego Saldana Miranda, Konstanti-
nos Sechidis, and Guilherme Gra¸ca, editors, Machine Learning and Prin-
ciples and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 325–340,
Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.
[30] Li Li Eng, Mahelet Fikru, and Thanyaluk Vichitsarawong. Comparing
the informativeness of sustainability disclosures versus esg disclosure
ratings.
Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
13:494–518, 2 2022.
[31] Kira R. Fabrizio and Eun-Hee Kim. Reluctant disclosure and trans-
parency: Evidence from environmental disclosures. Organization Sci-
ence, 30(6):1207–1231, 2019.
[32] Marco Fasan. Annual reports, sustainability reports and integrated re-
ports: Trends in corporate disclosure. In Integrated reporting: Concepts
and cases that redefine corporate accountability, pages 41–57. Springer,
Cham, Switzerland, 2013.
[33] Davide Fiaschi, Elisa Giuliani, Federica Nieri, and Nicola Salvati. How
bad is your company?
measuring corporate wrongdoing beyond the
magic of esg metrics. Business Horizons, 63(3):287–299, 2020.
21
[34] Jannik Fischbach, Max Adam, Victor Dzhagatspanyan, Daniel Mendez,
Julian Frattini, Oleksandr Kosenkov, and Parisa Elahidoost. Automatic
esg assessment of companies by mining and evaluating media coverage
data: Nlp approach and tool, 2022.
[35] Maria Folqu´e, Elena Escrig-Olmedo, and Teresa Corzo Santamaria. Sus-
tainable development and financial system: Integrating esg risks through
sustainable investment strategies in a climate change context. Sustain-
able Development, 29(5):876–890, 2021.
[36] Dar´ıo Garigliotti.
Sdg target detection in environmental reports us-
ing retrieval-augmented generation with llms. In Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Natural Language Processing Meets Climate Change (Cli-
mateNLP 2024), pages 241–250, 2024.
[37] Tushar Goel, Palak Jain, Ishan Verma, Lipika Dey, and Shubham Pali-
wal. Mining company sustainability reports to aid financial decision-
making. In Proc. of AAAI Workshop on Know. Disc. from Unstructured
Data in Fin. Services, 2020.
[38] Jaime Gonz´alez-Gonz´alez, Silvia Garc´ıa-M´endez, Francisco De Arriba-
P´erez, Francisco J Gonz´alez-Casta˜no, and ´Oscar Barba-Seara. Explain-
able automatic industrial carbon footprint estimation from bank trans-
action classification using natural language processing. IEEE Access,
10:126326–126338, 2022.
[39] Mireia Guix, Claudia Oll´e, and Xavier Font. Trustworthy or mislead-
ing communication of voluntary carbon offsets in the aviation industry.
Tourism Management, 88:104430, 2022.
[40] Sooji Han, Rui Mao, and Erik Cambria. Hierarchical attention network
for explainable depression detection on Twitter aided by metaphor con-
cept mappings. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 94–104, Gyeongju, Repub-
lic of Korea, 2022. International Committee on Computational Linguis-
tics.
[41] Colin Higgins, Samuel Tang, and Wendy Stubbs.
On managing
hypocrisy: The transparency of sustainability reports. Journal of Busi-
ness Research, 114:395–407, 2020.
22
[42] Anne-Kathrin Hinze and Franziska Sump. Corporate social responsi-
bility and financial analysts: a review of the literature. Sustainability
Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, 10(1):183–207, 2019.
[43] Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Been Kim.
A benchmark for interpretability methods in deep neural networks. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[44] Konstantin Ignatov. When esg talks: Esg tone of 10-k reports and its
significance to stock markets. International Review of Financial Analy-
sis, 89:102745, 2023.
[45] Juyeon Kang and Ismail El Maarouf. FinSim4-ESG shared task: Learn-
ing semantic similarities for the financial domain. extended edition to
ESG insights. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Financial Tech-
nology and Natural Language Processing (FinNLP), pages 211–217, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid), December 2022. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[46] Eun-Hee Kim and Thomas Lyon. Greenwash vs. brownwash: Exagger-
ation and undue modesty in corporate sustainability disclosure. Orga-
nization Science, 26:705–723, 06 2015.
[47] Jeong-Bon Kim, Chong Wang, and Feng Wu. The real effects of risk
disclosures: evidence from climate change reporting in 10-ks. Review of
Accounting Studies.
[48] Jeong-Bon Kim, Chong Wang, and Feng Wu. The real effects of risk
disclosures: evidence from climate change reporting in 10-ks. Review of
Accounting Studies, 28(4):2271–2318, 2023.
[49] Min Gyeong Kim, Kyu Sung Kim, and Kun Chang Lee. Analyzing the
effects of topics underlying companies’ financial disclosures about risk
factors on prediction of esg risk ratings: Emphasis on bertopic. In 2022
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pages 4520–
4527, 2022.
[50] Jaeyoung Lee and Misuk Kim. Esg information extraction with cross-
sectoral and multi-source adaptation based on domain-tuned language
models. Expert Systems with Applications, 221:119726, 2023.
23
[51] Zuchao Li, Hai Zhao, and Kevin Parnow. Global greedy dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
volume 34, pages 8319–8326, 2020.
[52] Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine
learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery.
Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018.
[53] Yibing Liu, Haoliang Li, Yangyang Guo, Chenqi Kong, Jing Li, and
Shiqi Wang. Rethinking attention-model explainability through faith-
fulness violation test. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 13807–13824. PMLR, 2022.
[54] Bianca Alves Almeida Machado, L´ıvia Cristina Pinto Dias, and Alberto
Fonseca. Transparency of materiality analysis in gri-based sustainabil-
ity reports. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Manage-
ment, 28:570–580, 3 2021.
[55] Rui Mao, Guanyi Chen, Xulang Zhang, Frank Guerin, and Erik Cam-
bria.
GPTEval:
A survey on assessments of ChatGPT and GPT-
4. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro
Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue, editors, Proceedings of the 2024
Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 7844–7866,
Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL.
[56] Rui Mao, Kai He, Xulang Zhang, Guanyi Chen, Jinjie Ni, Zonglin Yang,
and Erik Cambria. A survey on semantic processing techniques. Infor-
mation Fusion, 101:101988, 2024.
[57] Rui Mao and Xiao Li. Bridging towers of multi-task learning with a
gating mechanism for aspect-based sentiment analysis and sequential
metaphor identification.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 13534–13542, 2021.
[58] Srishti Mehra, Robert Louka, and Yixun Zhang. Esgbert: Language
model to help with classification tasks related to companies environmen-
tal, social, and governance practices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16788,
2022.
24
[59] Gianmarco Mengaldo. Explain the black box for the sake of science:
Revisiting the scientific method in the era of generative artificial intelli-
gence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10557, 2024.
[60] Johannes Meuer, Julian Koelbel, and Volker H. Hoffmann. On the na-
ture of corporate sustainability. Organization and Environment, 33:319–
341, 9 2020.
[61] Doan Thi Thuc Nguyen. An empirical study on the impact of sustain-
ability reporting on firm value. Journal of Competitiveness, 2020.
[62] Jingwei Ni, Julia Bingler, Chiara Colesanti-Senni, Mathias Kraus,
Glen Gostlow, Tobias Schimanski, Dominik Stammbach, Saeid Ashraf
Vaghefi, Qian Wang, Nicolas Webersinke, Tobias Wekhof, Tingyu Yu,
and Markus Leippold. Chatreport: Democratizing sustainability disclo-
sure analysis through llm-based tools. EMNLP 2023 - 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of
the System Demonstrations, pages 21–51, 7 2023.
[63] Peter Nickl, Lu Xu, Dharmesh Tailor, Thomas M¨ollenhoff, and Mo-
hammad Emtiyaz E Khan. The memory-perturbation equation: Under-
standing model's sensitivity to data. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 26923–26949, New York, 2023.
Curran Associates, Inc.
[64] I. Nikolaou, K. Evangelinos, and W. Leal Filho.
A system dynamic
approach for exploring the effects of climate change risks on firms’ eco-
nomic performance. Journal of Cleaner Production, 103:499–506, 2015.
Carbon Emissions Reduction: Policies, Technologies, Monitoring, As-
sessment and Modeling.
[65] Guido Orzes, Antonella Maria Moretto, Maling Ebrahimpour, Marco
Sartor, Mattia Moro, and Matteo Rossi. United nations global compact:
Literature review and theory-based research agenda. Journal of cleaner
production, 177:633–654, 2018.
[66] Stefan Pasch and Daniel Ehnes. Nlp for responsible finance: Fine-tuning
transformer-based models for esg. In 2022 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Big Data (Big Data), pages 3532–3536, 2022.
25
[67] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP),
pages 1532–1543, 2014.
[68] Panayis Pitrakkos and Warren Maroun. Evaluating the quality of carbon
disclosures. Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal,
11:553–589, 4 2020.
[69] Marco Polignano, Nicola Bellantuono, Francesco Paolo Lagrasta, Sergio
Caputo, Pierpaolo Pontrandolfo, and Giovanni Semeraro. An NLP ap-
proach for the analysis of global reporting initiative indexes from corpo-
rate sustainability reports. In Proceedings of the First Computing Social
Responsibility Workshop within the 13th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, pages 1–8, Marseille, France, June 2022. European
Language Resources Association.
[70] Prajal Pradhan, Lu´ıs Costa, Diego Rybski, Wolfgang Lucht, and
J¨urgen P Kropp. A systematic study of sustainable development goal
(sdg) interactions. Earth’s Future, 5(11):1169–1179, 2017.
[71] Ardian Qorri, Saranda Gashi, and Andrzej Kraslawski.
A practical
method to measure sustainability performance of supply chains with in-
complete information. Journal of Cleaner Production, 341:130707, 2022.
[72] Manish Raghavan, Solon Barocas, Jon Kleinberg, and Karen Levy. Mit-
igating bias in algorithmic hiring: Evaluating claims and practices. In
Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and trans-
parency, pages 469–481, 2020.
[73] R Rajesh. Exploring the sustainability performances of firms using envi-
ronmental, social, and governance scores. Journal of Cleaner Production,
247:119600, 2020.
[74] Ivan Ruiz Manuel and Kornelis Blok. Quantitative evaluation of large
corporate climate action initiatives shows mixed progress in their first
half-decade. Nature Communications, 14(1), 2023.
[75] Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang
Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le
26
Scao, Arun Raja, et al.
Multitask prompted training enables zero-
shot task generalization. International Conference on Machine Learning,
2022.
[76] Tobias Schimanski, Julia Bingler, Mathias Kraus, Camilla Hyslop, and
Markus Leippold. ClimateBERT-NetZero: Detecting and assessing net
zero and reduction targets. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika
Bali, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 15745–15756, Singapore, Decem-
ber 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[77] Hendrik Schuff,
Alon Jacovi,
Heike Adel,
Yoav Goldberg,
and
Ngoc Thang Vu. Human interpretation of saliency-based explanation
over text.
In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pages 611–636, 2022.
[78] Tyler A. Scott, Nicholas Marantz, and Nicola Ulibarri. Use of boiler-
plate language in regulatory documents: Evidence from environmental
impact statements. Journal of Public Administration Research and The-
ory, 32:576–590, 6 2022.
[79] Elisabeth Sinnewe, Troy Yao, and Mahbub Zaman. Informing or obfus-
cating stakeholders: Integrated reporting and the information environ-
ment. Business strategy and the environment, 30(8):3893–3906, 2021.
[80] Nils Smeuninx, Bernard De Clerck, and Walter Aerts. Measuring the
readability of sustainability reports: A corpus-based analysis through
standard formulae and nlp. International Journal of Business Commu-
nication, 57(1):52–85, 2020.
[81] A. Søgaard.
Explainable Natural Language Processing.
Synthesis
Lectures on Human Language Technologies. Springer Cham, Cham,
Switzerland, 2021.
[82] Alik Sokolov, Jonathan Mostovoy, Jack Ding, and Luis Seco. Building
machine learning systems for automated esg scoring. The Journal of
Impact and ESG Investing, 1(3):39–50, 2021.
[83] Dominik Stammbach, Nicolas Webersinke, Julia Bingler, Mathias Kraus,
and Markus Leippold. Environmental claim detection. In Anna Rogers,
27
Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki, editors, Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 1051–1066, Toronto, Canada, July
2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[84] Gordon Kuo Siong Tan. Assembling sustainability reporting in singa-
pore. Competition & Change, 26(5):629–649, 2022.
[85] Jinfang Tian, Qian Cheng, Rui Xue, Yilong Han, and Yuli Shan. A
dataset on corporate sustainability disclosure. Scientific Data, 10(1):182,
2023.
[86] Thomas A Tsalis, Kyveli E Malamateniou, Dimitrios Koulouriotis, and
Ioannis E Nikolaou. New challenges for corporate sustainability report-
ing: United nations’ 2030 agenda for sustainable development and the
sustainable development goals. Corporate Social Responsibility and En-
vironmental Management, 27(4):1617–1629, 2020.
[87] Yu-Min Tseng, Chung-Chi Chen, Hen-Hsen Huang, and Hsin-Hsi Chen.
Dynamicesg: A dataset for dynamically unearthing esg ratings from
news articles. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 5412–5416, 2023.
[88] Hugues Turb´e, Mina Bjelogrlic, Christian Lovis, and Gianmarco Men-
galdo. Evaluation of post-hoc interpretability methods in time-series
classification. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5(3):250–260, 2023.
[89] Hugues Turb´e, Mina Bjelogrlic, Gianmarco Mengaldo, and Christian
Lovis. Protos-vit: Visual foundation models for sparse self-explainable
classifications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10025, 2024.
[90] Jiawen Wei, Hugues Turb´e’, and Gianmarco Mengaldo.
Revisiting
the robustness of post-hoc interpretability methods.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.19683, 2024.
[91] Jin Boon Wong and Qin Zhang.
Stock market reactions to adverse
esg disclosure via media channels.
The British Accounting Review,
54(1):101045, 2022.
28
[92] Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Strongly incremental constituency parsing
with graph neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:21687–21698, 2020.
[93] Wei Jie Yeo, Ranjan Satapathy, Rick Siow Mong Goh, and Erik Cam-
bria. How interpretable are reasoning explanations from prompting large
language models? NAACL Findings, 2024.
[94] Xulang Zhang, Rui Mao, and Erik Cambria. A survey on syntactic pro-
cessing techniques. Artificial Intelligence Review, 56:5645–5728, 2023.
[95] Xulang Zhang, Rui Mao, Kai He, and Erik Cambria. Neurosymbolic
sentiment analysis with dynamic word sense disambiguation. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, page
8772–8783, 2023.
[96] Ramona Zharfpeykan. Representative account or greenwashing? vol-
untary sustainability reports in australia’s mining/metals and financial
services industries. Business Strategy and the Environment, 30(4):2209–
2223, 2021.
[97] Yusheng Zhou, Xueqin Wang, and Kum Fai Yuen. Sustainability disclo-
sure for container shipping: A text-mining approach. Transport Policy,
110:465–477, 9 2021.
29
