Title: Information Retrieval in Friction Stir Welding of Aluminum Alloys by using Natural Language Processing based Algorithms
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.12309v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
Information Retrieval in Friction Stir Welding of Aluminum Alloys by 
using Natural Language Processing based Algorithms 
Akshansh Mishra1 
1 Department of Chemistry, Materials and Chemical Engineering "Giulio Natta", Politecnico di Milano, Milan, 
Italy 
1Orcid id: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4939-359X 
 
Abstract: Text summarization is a technique for condensing a big piece of text into a few 
key elements that give a general impression of the content. When someone requires a quick 
and precise summary of a large amount of information, it becomes vital. If done manually, 
summarizing text can be costly and time-consuming. Natural Language Processing (NLP) is 
the sub-division of Artificial Intelligence that narrows down the gap between technology and 
human cognition by extracting the relevant information from the pile of data. In the present 
work, scientific information regarding the Friction Stir Welding of Aluminum alloys was 
collected from the abstract of scholarly research papers. For extracting the relevant 
information from these research abstracts four Natural Language Processing based algorithms 
i.e. Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), Luhn Algorithm, Lex Rank Algorithm, and KL-
Algorithm were used. In order to evaluate the accuracy score of these algorithms, Recall-
Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) was used. The results showed that the 
Luhn Algorithm resulted in the highest f1-Score of 0.413 in comparison to other algorithms. 
Keywords: Natural Language Processing; Friction Stir Welding; Aluminum Alloys; 
Summarization 
 
1. Introduction 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that focuses on creating 
intelligent machines that can accomplish activities that would normally need human 
intelligence. Artificial intelligence can take data from sensors, equipment, and people, then 
apply it to algorithms to improve operations or accomplish light-out production. AI-driven 
robots are paving the way to the future by providing a slew of benefits, including new 
prospects, increased production efficiency, and a tighter match between machine and human 
interaction [1-6]. The Fourth Industrial Revolution is characterized by knowledge-based work 
that is carried out through automation and the development of new techniques to automate 
jobs. 
There has been a significant amount of study into the intellectualization of industrial control, 
which is currently rather mature. However, industrial data intellectualization is still in its 
early stages, and there are some challenges, primarily because industrial data is 
heterogeneous and multisource, and the majority of it is unstructured data. As a result, 
figuring out how to automatically extract usable information from these unstructured data and 
integrate it is an important aspect of industrial data intelligence. Services centered on the 
2 
 
users' experience, for example, are a significant aspect of value generation and are becoming 
increasingly relevant in the vehicle sector. 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a computational technique that is a branch of 
Artificial Intelligence that gives the ability to a machine system to understand the audible 
words and text just like humans [7-8]. Natural Language Processing algorithms work by 
separating the human-sourced language into fragments for understanding the given context 
by analyzing the main ideas conveyed by the words and further analyzing the grammatical 
structure of the input sentences [9-10]. Natural Language Processing finds application in 
monitoring of social media, language translation, chatbots, grammatical corrections, targeted 
population advertisement, etc [11].  
Natural Language Processing is also been applied to the material science and manufacturing 
domain for knowledge extraction purposes. Shetty et al. [12] used Natural Language 
Processing algorithm for tracking the popularity of polymers on the basis of their applications 
and also for the determination of the polymer material for novel applications as shown in 
Figure 1. Venugopal et al. [13] developed a framework for automating image comprehension 
and text in order to extract the knowledge from the available works of literature on inorganic 
glass materials.  
 
                                 
 
          Figure 1: Implementation of Natural Language Processing algorithm on Polymers’ literatures [6].  
 
There are limited papers available on the application of Natural Language processing in the 
material science and manufacturing domain. The present research work is the first time 
application of Natural Language Processing in the Friction Stir Welding domain for 
knowledge extraction purposes. The main objective of the research work is to summarize the 
3 
 
research study carried out in the field of Friction Stir Welded aluminum joints by using 
various algorithms and further finding out the best algorithm for summarization purposes. 
 
2. Experimental Procedure 
Firstly, 20 abstracts dealing with the Friction Stir Welded aluminum joints were collected 
from the Google Scholar database [14–32]. The collected abstracts were converted into a text 
file for further processing as shown in Figure 2. Secondly, the sentences in the given text file 
were tokenized and frequency distribution was calculated. Thirdly, the punctuation marks in 
the given text were removed followed by the finding and removal of the stop words in the 
text file. Fourthly, the obtained text was subjected to 4 Natural Language Processing based 
algorithms, and their metric features such as recall, precision, and f1-score values were 
calculated by using the ROUGE-N algorithm. N represents the n-gram which is a group of 
tokens or words. 
 
 
 
 
                     Figure 2: Implementation of Natural Language Processing Algorithm in recent work.  
 
4 
 
The calculation of the recall value, precision value, and f1-score is done by Equation 1, 
Equation 2, and Equation 3.  
 
              
                                              
                               
                (1) 
 
                
                                             
                          
              (2) 
 
           
                            
                                                                        (3) 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
The initial plot of the frequency distribution is shown in Figure 3. The final plot of the 
frequency distribution after removing the punctuation marks and stop words is shown in 
Figure 4. The word cloud obtained after these pre-processing steps is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
                                            Figure 3: Frequency Distribution plot at an initial stage 
 
5 
 
 
         Figure 4: Final plot of frequency distribution after removing the punctuation marks and stop words. 
 
 
                                             Figure 5: Word Cloud obtained for the given text file 
 
3.1 Text Summarization by LexRank Algorithm 
LexRank algorithm is an unsupervised eigenvector centrality-based graphical method to 
summarize the given input text automatically. For a graphical representation of a required 
6 
 
sentence, a connectivity matrix that works on the cosine similarity principle is implemented 
as an adjacency matrix. In this approach, a centroid sentence is chosen which acts as a mean 
for all other sentences present in the text file which is followed by the ranking allocation on 
the basis of their similarities. The bag of words model is used to define similarity by 
representing the N (number of all possible words)- dimensional vectors. In the vector 
representation form of the sentence, the value of the corresponding dimension is calculated 
by Equation 4. 
 
                                                            (   )             
                                                                                                                                   (4) 
  
The IDF modified cosine value of the word is calculated by Equation 5. 
 
                   (   )  
∑
          (    ) 
     
√∑
(           ) 
    
     √∑
(           ) 
    
                                (5)                          
 
 
In order to display the output summary, number of sentence were equated to 11. The output 
obtained is shown below: 
The authors tried to butt-weld an aluminum alloy plate to a mild steel plate by friction stir 
welding, and investigated the effects of a pin rotation speed, the position for the pin axis to be 
inserted on the tensile strength and the microstructure of the joint. The maximum tensile 
strength of the joint was about 86% of that of the aluminum alloy base metal. In the study, the 
microstructural evolution and mechanical properties of friction stir welding joint during 
plastic forming and subsequent heat treatment were investigated. The gain size in the SZ is 
smaller than that in the base metal, and is decreased with a decrease of the tool rotation 
speed. Friction stir welding (FSW) of 2219-O and 2219-T6 aluminum alloys was performed 
to investigate the effects of the base material conditions on the FSW characteristics. The 
experimental results indicated that the base material condition has a significant effect on 
weld morphologies, weld defects, and mechanical properties of joints. However, the grain 
size of the stir zone decreased with the decrease in friction heat flow during FSW. The 
aluminum (Al) alloys 6063-T5 and T4 were friction-stir welded at different tool rotation 
speeds (R), and then distributions of the microstructure and hardness were examined in these 
welds. This study aims to experimentally explore the thermal histories and temperature 
distributions in a workpiece during a friction stir welding (FSW) process involving the butt 
joining of aluminum 6061-T6. The dynamic recrystallization (DRX) process and grain 
structure evolution during friction stir welding determine the final microstructure and 
7 
 
performance of weld joints. The joint efficiency (the ratio of the joint strength to the base 
metal strength) of the joint fabricated by FSVW with water cooling was around 87%, while 
this quantity was about 66% for the friction stir welding joint. 
Table 1 shows the recall value, precision value and f1-score obtained by using the LexRank 
algorithm.  
 
                                               Table `1: Performance evaluation of LexRank algorithm 
         Recall Value 
          Precision Value 
                F1-Score 
               1.0 
              0.144 
                  0.252 
 
So, it is observed that the LexRank is an unsupervised text summarizing method based on 
graph-based sentence centrality rating. The essential premise is that sentences "recommend" 
to the reader more similar ones. As a result, if one sentence is highly similar to many others, 
it is likely to be a very important sentence. This sentence's relevance arises from the 
importance of the sentence "recommending" it. As a result, in order to be highly ranked and 
included in a summary, a sentence must be similar to a large number of other sentences. This 
makes obvious sense and enables the algorithms to be used on any fresh text. 
3.2 Text Summarization by Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) Algorithm 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) algorithm also known as Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) is 
used for simulating and modeling the essence of passages and words given in the text 
document by using Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) method. Latent Semantic Analysis 
algorithm statistically analyze and predict the meaning of a given passage by analyzing the 
co-occurance of the given word in a text file. The summary obtained by implementing the 
Latent Semantic Algorithm (LSA) on a given experimental text file is shown below: 
 
In evaluating friction stir welding, critical issues (beyond a sound joint) include 
microstructure control and localized mechanical property variations. Being a solid-state 
process, friction stir welding has the potential to avoid significant changes in microstructure 
and mechanical properties. Dissimilar friction stir welding between magnesium and 
aluminum alloy plates with thicknesses of 2 mm was performed. The tool for welding was 
rotated at speeds ranging from 800 to 1600 rpm under a constant traverse speed of 300 
mm/min. Friction stir welding is an efficient manufacturing method for joining aluminum 
alloy and can dramatically reduce grain size conferring excellent plastic deformation 
properties. The tool for welding was rotated at speeds ranging from 500 to 3?000 r/min 
under a constant traverse speed of 100 mm/min. In this study, an attempt has been made to 
investigate the formation of these defects. Precipitate evolution in friction stir welding of 
2219-T6 aluminum alloys was characterized by transmission electron microscopy. FSW is a 
new solid-state welding process used to join metals and alloys (especially unweldable 
8 
 
aluminums). The friction-stir welding (FSW) of 0.6 cm plates of 2024 Al (140 HV) to 6061 Al 
(100 HV) is characterized by residual, equiaxed grains within the weld zone having average 
sizes ranging from 1 to 15 ?m, exhibiting grain growth from dynamically recrystallized 
grains which provide a mechanism for superplastic flow; producing intercalated, lamellar-
like flow patterns. The hardness values increased from 50 to around 78 (Hv) for friction stir 
welding and FSVW with water systems, respectively. 
The performance evaluation results of LSA algorithm is shown in Table 2: 
                                               
                                              Table `2: Performance evaluation of LSA Algorithm 
         Recall Value 
          Precision Value 
                F1-Score 
               0.987 
              0.155 
                  0.268 
 
It is observed that the recall value and precision value of LSA algorithm is less than those of 
LexRank algorithm but f1-score of LSA algorithm is more than those of LexRank algorithm.  
It is can be seen that the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) is a mathematical technique that is 
used to get insight into a material. Topic Modeling is based on this method. The basic 
concept is to decompose a matrix of what we have i.e. documents and terms into two 
independent document-topic and topic-term matrices. 
3.3 Text Summarization by using Luhn Algorithm 
Luhn algorithm is based on heuristic approach and is one of the earliest method used for 
summarizing the text file. The mechanism of the Luhn algorithm is based on the selection of 
higher importance words on the basis of their frequency distribution and further assigning 
higher weights to the words which are mentioned in the beginning of the text file. The score 
assigned to a sentence is calculated by Equation 6. 
 
      
(                          ) 
                        
                                        (6) 
 
The output summary obtained by the given algorithm is as follows: 
Simulated weld thermal cycles with different peak temperatures have shown that the 
precipitates are dissolved at temperatures higher than 675 K and that the density of the 
strengthening precipitate was reduced by thermal cycles lower than 675 K. A comparison 
between the thermal cycles and isothermal aging has suggested precipitation sequences in 
the softened region during friction-stir welding. The authors tried to butt-weld an aluminum 
alloy plate to a mild steel plate by friction stir welding, and investigated the effects of a pin 
rotation speed, the position for the pin axis to be inserted on the tensile strength and the 
9 
 
microstructure of the joint. Many fragments of the steel were scattered in the aluminum alloy 
matrix and the oxide film removed from the faying surface of the steel by the rubbing motion 
of a rotating pin was observed at the interface between the steel fragments and the aluminum 
alloy matrix. Tensile strength of the welds is about 20% lower than that of the hardening 
aluminum plate, but about 10% higher microhardness is demonstrated by the welds in 
comparison with that of the aluminum plate in annealing condition. Moreover, travel rate of 
the welding head pin has a strong effect on microhardness and tensile strength of the FSW 
welds, and the ratio of rotation speed and travel rate of the head should be in a reasonable 
range to obtain high performance welds. Different R values did not result in significant 
differences in the hardness profile in these welds, except for the width of the softened region 
in the weld of 6063-T5 Al. Postweld aging raised the hardness in most parts of the welds, but 
the increase in hardness was small in the stir zone produced at the lower R values. The 
welding of a lap joint of a commercially pure aluminum plate to a low carbon steel plate (i.e., 
Al plate top, and steel plate bottom) was produced by friction stir welding using various 
rotations and traveling speeds of the tool to investigate the effects of the welding parameters 
on the joint strength. The friction-stir welding (FSW) of 0.6 cm plates of 2024 Al (140 HV) to 
6061 Al (100 HV) is characterized by residual, equiaxed grains within the weld zone having 
average sizes ranging from 1 to 15 ?m, exhibiting grain growth from dynamically 
recrystallized grains which provide a mechanism for superplastic flow; producing 
intercalated, lamellar-like flow patterns. Dislocation spirals and loops are also observed in 
the 2024 Al intercalation regions within the weld zones at higher speeds (>800 rpm) 
corresponding to slightly elevated temperatures introducing dislocation climb, and residual 
microhardness profiles follow microstructural variations which result in a 40% reduction in 
the 6061 Al workpiece microhardness and a 50% reduction in the 2024 Al workpiece 
microhardness just outside the FSW zone. It is found that along the material flowing path 
during friction stir welding, the main DRX mechanisms are different at leading, retreating 
and trailing sides around the tool, and the tool rotation speed (associated with the heat input 
level) determines which type of DRX is easier to occur at different positions along material 
flowing path. The joint efficiency (the ratio of the joint strength to the base metal strength) of 
the joint fabricated by FSVW with water cooling was around 87%, while this quantity was 
about 66% for the friction stir welding joint. 
The result of performance evaluation metrics is shown in Table 3. 
 
                                            Table 3: Performance evaluation of Luhn Algorithm 
         Recall Value 
          Precision Value 
                F1-Score 
               0.996 
              0.260 
                  0.413 
 
It is observed that the f1-score of the Luhn Algorithm is greater than the LexRank and LSA 
algorithm. And also it can be seen that the Luhn's algorithm is a TF-IDF-based technique. 
Only the most important terms are selected based on their frequency. The words that appear 
at the start of the document are given more weight. 
10 
 
3.4 Text Summarization by using KL-Algorithm 
Kullback-Lieber (KL) algorithm is based on greedy method approach by adding a sentence to 
the summary when there is a reduction in KL divergence. KL algorithm checks the 
divergence of the summary vocabulary from its input vocabulary by minimizing it. If there 
are L words in a summary and for a given document D, a criterian is introduced by KL-
algorithm for selection of summary S. The output result obtained by the given algorithm is as 
follows: 
The maximum tensile strength of the joint was about 86% of that of the aluminum alloy base 
metal. The elongation of the FSWed plates is lower than that of the base metal (about 22%). 
However, it is noticeable that the maximum elongation of about 21% is obtained at 1?000 
r/min. In addition, the two types of joints have different fracture location characteristics. 
However, the origin of the defects remains an area of uncertainty. In the heat-affected zone 
the precipitates coarsened. Tensile strength of the welds is about 20% lower than that of the 
hardening aluminum plate, but about 10% higher microhardness is demonstrated by the 
welds in comparison with that of the aluminum plate in annealing condition. However, the 
grain size of the stir zone decreased with the decrease in friction heat flow during FSW. The 
ductility in FS-welded 5083 Al alloy increased with the decrease in friction heat flow. It was 
indicated that the formability in FS-welded 5083 Al alloy was improved by the refinement of 
grain size of the stir zone. Microstructural analyses suggested that the small increase in 
hardness in the stir zone produced at the lower R values was caused by an increase in the 
volume fraction of PFZs. 
Table 4 shows the result of the performance of KL- algorithm. It is observed that the f1-score 
of KL-algorithm which is lowest of all the implemented algorithms.   
 
                                            Table 4: Performance evaluation of KL-Algorithm 
         Recall Value 
          Precision Value 
                F1-Score 
               0.990 
              0.100 
                  0.182 
 
 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
In order to create an autonomous text summary, machine learning and natural processing 
language come in handy. In machine-human interaction, natural language processing plays a 
significant role. It is still being worked on, and more study is being done in this area. In the 
future, we might witness a more intelligent and perfect text summary system that understands 
human language and works appropriately. In the present research work, four types of Natural 
11 
 
Language Processing algorithms i.e. LexRank algorithm, Luhn algorithm, Latent Semantic 
Analysis (LSA) algorithm were successfully implemented on the research texts 
summarization of Friction Stir Welded Aluminum joints. The results showed that the Luhn 
algorithm yielded the highest f1-score of 0.413 in comparison to the other algorithms. It can 
be also concluded that the text mining approach can be beneficial for the researchers to mine 
out the necessary information from the bulk of data by automating the whole process which 
leads to the reduction of the experimentation time.  
 
References 
1. Goli, A., Zare, H.K., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. and Sadeghieh, A., 2019. Application of 
robust optimization for a product portfolio problem using an invasive weed optimization 
algorithm. Numerical Algebra, Control & Optimization, 9(2), p.187. 
2. Goli, A., Tirkolaee, E.B. and Aydın, N.S., 2021. Fuzzy integrated cell formation and 
production scheduling considering automated guided vehicles and human factors. IEEE 
Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 29(12), pp.3686-3695. 
3. Goli, A. and Malmir, B., 2020. A covering tour approach for disaster relief locating and 
routing with fuzzy demand. International Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems 
Research, 18(1), pp.140-152. 
4. Pahlevan, S.M., Hosseini, S.M.S. and Goli, A., 2021. Sustainable supply chain network 
design using products’ life cycle in the aluminum industry. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, pp.1-25. 
5. Goli, A., Zare, H.K., Moghaddam, R. and Sadeghieh, A., 2018. A comprehensive model of 
demand prediction based on hybrid artificial intelligence and metaheuristic algorithms: A 
case study in dairy industry. 
6. Goli, A., Khademi-Zare, H., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., Sadeghieh, A., Sasanian, M. and 
Malekalipour Kordestanizadeh, R., 2021. An integrated approach based on artificial 
intelligence and novel meta-heuristic algorithms to predict demand for dairy products: a case 
study. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 32(1), pp.1-35. 
7. Chowdhury, G.G., 2003. Natural language processing. Annual review of information 
science and technology, 37(1), pp.51-89. 
8. Nadkarni, P.M., Ohno-Machado, L. and Chapman, W.W., 2011. Natural language 
processing: an introduction. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 18(5), 
pp.544-551. 
9. Manning, C.D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J.R., Bethard, S. and McClosky, D., 2014, 
June. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd 
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics: system demonstrations (pp. 
55-60). 
12 
 
10. Bird, S., Klein, E. and Loper, E., 2009. Natural language processing with Python: 
analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.". 
11. Meystre, S. and Haug, P.J., 2005. Automation of a problem list using natural language 
processing. BMC medical informatics and decision making, 5(1), pp.1-14. 
12. Shetty, P. and Ramprasad, R., 2021. Automated knowledge extraction from polymer 
literature using natural language processing. Iscience, 24(1), p.101922. 
13. Venugopal, V., Sahoo, S., Zaki, M., Agarwal, M., Gosvami, N.N. and Krishnan, N.M., 
2021. Looking Through Glass: Knowledge Discovery from Materials Science Literature 
using Natural Language Processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.01508. 
14. Rhodes, C.G., Mahoney, M.W., Bingel, W.H., Spurling, R.A. and Bampton, C.C., 1997. 
Effects of friction stir welding on microstructure of 7075 aluminum. Scripta Materialia, 
36(1). 
15. Sato, Y.S., Kokawa, H., Enomoto, M. and Jogan, S., 1999. Microstructural evolution of 
6063 aluminum during friction-stir welding. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions. A, 
Physical Metallurgy and Materials Science, 30(9). 
16. Watanabe, T., Takayama, H. and Yanagisawa, A., 2006. Joining of aluminum alloy to 
steel by friction stir welding. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 178(1-3), pp.342-
349. 
17. Kwon, Y.J., Shigematsu, I. and Saito, N., 2008. Dissimilar friction stir welding between 
magnesium and aluminum alloys. Materials Letters, 23(62), pp.3827-3829. 
18. Benavides, S., Li, Y., Murr, L., Brown, D. and McClure, J., 1999. Low-temperature 
friction-stir welding of 2024 aluminum. Scripta materialia, 41(8). 
19. Hu, Z.L., Wang, X.S., Pang, Q., Huang, F., Qin, X.P. and Hua, L., 2015. The effect of 
postprocessing on tensile property and microstructure evolution of friction stir welding 
aluminum alloy joint. Materials Characterization, 99, pp.180-187. 
20. Yong-Jai, K.W.O.N., Seong-Beom, S.H.I.M. and Dong-Hwan, P.A.R.K., 2009. Friction 
stir welding of 5052 aluminum alloy plates. Transactions of Nonferrous Metals Society of 
China, 19, pp.s23-s27. 
21. Chen, Y., Liu, H. and Feng, J., 2006. Friction stir welding characteristics of different 
heat-treated-state 2219 aluminum alloy plates. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 420(1-
2), pp.21-25. 
22. Chen, H.B., Yan, K., Lin, T., Chen, S.B., Jiang, C.Y. and Zhao, Y., 2006. The 
investigation of typical welding defects for 5456 aluminum alloy friction stir welds. Materials 
Science and Engineering: A, 433(1-2), pp.64-69. 
13 
 
23. Chen, Y.C., Feng, J.C. and Liu, H.J., 2009. Precipitate evolution in friction stir welding of 
2219-T6 aluminum alloys. Materials characterization, 60(6), pp.476-481. 
24. Deqing, W., Shuhua, L. and Zhaoxia, C., 2004. Study of friction stir welding of 
aluminum. Journal of materials science, 39(5), pp.1689-1693. 
25. Sharma, N. and SIDDIQUEE, A.N., 2017. Friction stir welding of aluminum to copper—
an overview. Transactions of Nonferrous Metals Society of China, 27(10), pp.2113-2136. 
26. Amini, S., Amiri, M.R. and Barani, A., 2015. Investigation of the effect of tool geometry 
on friction stir welding of 5083-O aluminum alloy. The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 76(1-4), pp.255-261. 
27. Hirata, T., Oguri, T., Hagino, H., Tanaka, T., Chung, S.W., Takigawa, Y. and Higashi, 
K., 2007. Influence of friction stir welding parameters on grain size and formability in 5083 
aluminum alloy. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 456(1-2), pp.344-349. 
28. Sato, Y.S., Urata, M. and Kokawa, H., 2002. Parameters controlling microstructure and 
hardness during friction-stir welding of precipitation-hardenable aluminum alloy 6063. 
Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 33(3), pp.625-635. 
29. Elrefaey, A., Gouda, M., Takahashi, M. and Ikeuchi, K., 2005. Characterization of 
aluminum/steel lap joint by friction stir welding. Journal of materials engineering and 
performance, 14(1), pp.10-17. 
30. Li, Y., Murr, L.E. and McClure, J.C., 1999. Flow visualization and residual 
microstructures associated with the friction-stir welding of 2024 aluminum to 6061 
aluminum. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 271(1-2), pp.213-223. 
31. Yu, P., Wu, C. and Shi, L., 2021. Analysis and characterization of dynamic 
recrystallization and grain structure evolution in friction stir welding of aluminum plates. 
Acta Materialia, 207, p.116692. 
32.  Abdollahzadeh A, Bagheri B, Abbasi M, Sharifi F, Mirsalehi SE, Moghaddam AO. A 
modified version of friction stir welding process of aluminum alloys: Analyzing the thermal 
treatment and wear behavior. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part L: 
Journal of Materials: Design and Applications. July 2021. doi:10.1177/14644207211023987 
 
 
 
 
