Title: NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme for Machine Reading of Scholarly Contributions in Natural Language Processing Literature
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.12870v3
--------------------------------------------------

NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme for
Machine Reading of Scholarly Contributions in
Natural Language Processing Literature
Jennifer D’Souza
TIB Leibniz Information Centre for Science and
Technology
Hannover, Germany
jennifer.dsouza@tib.eu
Sören Auer
TIB Leibniz Information Centre for Science and
Technology & L3S Research Center
Hannover, Germany
soeren.auer@tib.eu
ABSTRACT
We describe an annotation initiative to capture the scholarly contri-
butions in natural language processing (NLP) articles, particularly,
for the articles that discuss machine learning (ML) approaches for
various information extraction tasks. We develop the annotation
task based on a pilot annotation exercise on 50 NLP-ML scholarly ar-
ticles presenting contributions to five information extraction tasks
1. machine translation, 2. named entity recognition, 3. question
answering, 4. relation classification, and 5. text classification. In
this article, we describe the outcomes of this pilot annotation phase.
Through the exercise we have obtained an annotation methodology;
and found ten core information units that reflect the contribution
of the NLP-ML scholarly investigations. The resulting annotation
scheme we developed based on these information units is called
NLPContributions.
The overarching goal of our endeavor is four-fold: 1) to find a
systematic set of patterns of subject-predicate-object statements for
the semantic structuring of scholarly contributions that are more
or less generically applicable for NLP-ML research articles; 2) to
apply the discovered patterns in the creation of a larger annotated
dataset for training machine readers [18] of research contributions;
3) to ingest the dataset into the Open Research Knowledge Graph
(ORKG) infrastructure as a showcase for creating user-friendly
state-of-the-art overviews; 4) to integrate the machine readers into
the ORKG to assist users in the manual curation of their respective
article contributions. We envision that the NLPContributions
methodology engenders a wider discussion on the topic toward its
further refinement and development. Our pilot annotated dataset of
50 NLP-ML scholarly articles according to the NLPContributions
scheme is openly available to the research community at https:
//doi.org/10.25835/0019761.
CCS CONCEPTS
• General and reference →Computing standards, RFCs and guide-
lines; • Information systems →Document structure; Ontolo-
gies; Data encoding and canonicalization.
KEYWORDS
dataset, annotation guidelines, semantic publishing, digital libraries,
scholarly knowledge graphs, open science graphs
1
INTRODUCTION
As the rate of research publications increases [51], there is a growing
need within digital libraries to equip researchers with alternative
knowledge representations, other than the traditional document-
based format, for keeping pace with the rapid research progress [3].
In this regard, several efforts exist or are currently underway for
semantifying scholarly articles for their improved machine inter-
pretability and ease in comprehension [19, 24, 38, 49]. These models
equip experts with a tool for semantifying their scholarly publi-
cations ranging from strictly-ontologized methodologies [19, 49]
to less-strict, flexible description schemes [24, 37], wherein the
latter aim toward the bottom-up, data-driven discovery of an ontol-
ogy. Consequently, knowledge graphs [1, 4] are being advocated
as a promising alternative to the document-based format for repre-
senting scholarly knowledge for the enhanced content ingestion
enabled via their fine-grained machine interpretability.
The automated semantic extraction from scholarly publications
using text mining has seen early initiatives based on sentences as
the basic unit of analysis. To this end, ontologies and vocabularies
were created [14, 39, 46, 47], corpora were annotated [20, 32], and
machine learning methods were applied [31]. Recently, scientific
IE has targeted search technology, thus newer corpora have been
annotated at the phrasal unit of information with three or six types
of scientific concepts in up to ten disciplines [5, 16, 22, 33] facilitat-
ing machine learning system development [2, 8, 10, 34]. In general,
a phrase-focused annotation scheme more directly influences the
building of a scholarly knowledge graph, since phrases constitute
knowledge graph statements. Nonetheless, sentence-level anno-
tations are just as poignant offering knowledge graph modelers
better context from which the phrases are obtained for improved
knowledge graph curation.
Over which, many recent data collection and annotation ef-
forts [26–28, 36] are steering new directions in text mining re-
search on scholarly publications. These initiatives are focused on
the shallow semantic structuring of the instructional content in lab
protocols or descriptions of chemical synthesis reactions. This has
entailed generating annotated datasets via structuring recipes to
facilitate their automatic content mining for machine-actionable
information which are presented otherwise in adhoc ways within
scholarly documentation. Such datasets inadvertently facilitate the
development of machine readers. In the past, such similar text min-
ing research was conducted as the unsupervised mining of Schemas
(also called scripts, templates, or frames)—as a generalization of re-
curring event knowledge (involving a sequence of three to ten
arXiv:2006.12870v3  [cs.CL]  3 Sep 2020
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
events) with various participants [40]—primarily over newswire
articles [7, 11–13, 42–44]. They were a potent task at generaliz-
ing over similar but distinct narratives—can be seen as knowledge
units—with the goal of revealing their underlying common ele-
ments. However, little insight was garnered on their practical task
relevance. This has changed with the recent surface semantic struc-
turing initiatives over instructional content. It has led to the re-
alization of a seemingly new practicable direction that taps into
the structuring of text and the structured information aggregation
under Scripts-based knowledge themes.
Since scientific literature is growing at a rapid rate and researchers
today are faced with this publications deluge [25], it is increas-
ingly tedious, if not practically impossible to keep up with the
progress even within one’s own narrow discipline. The Open Re-
search Knowledge Graph (ORKG) [4] is posited as a solution to
the problem of keeping track of research progress minus the cog-
nitive overload that reading dozens of full papers impose. It aims
to build a comprehensive knowledge graph that publishes the re-
search contributions of scholarly publications per paper, where the
contributions are interconnected via the graph even across papers.
At https://www.orkg.org/ one can view the contribution knowledge
graph of a single paper as a summary over its key contribution prop-
erties and values; or compare the contribution knowledge graphs
over common properties across several papers in a tabulated survey.
Practical examples of the latter can be found accessible online at
https://www.orkg.org/orkg/featured-comparisons. This practically
addresses the knowledge ingestion problem for researchers. How?
With the ORKG comparisons feature, researchers are no longer
faced with the daunting cognitive ingestion obstacle from manually
scouring through dozens of papers of unstructured content in their
field. Where this process traditionally would take several days or
months, using the ORKG contributions comparison tabulated view,
the task is reduced to just a few minutes. Assuming the individual
paper contributions are structured in the ORKG, they can then sim-
ply deconstruct the graph, tap into the aspects they are interested
in, and can enhance it for their purposes. Further, they can select
multiple such paper graphs and with the click of a button gener-
ate their tabulated comparison. For additional details on systems
and methods beyond just the contribution highlights, they can still
choose to read the original articles, but this time around equipped
with a better selective understanding of which articles they should
read in depth. Of-course scholarly article abstracts are intended
for this purpose, but they are not machine interpretable, in other
words, they cannot be comparatively organized. Further, the un-
structured abstracts representation still treats research as data silos,
thus with this model, research endeavors, in general, continue to
be susceptible to redundancy [23], lacking a meaningful way of
connecting structured and unstructured information.
1.1
Our Contribution
In this paper, we propose a surface semantically structured dataset
of 50 scholarly articles for their research contributions in the field
of natural language processing focused on machine learning ap-
plications (the NLP-ML domain) across five different information
extraction tasks to be integrable within the ORKG. To this end,
we (1) identify sentences in scholarly articles that reflect research
contributions; (2) create structured (subject,predicate,object) anno-
tations from these sentences by identifying mentions of the con-
tribution candidate term phrases and their relations; and (3) group
collections of such triples, that arise from either consecutive or
non-consecutive sentences, under one of ten core information units
that capture an aspect of the contribution of NLP-ML scholarly
articles. These core information units are conceptually posited as
thematic scripts [40]. The resulting model formalized from the pilot
annotation exercise we call the NLPContributions scheme.
It has the following characteristics: (1) via a contribution-centered
model, it makes realistic the otherwise forbidding task of semanti-
cally structuring full-text scholarly articles—our task only needs a
surface structuring of the highlights of the approach which often
can be found in the Title, the Abstract, one or two paragraphs in the
Introduction, and in the Results section; (2) it offers guidance for a
structuring methodology, albeit still encompassing subjective deci-
sions to a certain degree, but overall presenting a uniform model
for identifying and structuring contributions—note that without
a model, such structuring decisions may not end up being compa-
rable across users and their modeled papers (see Figure 6); (3) the
dataset is annotated in JSON format since it preserves relation hier-
archies; (4) the annotated data we produce can be practically lever-
aged within frameworks such as the ORKG that support structured
scholarly content-based knowledge ingestion. With the integration
of our semantically structured scholarly contributions data in the
ORKG, we aim to address the tedious and time-consuming scholarly
knowledge ingestion problem via its contributions comparison fea-
ture. And further, by using the graph-based model, we also address
the problem of scholarly information produced as data silos, as the
ORKG connects the structured information across papers.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Sentence-based Annotations of Scholarly Publications. Early
initiatives in semantically structuring scholarly publications fo-
cused on sentences as the basic unit of analysis. In these sentence-
based annotation schemes, all annotation methodologies [20, 32,
47, 48] have had very specific aims for scientific knowledge cap-
ture. Seminal works in this direction consider the CoreSC (Core
Scientific Concepts) sentence-based annotation scheme [32]. This
scheme aimed to model in finer granularity, i.e. at the sentence-
level, concepts that are necessary for the description of a scientific
investigation, while traditional approaches employ section names
serving as coarse-grained paragraph-level annotations. Such se-
mantified scientific knowledge capture was apt at highlighting
selected sentences within computer-based readers. In this applica-
tion context, mere sectional information organization for papers
was considered as missing the finer rhetorical semantic classifi-
cations. E.g., in a Results section, the author may also provide
some sentences of background information, which in a sentence-
wise semantic labeling are called Background and not Results.
As another sentence-based scheme is the Argument Zoning (AZ)
scheme [48]. This scheme aimed at modeling the rhetorics around
knowledge claims between the current work and cited work. They
used semantic classes as “Own_Method,” “Own_Result,” “Other,”
“Previous_Own,” “Aim,” etc., each elaborating on the rhetorical path
to various knowledge claims. This latter scheme was apt for citation
NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
summaries, sentiment analysis and the extraction of information
pertaining to knowledge claims. In general, such complementary
aims for the sentence-based semantification of scholarly publica-
tions can be fused to generate more comprehensive summaries.
Phrase-based Annotations of Scholarly Publications. The
trend towards scientific terminology mining methods in NLP steered
the release of phrase-based annotated datasets in various domains.
An early dataset in this line of work was the ACL RD-TEC cor-
pus [22] which identified seven conceptual classes for terms in the
full-text of scholarly publications in Computational Linguistics,
viz. Technology and Method; Tool and Library; Language Resource;
Language Resource Product; Models; Measures and Measurements;
and Other. Similar to terminology mining is the task of scientific
keyphrase extraction. Extracting keyphrases is an important task
in publishing platforms as they help recommend articles to read-
ers, highlight missing citations to authors, identify potential re-
viewers for submissions, and analyse research trends over time.
Scientific keyphrases, in particular, of type Processes, Tasks and
Materials were the focus of the SemEval17 corpus annotations [5].
The dataset comprised annotations of the full text articles in Com-
puter Science, Material Sciences, and Physics. Following suit was
the SciERC corpus [33] of annotated abstracts from the Artificial
Intelligence domain. It included annotations for six concepts, viz.
Task, Method, Metric, Material, Other-Scientific Term, and Generic.
Finally, in the realm of corpora having phrase-based annotations,
was the recently introduced STEM-ECR corpus [16] notable for its
multidisciplinarity including the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Medicine domains. It was annotated with four generic concept
types, viz. Process, Method, Material, and Data that mapped across
all domains, and further with terms grounded in the real-world via
Wikipedia/Wiktionary links.
Next, we discuss related works that semantically model instruc-
tional scientific content. In these works, the overarching scientific
knowledge capture theme is the end-to-end semantification of an
experimental process.
Shallow Semantic Structural Annotations of Instructional
Content in Scholarly Publications. Increasingly, text mining ini-
tiatives are seeking out recipes or formulaic semantic patterns to
automatically mine machine-actionable information from scholarly
articles [26–28, 36].
In [27], they annotate wet lab protocols, covering a large spec-
trum of experimental biology, including neurology, epigenetics,
metabolomics, cancer and stem cell biology, with actions corre-
sponding to lab procedures and their attributes including materials,
instruments and devices used to perform specific actions. Thereby
the protocols then constituted a prespecified machine-readable for-
mat as opposed to the ad-hoc documentation norm. Kulkarni et
al. [27] even release a large human-annotated corpus of semantified
wet lab protocols to facilitate machine learning of such shallow se-
mantic parsing over natural language instructions. Within scholarly
articles, such instructions are typically published in the Materials
and Method section in Biology and Chemistry fields.
Along similar lines, inorganic materials synthesis reactions and
procedures continue to reside as natural language descriptions in
the text of journal articles. There is a growing impetus in such
fields to find ways to systematically reduce the time and effort
required to synthesize novel materials that presently remains one
of the grand challenges in the field. In [26, 36], to facilitate machine
learning models for automatic extraction of materials syntheses
from text, they present datasets of synthesis procedures annotated
with semantic structure by domain experts in Materials Science.
The types of information captured include synthesis operations
(i.e. predicates), and the materials, conditions, apparatus and other
entities participating in each synthesis step.
The NLPContributions annotation methodology proposed in
this paper draws on each of the earlier categorizations of related
work. First, the full-text of scholarly articles including the Title
and the Abstract are annotated in a sentence-wise granularity with
the aim of the annotated sentences being only those restricted to
the contributions of the investigation. We selectively consider the
full-text of the article by focusing only on specific sections of the
article such as the Abstract, Introduction, and the Results sections.
Sometimes we also model the contribution highlights from the
Approach/System description in case if the Introduction does not
contain such pertinent information of the proposed model. We skip
the Background, Related Work, and Conclusion sections altogether.
These sentences are then grouped under one of ten main informa-
tion units, viz. ResearchProblem, Objective, Approach, Tasks,
ExperimentalSetup, Hyperparameters, Baselines, Results, and
AblationAnalysis. Each of these units are defined in detail in
the next section. Second, from the grouped contribution-centered
sentences, we perform phrase-based annotations for (subject, predi-
cate, object) triples to model in a knowledge graph. And Third, the
resulting dataset has an overarching knowledge capture objective:
capturing the contribution of the scholarly article and, in particular,
to facilitate the training of machine readers for the purpose along
the lines of the machine-interpretable wet-lab protocols.
3
THE NLPCONTRIBUTIONS MODEL
3.1
Goals
The development of the NLPContributions annotation model was
backed by four primary goals:
(1) We aim to produce a semantic representation based on ex-
isting work, that can be well motivated as an annotation
scheme for the application domain of NLP-ML scholarly ar-
ticles, and is specifically aimed at the knowledge capture of
the contributions in scholarly articles;
(2) The annotated scholarly contributions based on NLPContri-
butions should be integrable in the Open Research Knowl-
edge Graph (ORKG)1–the state-of-the-art content-based knowl-
edge capturing platform of scholarly articles’ contributions.
(3) The NLPContributions model should be useful to produce
data for the development of machine learning models in
the form of machine readers [18] of scholarly contributions.
Such trained models can serve to automatically extract such
structured information for downstream applications, either
in completely automated or semi-automated workflows as
recommenders.2
1https://www.orkg.org/orkg/
2In future work, we will expand our current pilot annotated dataset of 50 articles with
at least 400 additional similarly annotated articles to facilitate machine learning.
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
(4) The NLPContributions model should be amenable to feed-
back via a consensus approval or content annotation change
suggestions from a large group of authors toward their schol-
arly article contribution descriptions (an experiment that
is beyond the scope of the present work and planned as
following work).
The NLPContributions annotation model is designed for build-
ing a knowledge graph. It is not ontologized, therefore, we assume
a bottom-up data-driven design toward ontology discovery as more
annotated contributions data is available. Nonetheless, we do pro-
pose a core skeleton model for organizing the information at the
top-level KG nodes. This involves a root node called Contribu-
tion, following which, at the first level of the knowledge graph,
are ten nodes representing core information units under which the
scholarly contributions data is organized.
3.2
The Ten Core Information Units
In this section, we describe the ten information units in our model.
ResearchProblem. Determines the research challenge ad-
dressed by a contribution using the predicate hasResearchProblem.
By definition, it is the focus of the research investigation, in other
words, the issue for which the solution must be obtained.
The task entails identifying only the research problem addressed
in the paper and not research problems in general. For instance,
in the paper about the BioBERT word embeddings [30], their re-
search problem is just the ‘domain-customization of BERT’ and not
‘biomedical text mining,’ since it is a secondary objective.
The ResearchProblem is typically found in an article’s Title,
Abstract and first few paragraphs of the Introduction. The task in-
volves annotating one or more sentences and precisely the research
problem phrase boundaries in the sentences.
The subsequent seven information objects are connected to Con-
tribution via the generic predicate has.
Approach. Depending on the paper’s content, is referred to as
Model or Method or Architecture or System or Application.
Essentially, this is the contribution of the paper as the solution
proposed for the research problem.
The annotations are made only for the high-level overview of the
approach without going into system details. Therefore, the equa-
tions associated with the model and all the system architecture
figures are not part of the annotations. While annotating the earlier
ResearchProblem did not involve semantic annotation granularity
beyond one level, annotating the Approach can. Sometimes the
annotations (one or multi-layered) are created using the elements
within a single sentence itself (see Figure 1); at other times, if they
are multi-layered semantic annotations, they are formed by bridg-
ing two or more sentences based on their coreference relations.
For the annotation element content itself, while, in general, the
subject, predicate, and object phrases are obtained directly from the
sentence text, at times the predicate phrases have to be introduced
as generic terms such as “has” or “on” or “has description” wherein
the latter predicate is used for including, as objects, longer text
fragments within a finer annotation granularity to describe the
top-level node. The actual type of approach is restricted to those
sub-types stated in the beginning of the paragraph and is decided
Figure 1: Fine-grained modeling illustration from a single
sentence for part of an Approach proposed in [9].
based on the the reference to the solution used by the authors or
the solution description section name itself. If the reference to the
solution or its section name is specific to the paper, such as ‘Joint
model,’ then we rename it to just ‘Model.’ In general, any alternate
namings of the solution, other than those mentioned earlier, includ-
ing “idea”, are normalized to “Model.” Finally, as machine learning
solutions, they are often given names. E.g., the model BioBERT [30],
in which case we introduce the predicate ‘called,’ as in (Method,
called, BioBERT).
The Approach is found in the article’s Introduction section in the
context of cue phrases such as “we take the approach,” “we propose
the model,” “our system architecture,” or “the method proposed in this
paper.” However, there are exceptions when the Introduction does
not present an overview of the system, in which case we analyze
the first few lines within the main system description content in
the article. Also, if the paper refers to their system by “method”
or “application,” this is normalized to Approach information unit.
System or Architecture is Model information unit.
Objective. This is the defined function for the machine learning
algorithm to optimize over.
In some cases, the Approach objective is a complex function. In
such cases, it is isolated as a separate information object connected
directly to the Contribution.
ExperimentalSetup. Has the alternate name Hyperparame-
ters. It includes details about the platform including both hardware
(e.g., GPU) and software (e.g., Tensorflow library) for implementing
the machine learning solution; and of variables, that determine
the network structure (e.g., number of hidden units) and how the
network is trained (e.g., learning rate), for tuning the software to
the task objective.
Recent machine learning models are all neural based and such
models have several associated variables such as hidden units,
model regularization parameters, learning rate, word embedding
NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
Figure 2: Illustration of modeling of Result (from [53]) w.r.t.
a precedence of its elements as [dataset -> task -> metric ->
score].
dimensions, etc. Thus to offer users a glance at the contributed sys-
tem, this aspect is included in NLPContributions. We only model
the experimental setup that are expressed in a few sentences or
that are concisely tabulated. There are cases when the experimental
setup is not modeled at all within NLPContributions. E.g., for the
complex “machine translation” models that involve many parame-
ters. Thus, whether the experimental setup should be modeled or
not, may appear as a subjective decision, however, over the course
of several annotated articles becomes apparent especially when the
annotator begins to recognize the simple sentences that describe
the experimental setup.
The ExperimentalSetup unit is found in the sections called Ex-
periment, Experimental Setup, Implementation, Hyperparameters,
or Training.
Results. Are the main findings or outcomes reported in the
article for the ResearchProblem.
Each Result unit involves some of the following elements: {dataset,
metric, task, performance score}. Regardless of how the sentence(s)
are written involving these elements, we assume the following
precedence order: [dataset -> task -> metric -> score] or [task ->
dataset -> metric -> score], as far as it can be applied without sig-
nificantly changing the information in the sentence. Consider this
illustrated in Figure 2. In the figure, the JSON is arranged starting
at the dataset, followed by the task, then the metric, and finally
the actual reported result. While this information unit is named
per those stated in the earlier paragraph, if in a paper the section
name is non-generic, e.g., “Main results,” “End-to-end results,” it is
normalized to a default name “Results.”
The Results unit is found in the Results, Experiments, or Tasks
sections. While the results are often highlighted in the Introduction,
unlike the Approach unit, in this case, we annotate the dedicated,
detailed section on Results because results constitute a primary
aspect of the contribution. Next we discuss the Tasks information
unit, and note that Results can include Tasks and vice versa as we
describe next.
Tasks. : The Approach or Model, particularly in multi-task set-
tings, are tested on more than one task, in which case, we list all the
experimental tasks. The experimental tasks are often synonymous
with the experimental datasets since it is common in NLP for tasks
to be defined over datasets. Where lists of Tasks are concerned,
the Tasks can include one or more of the ExperimentalSetup,
Hyperparameters, and Results as sub information units.
Experiments. Are an encompassing information unit that in-
cludes one or more of the earlier discussed units. Can include a
combination of ExperimentalSetup and Results, or it can be com-
bination of lists of Tasks and their Results, or a combination of
Approach, ExperimentalSetup and Results.
Recently, more and more multitask systems are being developed.
Consider, the BERT model [15] as an example. Therefore, modeling
ExperimentalSetup with Results or Tasks with Results is nec-
essary in such systems since the experimental setup often changes
per task producing a different set of results. Hence, this information
unit encompassing two or more sub information units is relevant.
AblationAnalysis. Is a form of Results that describes the
performance of components in systems.
Unlike Results, AblationAnalysis is not performed in all pa-
pers. Further, in papers that have them, we only model these results
if they are expressed in a few sentences, similar to our modeling
decision for Hyperparameters.
The AblationAnalysis information unit is found in the sections
that have Ablation in their title. Otherwise, it can also be found
in the written text without having a dedicated section for it. For
instance, in the paper “End-to-End Relation Extraction using LSTMs
on Sequences and Tree Structures” [35] there is no section title with
Ablation, but this information is extracted from the text via cue
phrases that indicate ablation results are being discussed.
Baselines. are those listed systems that a proposed approach
is compared against.
The Baselines information unit is found in sections that have
Baseline in their title. Otherwise, it can also be found in sections that
are not directly titled Baseline, but require annotator judgement
to infer that baseline systems are being discussed. For instance,
in the paper “Extracting Multiple-Relations in One-Pass with Pre-
Trained Transformers,” [50] the baselines are discussed in subsec-
tion ‘Methods.’ Or in paper “Outrageously large neural networks:
The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer,” [41], the baselines are
discussed in a section called “Previous State-of-the-Art.”
Of these ten information units, only three are mandatory. They
are ResearchProblem, Approach, and Results; the other seven
may or may not be present depending on the content of the article.
Code. is a link to the software on Github or on other similar
open source platforms, or even on author’s website.
3.3
Contribution Sequences within
Information Units
Except for ResearchProblem, each of the remaining nine infor-
mation units encapsulate different aspects of the contributions
of scholarly investigations in the NLP-ML domain; with the Re-
searchProblem offering the primary contribution context. Within
the seven different aspects, there are what we call Contribution
Sequences.
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
Here, with the help of an example depicted in Figure 3 we il-
lustrate the notion of contribution sequences. In this example, we
model contribution sequences in the context of the Experimen-
talSetup information unit. In the figure, this information unit has
two contribution sequences. The first connected by predicate ‘used’
to the object ‘BERTBase model,’ and the second, also connected
by predicate ‘used’ to the object ‘NVIDIA V100 (32GB) GPUs.’ The
‘BERTBase model’ contribution sequence includes a second level of
detail expressed via two different predicates ‘pre-trained for’ and
‘pre-trained on.’ As a model of scientific knowledge, the triple with
the entities connected by the first predicate, i.e. (BERTBase model,
pre-trained for, 1M steps) reflects that the ‘BertBase model’ was
pretrained for 1 million steps. The second predicate produces two
triples: (BERTBase model, pre-trained on, English Wikipedia) and
(BERTBase model, pre-trained on, BooksCorpus). In each case, the
scientific knowledge captured by these two triples is that BERTBase
was pretrained on {Wikipedia, BooksCorpus}. Note in the JSON
data structure, the predicate connects the two objects as an array.
Next, the second contribution sequence, hinged at ‘NVIDIA V100
(32GB) GPUs’ as the subject has two levels of granularity. Consider
the following three triples: (NVIDIA V100 (32GB) GPUs, used, ten)
and (ten, for, pre-training). Note, in this nesting pattern, except
for ‘NVIDIA V100 (32 GB) GPUs,’ the predicates {used, for} and
remaining entities {ten, pre-training} are nested according to their
order of appearance in the written text. Therefore, in conclusion,
an information unit can have several contribution sequences, and
the contribution sequences need not be identically modeled. For
instance, our second contribution sequence is modeled in a fine
grained manner, i.e. in multiple levels. And when fine-grained mod-
eling is employed, it is relatively straightforward to spot in the
sentence(s) being modeled.
4
THE PILOT ANNOTATION TASK
The pilot annotation task was performed by a postdoctoral re-
searcher with a background in natural language processing. The
NLPContributions model or scheme just described, were devel-
oped over the course of the pilot task. At a high-level, the annota-
tions were performed in three main steps. They are presented next,
after which we describe the annotation guidelines.
4.1
Pilot Task Steps
(a) Contribution-Focused Sentence Annotations. In this stage,
sentences from scholarly articles were selected as candidate con-
tribution sentences under each of the aforementioned mandatory
three information units (viz., ResearchProblem, Approach, and
Results) and, if applicable to the article, for one or more of the
remaining seven information units as well.
To identify the contribution sentences in the article, the full-text
of the article is searched. However, as discussed at the end of Sec-
tion 2, the Background, Related Work, and Conclusions sections are
entirely omitted from the search. Further, the section discussing the
Approach or the System is only referred to when the Introduction
section does not offer sufficient highlights of this information unit.
In addition, except for tabulated hyperparameters, we do not con-
sider other tables for annotation within the NLPContributions
model.
Figure 3: Illustration of the modeling of Contribution Se-
quences in the Experimental Setup Information Unit
(from [30]). Created using https://jsoneditoronline.org
To better clarify the pilot task process, in this subsection, we use
Figure 2 as the running example. From the example, at this stage,
the sentence “For NER (Table 7), S-LSTM gives an F1-score of 91.57%
on the CoNLL test set, which is significantly better compared with
BiLSTMs.” is selected as one of the contribution sentence candidates
as part of the Results information unit. This sentence is selected
from a Results subsection in [53], but is just one among three others.
(b) Chunking Phrase Spans for Subject, Predicate, Object En-
tities. Then for the selected sentences, we annotate their scientific
knowledge entities. The entities are annotated by annotators hav-
ing an implicit understanding of whether they take the subject,
predicate, or object roles in a per triple context. As a note, by our
annotation scheme, predicates are not mandatorily verbs and can
be nouns as well.
Resorting to our running example, for the selected sentence,
this stage involves annotating the phrases “For,” “NER,” “F1-score,”
“91.57%,” and “CoNLL test set,” with the annotator cognizant of
the fact that they will use the [dataset -> task -> metric -> score]
scientific entity precedence in the next step.
(c) Creating contribution sequences. This involves relating the
subjects and objects within triples, which as illustrated in Section
3.3, the object in one triple can be a subject in another triple if
the annotation is performed at a fine-grained level of detail. For
NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
the most part, the nesting is done per order of appearance of the
entities in the text, except for those involving the scientific entities
{dataset, task, metric, score} under the Results information unit.
In the context of our running example, given the early annotated
scientific entities, in this stage, the annotator will form the following
two triples: (CoNLL test set, For, NER), (NER, F1-score, 91.57%) as a
single contribution sequence. What is not depicted in Figure 1 are
the top-level annotations including the root node and one of the ten
information unit nodes. This is modeled as follows: (Contribution,
has, Results), and (Results, has, CoNLL test set).
4.2
Task Guidelines
In this section, we elicit a set of general guidelines that inform the
annotation task.
How are information unit names selected? For information units
such as Approach, ExperimentalSetup, and Results that each
have a set of candidate names, the applied name is the one selected
based on the closest section title or cue phrase.
Which of the ten information units does the sentence belong
to? Conversely to the above, if a sentence is first identified as a
contribution sentence candidate, it is placed within the information
unit category that is identified directly based on the section header
for the sentence in the paper or inferred from cue phrases from the
first few sentences in its section.
Inferring Predicates. In ideal settings, the constraint on the text
used for subjects, objects, and predicates in contribution sequences
is that they should be found in their corresponding sentence. How-
ever, for predicates this is not always possible. Since predicate
information may not always be found in the text, it is sometimes
annotated additionally based on the annotator judgment. However,
even this open-ended choice remains restricted to a predefined set
of candidates. It includes {“has”, “on”, “by”, “for”, “has value”, “has
description”, “based on”, “called”}.
How are the supporting sentences linked to their correspond-
ing contribution sequence within the overall JSON object? The
sentence(s) is stored in a dictionary with a “from sentence” key,
which is then attached to either the first element or, if it is a nested
triples hierarchy, sometimes even to the second element of a contri-
bution sequence. The dictionary data-type containing the evidence
sentence is either put as an array element, or as a nested dictionary
element.
Are the nested contribution sequences always obtained from
a single sentence? The triples can be nested based on information
from one or more sentences in the article. Further, the sentences
need not be consecutive in the running text. As mentioned earlier,
the evidence sentences are attached to the first element or the
second element by the predicate “from sentence.” If a contribution
sequence is generated from a table then the table number in the
original paper is referenced.
When is the Approach actually modeled from the dedicated
section as opposed to the Introduction? In general, we avoid an-
notating the Approach or Model sections for their contribution
sentences as they tend to delve deeply into the approach or model
details, and involve complicated elements such as equations, etc.
Instead, we restrict ourselves to the system higlights in the Intro-
duction. However, in some articles the Introduction doesn’t offer
Figure 4: Illustration of the modeling of a sentence with a list
as part of the Model Information Unit (from [29]). Created
using https://jsoneditoronline.org
system highlights which is when we resort to using the dedicated
section for the contribution highlights in this mandatory informa-
tion unit.
Do we explore details about hardware used as part of the con-
tribution? Yes, if it is explicitly part of the hyperparameters.
Are predicates always verbs? Predicates are not always verbs.
They can also be nouns especially in the hyperparameters section.
Creating contribution sequences from tabulated hyperparam-
eters. Only for hyperparameters, we model their tabulated version
if given. This is done as follows: 1) for the predicate, we use the
name of the parameter; and 2) for the object, the value against
the name. Sometimes, however, if there are two-level hierarchical
parameters, then the predicate is the first name, object is the value,
and the value is qualified by the parameter name lower in the hier-
archy. Qualifying the second name involves introducing the “for”
predicate.
How are lists modeled within contribution sequences? As part
of the contribution sentence candidates, are also included sentences
with lists. Such sentences are predominantly found for the Exper-
imentalSetup or Result information units. This is modeled as
depicted in Figure 4 for the first two list elements. Here, the Model
information unit has two contribution sequences, each pertaining
to a specific list item in the sentence. Further, the predicate “has
description” is introduced for linking text descriptions.
Which JSON structures are used to represent the data? Flexibly,
they include dictionaries, or nested dictionaries, or arrays of items,
where the items can be strings, dictionaries, nested dictionaries, or
arrays themselves.
How are appositives handled? We introduce a new predicate
“name” to handle appositives.
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
5
MATERIALS AND TOOLS
5.1
Paper Selection
A collection of scholarly articles is downloaded based on the ones in
the publicly available leaderboard of tasks in artificial intelligence
called https://paperswithcode.com/. It predominantly represents
papers in the Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision
fields. For the purposes of our NLPContributions model, we re-
strict ourselves just to the NLP papers. From the set, we randomly
select 10 papers in five different NLP-ML research tasks: 1. machine
translation, 2. named entity recognition, 3. question answering, 4.
relation classification, and 5. text classification.
5.2
Data Representation Format and
Annotation Tools
JSON was the chosen data format for storing the semantified parts
of the scholarly articles contributions. To avoid syntax errors in
creating the JSON objects, the annotations were made via https:
//jsoneditoronline.org which imposes valid JSON syntax checks.
Finally, in the early stages of the annotation task, some of the an-
notations were made manually in the ORKG infrastructure https:
//www.orkg.org/orkg/ to test their practical suitability in a knowl-
edge graph; three of such annotated papers are depicted in Figure 6.
The links in the Figure captions can be visited to explore the anno-
tations at their finer granularity of detail.
5.3
Annotated Dataset Characteristics
Overall, the annotated corpus contains a total of 2631 triples (avg.
of 52 triples per article). Its data elements comprise 1033 unique
subjects, 843 unique predicates, and 2182 unique objects. In Table 1
251 
159 
119 
90 
82 
54 
53 
47 
42 
41 
39 
38 
36 
32 
28 
24 
24 
18 
17 
15 
0
100
200
has
has research problem
on
for
with
by
from sentence
use
in
of
outperforms
has description
called
using
to
is
from
used
propose
achieves
Frequency of Occurrence 
Figure 5: A list of the predicates in our triples dataset that
appear more than 15 times.
below, we show the per-task distribution of triples and their ele-
ments. Of all tasks, relation classification has the highest number
of unique triples (544) and named entity recognition the least (473).
Generally, in the context of triples formation, predicates are
often selected from a closed set and hence comprise a smaller group
of items. In the NLPContribution model, however, predicates
are extracted from the text if present. This leads to a much larger
set of predicates that would require the application of predicate
normalization functions to find the smaller core semantic set. In
Figure 5, to offer some insights to this end, we show the predicates
that appear more than 15 times over all the triples. We find the
predicate has appears most frequently since its function often serves
as a filler predicate. A complete list of the predicates is released in
our dataset repository online https://doi.org/10.25835/0019761.
MT
NER
QA
RC
TC
Subject
259
209
203
228
221
Predicate
243
220
187
201
252
Object
471
434
515
455
459
Total
502
473
497
544
504
Table 1: Per-task (machine translation (MT), named entity
recognition (NER), question answering (QA), relation classi-
fication (RC), text classification (TC)) triples distribution in
terms of unique subject, predicate, object, and overall.
6
USE CASE: NLPCONTRIBUTIONS IN ORKG
As a use case of the ORKG infrastructure, instead of presenting just
the annotations obtained from NLPContributions, we present a
further enriched showcase. Specifically, we model the evolution of
the annotation scheme at three different attempts with the third one
arriving at NLPContributions. This is depicted in Figure 6. Our
use case is an enriched one for two reasons: 1) it depicts the ORKG
infrastructure flexibility for data-driven ontology discovery that
makes allowances for different design decisions; and 2) it also shows
how within flexible infrastructures the possibilities can be too wide
that arriving at a consensus can potentially prove a challenge if it
isn’t mandated at a critical point in the data accumulation.
Figure 6(a) depicts the first modeling attempts of an NLP-ML
contribution. For predicates, the model restricts itself to use only
those found in the text. The limitation of such a model is that not
normalizing linguistic variations very rarely creates comparable
models across investigations even if they imply the same thing.
Hence, we found that for comparability a common predicate vocab-
ulary at the top-level in the model minimally needs to be in place.
Figure 6(b) is the second attempt of modeling a different NLP-ML
contribution. In this attempt, the predicates at the top-level are
mostly normalized to a generic “has,” however, “has” is connected
to various information items again lexically based on the text of
the scholarly articles, one or more of which can be grouped under
a common category. Via such observations, we systematized the
knowledge organization at the top-level of the graph by introducing
the ten information unit nodes. Figure 6(c) is the resulting NLP-
Contributions annotations model. Within this model, scholarly
contributions with one or more of the information units in common,
NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
(a) Research paper [45] top-level snapshot in ORKG https://www.orkg.org/orkg/paper/R41467/
(b) Research paper [21] top-level snapshot in ORKG https://www.orkg.org/orkg/paper/R41374
(c) Research paper [54] top-level snapshot in ORKG https://www.orkg.org/orkg/paper/R44287
Figure 6: Figures 6(a),6(b),6(c) depict evolution of the annotation scheme over three different research papers. Fig. 6(c) is the
resulting selected format NLPContributions that is proposed in this paper.
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
viz. “Ablation study,” “Baseline Models,” “Model,” and “Results,” can
be uniformly compared.
7
LIMITATIONS
Obtaining disjoint (subject, predicate, object) triples as con-
tribution sequences. It was not possible to extract disjoint triples
from all sentences. In many cases, we extract the main predicate and
use as object the relevant full sentence or its clausal part. From [30],
for instance, under the ExperimentalResults information unit,
we model the following: (Contribution, has, Experimental results);
(Experimental results, on, all datasets); and (all datasets, achieves,
BioBERT achieves higher scores than BERT). Note, in the last triple,
“achieves” was used as a predicate and its object “BioBERT achieves
higher scores than BERT” is modeled as a clausal sentence part.
Employing coreference relations between scientific entities. In
the fine-grained modeling of schemas, scientific entities within
triples are sometimes nested across sentences by leveraging their
coreference relations. We consider this a limitation toward the
automated machine reading task, since coreference resolution itself
is often challenging to perform automatically.
Tabulated results are not incorporated within NLPContribu-
tions. Unlike tabulated hyperparameters which have a standard
format, tabulated results have significantly varying formats. Thus
their automated table parsing is a challenging task in itself. Nonethe-
less, by considering the textual results, we relegate ourselves to
their summarized description, which often serves sufficient for
highlighting the contribution.
Can all NLP-ML papers be modeled by NLPContributions?
While we can conclude that some papers are easier to model than
others (e.g., articles addressing ‘relation extraction’ vs. ‘machine
translation’ which are harder), it is possible that all papers can be
modelled by at least some if not all the information units of the
model we propose.
8
DISCUSSION
From the pilot dataset annotation exercise, we note the following
regarding task practically. Knowledge modeled under some infor-
mation units are more amenable to systematic structuring than
others. E.g., information units such as ResearchProblem, Experi-
mentalSetup, Results, and Baselines are readily amenable for
systematic templates discovery toward their structured modeling
within the ORKG; whereas the remaining information units, espe-
cially Approach or Model, will require additional normalization
steps toward the search for their better structuring.
9
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Open Research Knowledge Graph [3] makes scholarly knowl-
edge about research contributions machine-actionable: i.e. findable,
structured, and comparable. Manually building such a knowledge
graph is time-consuming and requires the expertise of paper au-
thors and domain experts. In order to efficiently build a scholarly
knowledge contributions graph, we will leverage the technology of
machine readers [18] to assist the user in annotating scholarly arti-
cle contributions. But the machine readers will need to be trained
for such a task objective. To this end, in this work, we have proposed
an annotation scheme for capturing the contributions in natural
language processing scholarly articles, in order to create such train-
ing datasets for machine readers. In addition, we also provide a
set of 50 annotated articles by the NLPContributions scheme
as a practical demonstration of feasibility of the annotation task.
However, for the training of machine learning models in future
work we will release a larger dataset annotated by the proposed
scheme. To facilitate future research, our pilot dataset is released
online at https://doi.org/10.25835/0019761.
Finally, aligned with the initiatives within research communities
to build the Internet of FAIR Data and Services (IFDS) [6], the data
within ORKG are compliant [38] with such FAIR data principles [52]
thus making them Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable.
Since the dataset we annotate by our proposed scheme is designed
to be ORKG-compliant, we adopt the cutting-edge standard of data
creation within the research community.
Nevertheless, the NLPContribution model is a surface seman-
tic structuring scheme for the contributions in unstructured text. To
realize a full-fledged machine-actionable and inferenceable knowl-
edge graph of scholarly contributions, as future directions, there are
a few IE modules that would need to be improved or added. They
are (1) improving the PDF parser to produce less noisy output; (2)
incorporating an entity and relation linking and normalization mod-
ule; (3) merging phrases from the unstructured text with known
ontologies (e.g., the MEX vocabulary [17]) to align resources and
thus ensure data interoperability and reusability; and (4) extending
the model to more scholarly disciplines and domains.
REFERENCES
[1] Waleed Ammar, Dirk Groeneveld, Chandra Bhagavatula, Iz Beltagy, Miles Craw-
ford, Doug Downey, Jason Dunkelberger, Ahmed Elgohary, Sergey Feldman, Vu
Ha, et al. 2018. Construction of the Literature Graph in Semantic Scholar. In
NAACL, Volume 3 (Industry Papers). 84–91.
[2] Waleed Ammar, Matthew E. Peters, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Russell Power.
2017. The AI2 system at SemEval-2017 Task 10 (ScienceIE): semi-supervised
end-to-end entity and relation extraction. In SemEval@ACL.
[3] SÃűren Auer. 2018. Towards an Open Research Knowledge Graph.
https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1157185
[4] Sören Auer, Viktor Kovtun, Manuel Prinz, Anna Kasprzik, Markus Stocker, and
Maria Esther Vidal. 2018. Towards a knowledge graph for science. In Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics.
1–6.
[5] Isabelle Augenstein, Mrinal Das, Sebastian Riedel, Lakshmi Vikraman, and An-
drew McCallum. 2017. SemEval 2017 Task 10: ScienceIE - Extracting Keyphrases
and Relations from Scientific Publications. In SemEval@ACL.
[6] Paul Ayris, Jean-Yves Berthou, Rachel Bruce, Stefanie Lindstaedt, Anna Monreale,
Barend Mons, Yasuhiro Murayama, Caj Södergård, Klaus Tochtermann, and
Ross Wilkinson. 2016. Realising the European open science cloud. Luxembourg.
https://doi.org/10.2777/940154
[7] Niranjan Balasubramanian, Stephen Soderland, Oren Etzioni, et al. 2013. Gener-
ating coherent event schemas at scale. In EMNLP. 1721–1731.
[8] Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciBERT: A pretrained language
model for scientific text. In EMNLP-IJCNLP. 3606–3611.
[9] Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston, and Nicolas Usunier. 2014. Open question an-
swering with weakly supervised embedding models. In Joint European conference
on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases. 165–180.
[10] Arthur Brack, Jennifer D’Souza, Anett Hoppe, Sören Auer, and Ralph Ewerth.
2020. Domain-Independent Extraction of Scientific Concepts from Research
Articles. In Advances in Information Retrieval. Springer International Publishing,
251–266.
[11] Nathanael Chambers. 2013. Event schema induction with a probabilistic entity-
driven model. In EMNLP. 1797–1807.
[12] Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsupervised learning of narrative
event chains. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT. 789–797.
[13] Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Unsupervised learning of narrative
schemas and their participants. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-Volume 2. 602–610.
NLPContributions: An Annotation Scheme
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
[14] Alexandru Constantin, Silvio Peroni, Steve Pettifer, David Shotton, and Fabio
Vitali. 2016. The document components ontology (DoCO). Semantic web 7, 2
(2016), 167–181.
[15] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In
Proceedings of NAACL, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota,
4171–4186.
[16] Jennifer D’Souza, Anett Hoppe, Arthur Brack, Mohmad Yaser Jaradeh, SÃűren
Auer, and Ralph Ewerth. 2020. The STEM-ECR Dataset: Grounding Scientific
Entity References in STEM Scholarly Content to Authoritative Encyclopedic and
Lexicographic Sources. In LREC. Marseille, France, 2192–2203.
[17] Diego Esteves, Diego Moussallem, Ciro Baron Neto, Tommaso Soru, Ricardo
Usbeck, Markus Ackermann, and Jens Lehmann. 2015. MEX vocabulary: a
lightweight interchange format for machine learning experiments. In Proceedings
of the 11th International Conference on Semantic Systems. 169–176.
[18] Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, and Michael J Cafarella. 2006. Machine Reading..
In AAAI, Vol. 6. 1517–1519.
[19] Said Fathalla, Sahar Vahdati, Sören Auer, and Christoph Lange. 2017. Towards a
knowledge graph representing research findings by semantifying survey articles.
In TPDL. Springer, 315–327.
[20] Beatríz Fisas, Francesco Ronzano, and Horacio Saggion. 2016. A Multi-Layered
Annotated Corpus of Scientific Papers. In LREC.
[21] Zhijiang Guo, Yan Zhang, and Wei Lu. 2019. Attention Guided Graph Convolu-
tional Networks for Relation Extraction. In ACL. 241–251.
[22] Siegfried Handschuh and Behrang QasemiZadeh. 2014. The ACL RD-TEC: a
dataset for benchmarking terminology extraction and classification in computa-
tional linguistics. In COLING 2014: 4th international workshop on computational
terminology.
[23] John PA Ioannidis. 2016. The mass production of redundant, misleading, and
conflicted systematic reviews and meta-analyses. The Milbank Quarterly 94, 3
(2016), 485–514.
[24] Mohamad Yaser Jaradeh, Allard Oelen, Kheir Eddine Farfar, Manuel Prinz, Jen-
nifer D’Souza, Gábor Kismihók, Markus Stocker, and Sören Auer. 2019. Open
Research Knowledge Graph: Next Generation Infrastructure for Semantic Schol-
arly Knowledge. In KCAP (Marina Del Rey, CA, USA). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
243–246.
[25] Arif E Jinha. 2010. Article 50 million: an estimate of the number of scholarly
articles in existence. Learned Publishing 23, 3 (2010), 258–263.
[26] Olga Kononova, Haoyan Huo, Tanjin He, Ziqin Rong, Tiago Botari, Wenhao Sun,
Vahe Tshitoyan, and Gerbrand Ceder. 2019. Text-mined dataset of inorganic
materials synthesis recipes. Scientific data 6, 1 (2019), 1–11.
[27] Chaitanya Kulkarni, Wei Xu, Alan Ritter, and Raghu Machiraju. 2018.
An
Annotated Corpus for Machine Reading of Instructions in Wet Lab Proto-
cols. In NAACL: HLT, Volume 2 (Short Papers). New Orleans, Louisiana, 97–106.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-2016
[28] Fusataka Kuniyoshi, Kohei Makino, Jun Ozawa, and Makoto Miwa. 2020. Annotat-
ing and Extracting Synthesis Process of All-Solid-State Batteries from Scientific
Literature. In LREC. 1941–1950.
[29] Joohong Lee, Sangwoo Seo, and Yong Suk Choi. 2019. Semantic Relation Clas-
sification via Bidirectional LSTM Networks with Entity-aware Attention using
Latent Entity Typing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08163 (2019).
[30] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim,
Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang. 2020. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language
representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics 36, 4 (2020),
1234–1240.
[31] Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik, Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich
Rebholz-Schuhmann. 2012. Automatic recognition of conceptualization zones in
scientific articles and two life science applications. Bioinformatics 28, 7 (2012),
991–1000.
[32] Maria Liakata, Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Colin R. Batchelor. 2010.
Corpora for the Conceptualisation and Zoning of Scientific Papers. In LREC.
[33] Yi Luan, Luheng He, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2018. Multi-Task
Identification of Entities, Relations, and Coreference for Scientific Knowledge
Graph Construction. In EMNLP.
[34] Yi Luan, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017. Scientific information
extraction with semi-supervised neural tagging. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06075
(2017).
[35] Makoto Miwa and Mohit Bansal. 2016. End-to-End Relation Extraction using
LSTMs on Sequences and Tree Structures. In Proceedings of the 54th ACL (Volume
1: Long Papers). 1105–1116.
[36] Sheshera Mysore, Zachary Jensen, Edward Kim, Kevin Huang, Haw-Shiuan
Chang, Emma Strubell, Jeffrey Flanigan, Andrew McCallum, and Elsa Olivetti.
2019. The Materials Science Procedural Text Corpus: Annotating Materials
Synthesis Procedures with Shallow Semantic Structures. In Proceedings of the
13th Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 56–64.
[37] Allard Oelen, Mohamad Yaser Jaradeh, Kheir Eddine Farfar, Markus Stocker, and
Sören Auer. 2019. Comparing Research Contributions in a Scholarly Knowledge
Graph. In K-CAP 2019. 21–26.
[38] A. Oelen, M. Y. Jaradeh, M. Stocker, and S. Auer. 2020. Generate FAIR Literature
Surveys with Scholarly Knowledge Graphs.
[39] Vayianos Pertsas and Panos Constantopoulos. 2017. Scholarly Ontology: mod-
elling scholarly practices. International Journal on Digital Libraries 18, 3 (2017),
173–190.
[40] Roger C Schank and Robert P Abelson. 1977. Scripts, plans, goals and under-
standing: An inquiry into human knowledge structures. (1977).
[41] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le,
Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large neural networks: The
sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 (2017).
[42] Dan Simonson and Anthony Davis. 2015. Interactions between narrative schemas
and document categories. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Computing News
Storylines. 1–10.
[43] Dan Simonson and Anthony Davis. 2016. NASTEA: Investigating narrative
schemas through annotated entities. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Com-
puting News Storylines. 57–66.
[44] Dan Simonson and Anthony Davis. 2018. Narrative Schema Stability in News Text.
In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
3670–3680.
[45] Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGerald, Jeffrey Ling, and Tom Kwiatkowski.
2019. Matching the Blanks: Distributional Similarity for Relation Learning. In
ACL. 2895–2905.
[46] Larisa N. Soldatova and Ross D. King. 2006. An ontology of scientific experiments.
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface 3 11 (2006), 795–803.
[47] Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta, and Marc Moens. 1999. An annotation scheme for
discourse-level argumentation in research articles. In Proceedings of the ninth
conference on European chapter of ACL. 110–117.
[48] Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Colin Batchelor. 2009.
Towards
discipline-independent argumentative zoning: evidence from chemistry and
computational linguistics. In EMNLP: Volume 3. 1493–1502.
[49] Lars Vogt, Jennifer D’Souza, Markus Stocker, and Sören Auer. 2020. Toward
Representing Research Contributions in Scholarly Knowledge Graphs Using
Knowledge Graph Cells. In JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China.
[50] Haoyu Wang, Ming Tan, Mo Yu, Shiyu Chang, Dakuo Wang, Kun Xu, Xiaoxiao
Guo, and Saloni Potdar. 2019. Extracting Multiple-Relations in One-Pass with
Pre-Trained Transformers. In Proceedings of the 57th ACL. 1371–1377.
[51] Mark Ware and Michael Mabe. 2015. The STM Report: An overview of scientific
and scholarly journal publishing. (03 2015).
[52] Mark D Wilkinson, Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Apple-
ton, Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, Jan-Willem Boiten, Luiz Bonino
da Silva Santos, Philip E Bourne, et al. 2016. The FAIR Guiding Principles for
scientific data management and stewardship. Scientific data 3 (2016).
[53] Yue Zhang, Qi Liu, and Linfeng Song. 2018. Sentence-State LSTM for Text
Representation. In Proceedings of the 56th ACL (Volume 1: Long Papers). 317–327.
[54] Yuhao Zhang, Peng Qi, and Christopher D Manning. 2018. Graph Convolution
over Pruned Dependency Trees Improves Relation Extraction. In EMNLP. 2205–
2215.
A
TWICE MODELING AGREEMENT
In general, even if the annotations are performed by a single anno-
tator, there will be an annotation discrepancy. Compare the same
information unit âĂĲExperimental SetupâĂİ modeled in Figure 7
below versus that modeled in Figure 3. Fig. 7 was the first annota-
tion attempt and includes the second attempted model, done on a
different day and blind from the the first. While neither are incor-
rect, the second has taken the least annotated information route
possibly due to annotator fatigue, hence a two-pass methodology
is recommended.
EEKE 2020 @ JCDL ’20, August 1–5, 2020, Virtual Event, China
D’Souza and Auer
Figure 7: Illustration of modeling of Contribution Sequences in the Experimental Setup Information Unit (from [30]) in a
first annotation attempt. Contrast with second attempt depicted in Figure 3 in the main paper content.
