Title: Exploring new Approaches for Information Retrieval through Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02199v1
--------------------------------------------------

1 
 
 
Exploring new Approaches for Information Retrieval 
through Natural Language Processing 
 
 
                
 
                                               Manak Raj1, Dr. Nidhi Mishra2 
                                                ASET, Amity University   
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
manak.raj@s.amity.edu,nmishra1@amity.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This review paper explores recent advancements and emerging approaches in Information Retrieval 
(IR) as applied to Natural Language Processing (NLP). IR is one of the domains under NLP, which is 
itself a vast field of study. The dynamic nature of IR has been propelled by significant technological 
innovations and evolving research paradigms. In the study of different research papers, information 
such as the evolution of IR models, advanced retrieval techniques, and their applications in various 
domains has been considered. Emphasis is placed on the methodologies used by different research 
scholars to enhance retrieval performance, particularly through the integration of techniques like 
reinforcement learning and deep learning. Different aspects of IR have been taken into consideration 
while designing this review paper. Some of these include private information retrieval, advancements 
in IR with models like BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) for 
improved retrieval accuracy, the functioning of search engines like Google, and the use of Lucene, an 
open-source library that facilitates efficient text indexing and searching. Additionally, the use of a 
Python toolkit called 'Pyserini' which supports reproducible IR research with both sparse and dense 
representations, is discussed. This toolkit exemplifies ongoing efforts to develop robust and flexible 
IR systems that cater to the complex requirements of modern information retrieval tasks. Other aspects 
of the topic are also included in this paper. It provides a comprehensive overview of the 
methodologies, applications, and performance of these approaches, highlighting the trends and future 
directions in the field. By integrating innovative techniques and addressing emerging challenges, the 
reviewed studies explain how the advancement of IR is ultimately enhancing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of information retrieval in various practical applications. 
 
 
 
Keywords: NLP, Information Retrieval, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Search Engines                                                              
2 
 
1.    Introduction 
Information Retrieval (IR) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) are important areas in 
computer science, enabling the efficient extraction and utilization of information from vast 
datasets that will be worked upon. IR focuses on the retrieval of relevant information in 
response to user queries, while NLP involves the processing and understanding of human 
language by computers. This review examines new approaches in IR through NLP 
advancements, providing a comprehensive overview of contemporary models, techniques, 
and applications. Information Retrieval is one of the domains of NLP and these days has 
become a very important factor in user’s experience. User will not want to have a poor 
response from the search engine like Google that is why it is very important that there is a 
continuous advancement in this field. NLP is the main center of knowledge of all the 
different domains like IR, Machine Translation, Semantic Analysis etc. Information 
Retrieval (IR) is a critical component of Natural Language Processing (NLP), dealing with 
the representation, storage, and access of information. With the exponential growth of 
digital data, efficient and accurate IR systems are essential.  So, it is very important for us 
to understand what Natural Language Processing actually is. Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) is a field of study and practical application which is focused on enabling computers 
to understand and manipulate natural language (which is our Human Language text or 
speech) effectively. Researchers in NLP strive to understand how humans use language, 
and making it easier for many other fields of study to apply the principles in disciplines like 
computer science, linguistics, mathematics, electrical engineering, artificial intelligence, 
robotics, and psychology. By harnessing insights from these diverse fields, NLP aims to 
develop tools and methodologies that empower computer systems to interpret and 
manipulate natural languages for various tasks. Applications of NLP span a wide range of 
domains including MT, NLP processing and summarization, user interfaces, multilingual 
and cross-language information retrieval (CLIR), speech recognition (like Alexa, Google 
Assistant) and an artificial intelligence. As we now know what NLP is we can also strive to 
know what IR is. Information Retrieval. It is a field within computer science that deals with 
the representation, storage, organization, and retrieval of information items such as 
documents, web pages, images, audio, video and other types of data from the huge dataset. 
The goal of IR is to provide users with relevant information in response to their queries or 
information needs. Search engines like Google, Bing and more utilizes various IR 
techniques to index and retrieve information from vast amounts of data available on the 
web. 
 
 
 
3 
 
2.    Literature Review 
2.1  Information Retrieval Models 
There are various IR models like Boolean Model, Vector Space model, Probabilistic model, 
Inference network model.[3] 
a) Boolean Model 
The Boolean model, one of the earliest and oldest IR models, which represents 
documents as well as queries as clusters of expressions, employing Boolean 
algebra (AND, OR, NOT) for query formulation. Its incapacity to rank the 
documents affects its effectiveness for more complex queries. It has a retrieval 
function that sees a document as either relevant or irrelevant. 
b) Vector Space Model 
In the Vector Space Model (VSM), all the documents and queries are portrayed as 
vectors in a multi-dimensional space. 
 
Figure 1: Document and query as vectors [3] 
The resemblance between a document and a query is found out using the concept 
of cosine similarity. VSM supports the ranking of documents based on coherence 
and relevance, which makes it quite popular in IR systems. 
 
Figure 2: Similarity Cosine function [3] 
VSM has one of its evaluation metrics which is a term which introduced term-
weight scheme and known as TF-IDF weighting. All of these weights have a term 
4 
 
frequency (TF) factor which helps in measuring the frequency of terms in the 
document or query. Whereas, inverse document frequency (IDF) factor is used to 
measure the inverse of the number of documents that contain a term either a 
document or a query one. 
c) Probabilistic Model 
The most crucial function of the probabilistic model is the concept of it to initiate 
ranking of documents on probability obtained from ability of relevance in any 
user's query. All the two, documents and user queries are represented by vectors 
~d and ~q and these are known as binary vectors, each binary vector component 
shows whether a given document or term occurs in some document or query, or it 
does not. 
d) Inference Network Model 
In IRS(s), each and every document along with terms that has different degrees of 
impact. When a user submits a query, all these things from many terms are 
collected to calculate some numerical score for the documents. This can be viewed 
strength, as the weight of each term within the document, influencing its 
significance to the given query. Document ranking in these systems follows 
methods and techniques in models such as the vector space model, probabilistic 
models. Anyhow, the correct method for quantifying the power of a term within 
any document is not very rigid and can be accustomed according to different 
choices of design and aims. 
 
 
2.2   Web Search Engines 
 
Information Retrieval (IR) plays a critical role in the functioning of nearly all of the web 
search engines which we use a lot in our daily lives, they are very essential tools for finding 
the widened corpora of information which is available all over the internet. Web search 
engines use IR techniques so that it can index, search, and rank all the web pages in order 
to provide the users with relevant results which they were seeking and that is truly based on 
their queries given by the user. When any user gives a query, the search engine starts 
understanding it in order to identify the key terms present in there. The search engine then 
extracts a list of all the web pages from its database that has been indexed and that contain 
these long terms which are related to the user’s intent. This process involves several steps, 
including: 
5 
 
a) Crawling - The crawler has a function of seeking and extracting the relevant 
documents for the given search engine like Google, Bing etc. Crawlers size and 
shape differs a lot, but one thing which is common to all the web crawlers is that 
it follows links on online pages to find the web page and then download all new 
pages. A web crawler has its own reach it can be limited to a place like an 
University. 
b) Indexing – It is the second process after once crawling is done. It means that the 
system will now create a document index. In this phase, query is written by the 
user so that some relevant information can be retrieved. 
c) Ranking – Once these two processes are done, the IR system searches the index 
for the relevant documents that are in accordance with the query and presents them 
to the user.                                                                          
   
 Figure 3: Web IR process [1] 
6 
 
2.3   CLIR Using BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) 
 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval (CLIR) is a filed from information retrieval that 
primarily focuses on fetching all the documents that are written in a language that the user 
who is proving the query does not know. This is kind of tricky but it simply starts with the 
translation of queries into the document’s language or the other way around. Use of MT, 
some multilingual sources, datasets cross this language barrier. The main purpose of all of 
this to allow the people access to information all across the globe without any barriers. 
Despite of all these innumerous problems, CLIR still plays an indispensable role in helping 
the world in global information access and enhancing the research of multilingual 
nuisances. BERT, XLNet and many more are the examples of the neural language models 
that have been developed recently and have achieved quite impressive results in nearly all 
of the NLP tasks including sentence classification, question answering and document 
ranking, information retrieval and many more tasks. BERT has been used in [9] for CLIR 
(Cross Lingual Information Retrieval).  
According to the traditional norms, CLIR consists of two factors that play the roles here, 
the first one is machine translation and the next id monolingual IR. Cross-lingual IR has 
gained a lot importance with the advent of increase in the information available all over the 
internet. It is the first bidirectional language model and it uses right and left texts to predict 
the next texts. It is heavily trained by optimizing two aims one is masked prediction and 
another one is next sentence prediction. The self-attention mechanism which is present in 
all the BERT models, so it can learn pairwise sentence. In this paper, they have extended 
and applied BERT as a ranker for CLIR. They introduced a cross-lingual deep relevance 
matching model for CLIR based on BERT. They finetuned a pretrained multilingual model 
with their own CLIR data and obtained very promising results. Just to finetune the model, 
they made a large amount of data being trained from parallel data they had, which is mainly 
used for MT and is much easier to access as in comparison to the relevance of contexts. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
2.4    Detailed Review of Selected Research Papers 
 
 
S No. 
Name 
Methodology 
Result 
Advantage 
Disadvantage 
1. 
Pyserini: A Python toolkit 
for reproducible 
information retrieval 
research with sparse and 
dense representations 
The various methods that 
have been used in here are 
sparse, dense and hybrid 
retrieval. 
Showed that hybrid retrieval 
overshadows the individual 
sparse or dense retrieval 
methods in terms of their 
retrieval effectiveness. 
Easy to use, 
reproducibility factor, 
pre-built-indexes, high 
performance and support 
for all the three retrievals. 
Pyserini relies mainly on 
several dependencies, like 
Java (in Lucene) and other 
Python libraries. Managing 
all these dependencies and 
ensuring compatibility can 
sometimes be challenging 
and not noteworthy. 
2. 
Development of an IR 
System for Argument 
Search 
It includes pre-processing, 
stoplist, stemmers, field 
weights and reranking have 
been used here. 
BM25 initial nDCG@5 score 
was 0.3938. Where, 
LMDirichlet initial nDCG@5 
score was 0.7345.  
This shows us the superiority of 
LMDirichet over BM25 
 
Improved the decision 
making of system, 
organization of content 
and improved research 
capabilities. 
Intricacy of argument 
mining and scalability 
issues. 
3. 
A Linguistic Study on 
Relevance Modeling in 
Information Retrieval 
Model selection and 
finetuning, probing tasks 
(semantic, lexical, 
syntactic) and their 
performances have been 
used here. 
The relative improvements of 
each and every retrieval models 
are 0.83%, 0.5% and 1.1% on 
document retrieval, answer 
retrieval and response retrieval. 
In depth analysis, 
guidance for model 
selection and task specific 
insights for the system. 
It has a very complex 
nature. 
4. 
A simplified framework 
for zero-shot cross-modal 
sketch data retrieval 
Encoder decoder 
architecture, cross triplet 
loss and zero shot learning 
algorithm have been used 
here. 
It showed the effectiveness of 
the proposed approach. 
Important performance metrics, 
includes precision, recall, and 
F1-score, are significantly 
higher for the proposed method 
as compared to all the previous 
approaches. 
Allows the retrieval of 
data without the need for 
every category, making it 
firm to various 
applications and new 
domains.  
To develop a zero-shot 
model is quite complex and 
require some advanced 
understanding of both 
sketch data and cross-
modal retrieval techniques. 
5. 
An Information Retrieval 
Approach to Building 
Datasets for Hate Speech 
Detection 
Selecting tweets via 
pooling, selecting tweets 
via AL(Active Learning) 
have been used here. 
Detection on Twitter was 
created, yielding 14.6% relative 
coverage and 14.1% hateful 
content presence. 
Reduces annotation costs 
through selection 
techniques like pooling 
and active learning.  
Existing detection models 
struggle with the larger 
subtleties of hate speech 
covered by the new dataset. 
6. 
Private Information 
Retrieval in Distributed 
Storage Systems Using an 
Arbitrary Linear code 
System model, privacy 
model, and Communication 
Price Of Privacy (cPoP) 
have been used here. 
Took the PIR protocol and 
where data is stored using an 
MDS code to the case where 
arbitrary systematic linear code 
is of rate R >1/2 and that is 
used to store data. 
Linear codes in PIR 
protocols helped in 
achieving privacy. This is 
important for protecting 
user privacy. 
The effectiveness of all the 
PIR protocols using linear 
codes often relies on 
certain security 
assumptions. If any of 
these assumptions are 
violated, the privacy gets 
hindered. 
 
 
8 
 
3.    Methodology 
This methodology section’s objective is to provide an overview of the main approaches 
used in some of the selected research papers. It contains the methodologies of the papers 
that have been chosen on the basis of their relevance to the field of IR and NLP. The 
traditional IR models such as BM25 and TF-IDF involve methodologies like ranking 
documents which are based on term frequency factor and inverse document frequency 
factor. For example, in the paper [2], TF-IDF has been utilized to index and alongside rank 
the documents, getting some performance improvements. TF-IDF is a weighting method 
which is used to measure the importance of a word in any document among a collection of 
documents. TF is the term frequency which is the number of times a term q in document t. 
The IDF has a quite discriminating power. It is inverse document frequency which is used 
to measure how rare or frequent a term is in a collection of documents T. It gives high 
weight to lesser but frequent terms and a lower weight to more but frequent terms.  
In the paper [11], SPLADE v2 has been discussed and SPLADE v2 incorporates three major 
methodologies: 
1. Pooling Strategy: There is a change from sum to max pooling in the mechanism of 
term weighting that improves the performance of the model. 
2. Document Encoder: It is a version of SPLADE that is totally replied upon 
expansion of document, enabling the pre-computation of term weights which 
eventually reduces inference costs. 
3. Distillation Training: It is a two-step process where firstly the model is trained 
using triplets which have been generated by the previous models and after that it 
is again trained with harder negatives which are generated by the SPLADE before 
the process of distillation. 
In the paper [20], authors have used two methodologies: 
Reinforcement Learning Algorithm: The methodology in this study involves adding up  
a reinforcement learning algorithm into the LLaMA model. The RL algorithm is designed 
to adapt the model’s response in accordance with user queries, giving a combination of 
dynamical systems theory and relativistic physics to model the temporal arise of IR 
strategies. This system uses reward-based learning to refine retrieval parameters like it on 
loop, increasing the model's accuracy, relevance in IR tasks. The algorithm’s decision-
making process is due to this complex transformation: 
9 
 
 
   Figure 4 : RL Algorithm [20] 
Where, ci: Control action for retrieval task, ei: Error in retrieval, Θ: Heaviside step function, 
γ: Threshold parameter, Λk: Lorentz-like transformation function, Vi: Value function, Ri: 
Reward threshold, κ: Scaling factor 
LLaMA Model Adaptation: Adapting the LLaMA model involves some implementation 
of the RL algorithm within its pre-existing architecture. The process is structured to adjust 
the retrieval parameters based on user’s feedback, thereby optimizing the model’s responses 
to align more closely with user queries. It aims to reduce the common issues such as 
irrelevant IR and hallucinations, which are typical in baseline LLMs. 
The proposed methodology in the paper [10] integrates several steps to enhance IR 
performance using social data. Key components include: 
 1. Query Expansion: One more time, processing the user queries by integrating more 
relevant terms derived from the content and social tokens of the documents.  
2. User Scoring: Finding the user’s intent based on their interactions and contributions. The 
scoring system under this helps to combine all the measures of user. 
3. Document Weighting: Assigning weights to documents based on user scores and 
interactions, enhancing the relevance calculation of documents to queries.  
4. Performance Metrics: The use of precision and recall that helps to find the effectiveness 
of the proposed approach as in comparison to standard IR methods. 
 
 
 
10 
 
4.    Conclusion And Discussion 
There has been a number of significant advancements in this dynamic field, which is 
information retrieval through natural language processing. If we see all the recent 
developments that have taken place in the area of machine learning, particularly deep 
learning and reinforcement learning, they have transformed all the traditional IR models 
into more refined systems that are capable of understanding and processing human language 
to an impeccable level. The summation of all the models like BERT, COLBERT and so 
many other models, it has helped in increasing the retrieval accuracy and it makes the 
information retrieval systems work way more efficiently. We also have tools like Pyserini 
and Anserini that are used for reproducible information retrieval research and they are both 
used as they support sparse and dense representations that also enhances the capabilities of 
IR systems. All these advancements have come through the continuous efforts by the 
research scholars to meet all the difficult requirements of the modern era. 
The improvements in IR through NLP have not only improved the efficiency of this field 
but has also given a hope for the expansion of this field to further domains and different 
applications. The adaptation of ‘Entity Recognition’, ’Semantic Analysis’, although they 
are not the primary focus of this review paper, but still all these enhances the ability of IR 
systems and make them able to deal with the complex queries and the user interactions. 
However, these advancements come with many challenges and limitations and research 
scholars are still working for making this field more refined. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
References 
[1] British, S., Oussous, A., Ibrihich, O., & Esghir, M. (2022). A Review on recent research in 
information retrieval. Procedia Computer Science, 201, 777-782.  
[2] Moutaoukkil, A., Idarrou, A., & Belahyane, I. (2022). Information retrieval approaches: A 
comparative study. International journal of electrical and computer engineering systems, 13(10), 
961-970. 
[3] Saini, B., Singh, V., & Kumar, S. (2014). Information retrieval models and searching 
methodologies: Survey. Information Retrieval, 1(2), 20. 
[4] 
Roshdi, 
A., 
& 
Roohparvar, 
A. 
(2015). 
Information 
retrieval 
techniques 
and 
applications. International Journal of Computer Networks and Communications Security, 3(9), 373-
377. 
[5] Chowdhary, K., & Chowdhary, K. R. (2020). Natural language processing. Fundamentals of 
artificial intelligence, 603-649. 
[6] Torfi, A., Shirvani, R. A., Keneshloo, Y., Tavaf, N., & Fox, E. A. (2020). Natural language 
processing advancements by deep learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01200. 
[7] Lin, J., Ma, X., Lin, S. C., Yang, J. H., Pradeep, R., & Nogueira, R. (2021, July). Pyserini: A 
Python toolkit for reproducible information retrieval research with sparse and dense representations. 
In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (pp. 2356-2362). 
[8] Kumar, R. A., Jabbar, M. A., & Reddy, Y. B. (2017, October). Information retrieval systems and 
web search engines: A survey. In Natl. Conf. Trends Eng. Technol (Vol. 25, pp. 123-125). 
[9] Jiang, Z., El-Jaroudi, A., Hartmann, W., Karakos, D., & Zhao, L. (2020). Cross-lingual 
information retrieval with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13005. 
[10] Khalifi, H., Dahir, S., El Qadi, A., & Ghanou, Y. (2020). Enhancing information retrieval 
performance by using social analysis. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 10, 1-7. 
[11] Formal, T., Lassance, C., Piwowarski, B., & Clinchant, S. (2021). SPLADE v2: Sparse lexical 
and expansion model for information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10086. 
[12] Yang, P., Fang, H., & Lin, J. (2017, August). Anserini: Enabling the use of lucene for information 
retrieval research. In Proceedings of the 40th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and 
development in information retrieval (pp. 1253-1256). 
[13] Alecci, M., Baldo, T., Martinelli, L., & Ziroldo, E. (2021). Development of an IR System for 
Argument Search. In CLEF (Working Notes) (pp. 2302-2318). 
[14] Chaudhuri, U., Banerjee, B., Bhattacharya, A., & Datcu, M. (2020). A simplified framework for 
zero-shot cross-modal sketch data retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (pp. 182-183). 
[15] Kumar, S., Rosnes, E., & i Amat, A. G. (2017, June). Private information retrieval in distributed 
storage systems using an arbitrary linear code. In 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information 
Theory (ISIT) (pp. 1421-1425). IEEE. 
[16] Dai, X., Lin, J., Zhang, W., Li, S., Liu, W., Tang, R., ... & Yu, Y. (2021, April). An adversarial 
imitation click model for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 (pp. 
1809-1820). 
[17] Venkatesh, P. R., Chaitanya, K., Kumar, R., & Krishna, P. R. (2022, October). Conversational 
Information Retrieval using Knowledge Graphs. In CIKM Workshops. 
[18] Rahman, M. M., Balakrishnan, D., Murthy, D., Kutlu, M., & Lease, M. (2021). An information 
retrieval approach to building datasets for hate speech detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09775. 
[19] Fan, Y., Guo, J., Ma, X., Zhang, R., Lan, Y., & Cheng, X. (2021, April). A linguistic study on 
relevance modeling in information retrieval. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 (pp. 1053-
12 
 
1064). 
[20] Tu, C. H., Hsu, H. J., & Chen, S. W. (2024). Reinforcement Learning for Optimized Information 
Retrieval in LLaMA. 
[21] Trotman, A., & Lilly, K. (2020, July). JASSjr: The minimalistic BM25 search engine for teaching 
and learning information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference 
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 2185-2188). 
[22] Wang, H., Jia, Y., & Wang, H. (2021, July). Interactive information retrieval with bandit 
feedback. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 2658-2661). 
[23] Thakur, N., Reimers, N., Rücklé, A., Srivastava, A., & Gurevych, I. (2021). Beir: A heterogenous 
benchmark 
for 
zero-shot 
evaluation 
of 
information 
retrieval 
models. arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:2104.08663. 
[24] Wang, C., Yu, H., & Wan, F. (2018, May). Information retrieval technology based on knowledge 
graph. In 2018 3rd International Conference on Advances in Materials, Mechatronics and Civil 
Engineering (ICAMMCE 2018) (pp. 291-296). Atlantis Press. 
[25] Huang, Y., & Huang, J. X. (2024, February). Exploring ChatGPT for next-generation information 
retrieval: Opportunities and challenges. In Web Intelligence (No. Preprint, pp. 1-14). IOS Press. 
 
