Title: Challenges Encountered in Turkish Natural Language Processing Studies
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.11436v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 - REVIEW  ARTICLE- 
 
 
Challenges Encountered in Turkish Natural Language Processing Studies  
Kadir Tohma*, Yakup Kutlu 
Iskenderun Technical University, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Computer 
Engineering, Hatay, TURKEY 
Abstract 
Natural language processing is a branch of computer science that combines artificial 
intelligence with linguistics. It aims to analyze a language element such as writing or 
speaking with software and convert it into information. Considering that each language has 
its own grammatical rules and vocabulary diversity, the complexity of the studies in this field 
is somewhat understandable. For instance, Turkish is a very interesting language in many 
ways. Examples of this are agglutinative word structure, consonant/vowel harmony, a large 
number of productive derivational morphemes (practically infinite vocabulary), derivation 
and syntactic relations, a complex emphasis on vocabulary and phonological rules. In this 
study, the interesting features of Turkish in terms of natural language processing are 
mentioned. In addition, summary info about natural language processing techniques, systems 
and various sources developed for Turkish are given. 
Keywords:  
Natural language processing, Turkish natural language processing, NLP 
 
Article history: 
Received  06 June 2020, Accepted 26 November 2020, Available online 27 November 2020 
 
Introduction 
Language is undoubtedly the main factor in communication between people. Natural 
language processing studies aim at the most effective use of language factor in human-
computer communication. Natural Language Processing is a subcategory of artificial 
intelligence and linguistics. It aims to analyze, understand or reproduce the canonical 
structure of natural languages This analysis can be summarized under many headings, such as 
automatic translation of written documents, question-answer machines, automatic speech and 
                                                 
* Corresponding Author: Kadir Tohma, E-mail: kadir.tohma@iste.edu.tr 
NESciences, 2020, 5(3): 204-211 
 
Doi: 10.28978/nesciences.833188 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
205 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
command recognition, speech synthesis, speech generation, automatic text summarization, 
and information provision. The problems encountered when speaking with each language 
rules are much less common. But in the real world, everyday language falls outside the rules 
of existing language. Language rules are general. However, the usage style varies from region 
to region. Trained computers are as important as knowing the language rules to be able to 
catch these changes or to be able to master daily speaking language. In Turkish, such cases 
are frequently encountered. For example, three different sentences with the same meaning can 
be written in Turkish. Turkish has this flexibility due to the suffixes the words take. The 
flexible structure is due to the fact that Turkish is an adjacent language. We cannot speak of 
flexibility for a non-adjacent language. It is difficult to say that grammar rules and 
punctuation are used correctly in all the articles we write or encounter in our daily life. 
Turkish is also a difficult language in this respect (Oflazer, 2014). There have been many 
studies on natural language processing but it is not possible to directly transfer the results of 
these studies or the tools that emerged in these studies into Turkish. This showed that Turkish 
natural language processing studies should be focused on. 
Structurally, Turkish has features that have interesting problems in natural language 
processing. In Turkish, the number of different words in which a word can be converted by 
suffixes is theoretically infinite. The reason why Turkish is studied in almost every linguistics 
textbook is that the Turkish language is a typical example in a number of grammatical 
phenomena; For example, vocal harmony, agglutinative word structure, syntactic ease. And 
in phrase structures, genitival always precede determined words. The word structure of 
Turkish is based on adding derivational affixes and inflectional suffixes to the roots as 
postfixes. The richness of inflectional suffixes, the productivity of derivational affixes and 
the direct effect of postfixes on syntax produce interesting results in computerized morpheme 
analysis (Adalı, 2012). In Turkish, the number of different words that a word can be 
converted with the help of suffixes is theoretically infinite (Gündoğdu et al., 2016). Turkish 
is a free language with adjacent and sentence element sequences. Therefore, sentence analysis 
is more complex than Indo-European languages (Eryiğit, 2006). 
In this study, the difficulties and differences of Turkish in terms of natural language 
processing are mentioned and a review of the natural language processing techniques, 
systems and studies developed for Turkish is presented. 
Linguistics and Natural Language Processing 
Advances in information technologies have given an important pace to computational linguistics 
studies. This new field of science, which is called Natural Language Processing (NLP), was first 
started with the aim of using natural languages in human-computer interaction, and gradually 
became computerized language science. The transfer of data and results in memory to people by 
speaking a natural language is called ''speech'' and the entries made to the computer by people 
through speaking are called ''speech recognition". In order for a computer to understand human 
speech and to interact with people by speaking in a language that a human can understand, the 
computer needs to know all the features of the language. In other words, all the features of the 
language must be taught to the computer. Therefore, IT specialists working in the field of NLP 
have started to evaluate the features of languages from their own point of view. In this context, 
studies on four main subjects, especially phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, have 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
206 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
been focused on. Linguists work on these four main issues that make up the structure of language 
and try to reveal the features and rules of language. Parallel to these studies, they examine the 
evolution of language over time. IT specialists working in the field of natural language try to 
process the language with the help of computer by using the results of linguists. For example, 
they try to find and correct spelling errors in a written text by using phonology and morphology 
features of Turkish. They try to develop inter-linguistic translation tools using the grammar rules 
of two languages, determined by linguists. According to a linguist, the richness of agglutinative 
languages is a positive feature for these languages, while it is a difficult but interesting issue for 
IT specialists to solve. As can be seen from these examples, linguists try to define the 
characteristics and structures of languages scientifically, while IT specialists interested in natural 
language processing and try to help people through computers. Today, linguists and IT specialists 
working in the field of natural language processing work separately and occasionally work 
together on specific topics. It is clear that working together will yield more productive results. 
Because one uses the results defined by the other. In order to work together, linguists need to 
focus on information technologies and IT specialists need to focus on linguistics. 
Morphological Structure of Turkish 
 
In terms of morphology, Turkish is an agglutinative language. There is no prefix in Turkish. 
Also, as in German, there is no combination of names that are written together by adding a series 
of noun roots. Compound words are often used for meanings that are much different from the 
sum of their meanings. In Turkish, words are created by adding a series of suffixes to 
approximately 20,000 root words in a very productive way. Nouns are not divided into classes as 
in German and French. The vocabulary has been influenced by Arabic, Persian, Greek, 
Armenian, French, Italian, German and English over time due to historical, geographical and 
economic reasons. When used in a sentence, the words take a series of suffix. The presence of 
derivational affixes in Turkish words is frequently encountered. Such words can sometimes have 
a very complex structure. Since Turkish is an agglutinative language, words that have different 
meanings can be derived from a root. 
 
Studies on Turkish Natural Language Processing 
 
Studies on Turkish natural language processing have started to increase especially in recent years. 
The studies focused on the topics mentioned in the areas of natural language processing. For 
example, Kılıçarslan and his friends developed a software tool to help the education and training 
of children with intellectual disabilities and autism. With the help of this tool, it is aimed to help 
children with disabilities to make connections between expressions and the corresponding 
concepts. Natural Language Processing (NLP) modules have been used with the fact that it is 
better to ensure that the user's relationship with the system is established with natural language 
expressions, rather than limiting them to keywords (Kılıçaslan et al., 2006). In the studies of 
Topçu et al., a Turkish speaking system was developed for chat purposes. The system works 
using AIML technology. The developed system has the feature of receiving information from the 
user, forwarding the chat, using the information of the user with his own sentences. When 
designing the system, the language used was Turkish, which caused some problems. As a result, 
the fact that Turkish is an agglutinative language and that verbs have a large number of suffixes 
increases the response time. To solve this problem, the morphological analysis of user inputs is 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
207 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
considered (Topçu et al., 2012). In the studies of Dönmez et al., the concepts and phrases were 
emphasized, the effect of the voice suffixes was discussed and the subject of valid/invalid 
predicates was examined. The methods suitable for sentence structure have been studied by 
considering predicate types. The effect of tense suffixes and personal endings on natural language 
processing is emphasized. Ambiguity events were examined and compared with Google 
translation. As a result, it was observed that this study achieved 68% success (Dönmez et al., 
2012). In the studies of Ergün et al., a system that automatically evaluates comments about a 
product is introduced by using text mining techniques. The data were first subjected to 
morphological analysis. In the texts, words indicating many product features and positive 
negative adjectives were determined. In order to determine the qualifier words, a tree structure 
was created according to the Turkish grammar rules. A software was developed using the Depth 
First Search algorithm on the tree structure. As a result of running the software, the data obtained 
were recorded in the SQL database. When the data is questioned according to any feature of the 
product, numerical information expressing the degree of satisfaction about that feature is obtained 
and interpreted (Ergün et al., 2000). In the study of Coşkun, focused on topics such as word order 
and sentence structures of the natural language. In addition, the elements of sentences are 
mentioned, the rule of coexistence of words is used to distinguish the elements from each other 
and methods are developed. The developed method has been tested in different fields. As a result 
of the test, it has been determined that the success of the method varies according to the correct 
analysis of the words in the sentence and the sentence types. It is important that the types of 
words are found correctly for the accuracy of namesets. Another conclusion is that the success of 
rule-based systems is higher in simple sentences (Coşkun 2013). Named entity recognition is 
often described as the automatic discovery of the names of people, places and institutions in the 
natural language. In the studies of Küçük et al., a large list of human names was collected 
through Wikipedia. Afterwards, with this list, a Wikipedia-based named entity recognition 
system was developed for Turkish by using the lists of people, places and institutions obtained 
from Turkish Wikipedia and a Turkish rule-based system. The system has been tested on several 
datasets and has achieved successful results (Küçük et al.,2016). Morphological analysis is the 
preliminary stage of the studies to be done with Natural Language Processing. In the studies of 
Çakıroğlu et al., it was emphasized that morphological analysis should have effective 
performance. In addition, it focuses on methods for detecting and correcting typos. Besides, 
correction methods were examined for nominative words. As a result, the system achieved 71% 
error correction and 98% correct word proposition (Çakıroğlu et al., 2006). 
 
Named entity Recognition is one of the most important research topics in areas such as 
Natural Language Processing, Data Extraction and Data Mining. This issue is still the subject of 
research for agglutinative languages. In the study of Güneş et al., artificial neural network 
structure has been handled in different ways for the named entity problem in Turkish, compared 
with previous studies and achieved success of 93.69% (Güneş et al., 2018). Text Generation is 
one of the technologies that deal with the field of Natural Language Production, which is one of 
the most important sub-branches of Natural Language Processing. It can be used for purposes 
such as producing new texts from an existing one, producing similar texts on different subjects, 
and creating new texts with the same title. Kutlugun et al., based on their previous studies, 
concluded that it was not sufficient to analyze natural language using a single method. And they 
produced new texts with using two different patterns. Also, in this study, the sentence structure of 
Turkish was examined and word types were determined. The position of the words in the 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
208 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
sentence was dealt with, the elements of the sentence were determined and new sentences were 
produced. As a result, more meaningful texts were produced by using a small number of 
sentences, and system performance were observed at the highest level (Kutlugün et al., 2018). In 
the studies of Berk et al., a collection of Turkish text with verb expressions having more than one 
word was put forward. Verb expressions that have more than one word in the collection are 
divided into subgroups. In the study, a new Turkish test collection was created considering the 
labelling rules stated in the “parseme” Joint Study 1.0 This collection was created by bringing 
together articles and columns in many fields. The collection is intended to be an effective 
resource for machine experience, n-gram based language modelling, and syntactic divergence 
(Berk et al., 2018). The determination of different emotions in a text together with the assets they 
affect is called Target Based Emotion Analysis. In the studies of Çetin et al., studies on Turkish 
Target Emotion Analysis were included. In this study, which was evaluated by using ABSA 2016 
competitions and Turkish restaurant comments, an algorithm based on conditional random fields 
using natural language processing outputs and word vectors for determining the target category, 
target term and two cases together was designed. And it was concluded that all three tasks were 
solved in one step. The data obtained from the study revealed that it was the most successful 
study among similar studies conducted so far. Achievements were 66.7% for target category, 
53.2% for target terms and 47.7% for both cases (Çetin et al., 2018). 
 
A study on correcting typos in Turkish was done by Kemal Oflazer and Cemalettin 
Güzey. This study stands on a two-phased morphological analysis and a search algorithm based 
on dynamic programming. In this study on correcting typos, the problem was evaluated under 
two main headings. The first step is to find all candidate roots from the dictionary for the 
misspelled word. The difficult point here is to decide whether the roots are changed as a result of 
misspelling or by phonetic changes. The second step is the main part of the problem; this is to 
derive all possible words from all candidate roots found. To achieve this, the method of finding 
the distance between two words, known as ''edit distance metric '' was used. In this study, “q 
gram” method was used to find out how similar the two words are. According to the test results, 
the correction of a misspelled word is performed with 95% success (Güzey et al., 1994, Oflazer, 
1993). Another study on the finding of misspelled words in Turkish was conducted by Rıfat 
Aşliyan, Korhan Günel and Tatyana Yakhno. The aim of this study is to determine whether the 
words in a Turkish text are written correctly or not. The system takes the words in the Turkish 
text as input and calculates the probability distribution using the “n-gram frequency” method. If 
the probability distribution of a word is zero, it is judged that the word is misspelled. In order to 
test the system, two different databases of a text containing the same words were prepared. One 
of them contains 685 misspelled words. The other one contains 685 correctly written words. The 
system's performance in finding misspelled words is 97% (Aşliyan et al., 2007). One of the few 
spell checking tools developed for Turkish was made by Ayşin Solak and Kemal Oflazer. The 
dictionary used by this software contains 23.000 words. Each root word in the dictionary is 
marked with flags symbolizing the word's properties. Any word in the dictionary can be marked 
with 64 different flags. But, 41 of these flags were used in the developed software. Root finding 
algorithm is based on the dictionary search process. According to this algorithm, if the word is 
searched and found in the dictionary, it means that there are no affixes; therefore there is no need 
to analyze. If the word is not in the dictionary, a letter is removed from the right of the word and 
the rest of the word is searched in the dictionary. This process continues until the word is found 
in the dictionary.  If the first letter of the word is reached and the root is not found in the 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
209 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
dictionary that means the word is misspelled (Oflazer et al.,1992, Solak et al., 1991).  
Özyurt et al. developed a basic and simple Turkish dialogue based dialogue system in their 
studies (Ozyurt et al.). Amasyalı et al. prepared a new and simple question-answering system 
called baybilmiş in their studies. A This study has many examples for English but a first for 
Turkish Internets question answering system was implemented (Amasyali et al., 2005). 
Gündoğdu et al. studied the Methods Used in Turkish Text Summarization. The difficulties 
encountered in this study were also due to the fact that the Turkish language has a different origin 
and grammatical structure from the English language. and it was emphasized that different 
solutions should be found in terms of solutions (Gündoğdu et al., 2016). In addition, many 
studies have mentioned the structural and semantic difficulties of Turkish (Yeniterzi et al., 2010, 
Yuret et al., 2006, Sak et al., 2011, Oyucu et al.,2020, Şahin et al., 2018, Saygili et al., 2017, 
Polat et al., 2020, Ali et al., 2020, Eryigit et al., 2008). 
 
Conclusion 
 
Nowadays, most of the studies in the field of natural language processing are conducted in 
English as it is a valid language everywhere in science and business. Although theoretical studies 
have been conducted in the field of natural language processing on the Turkish language, the 
number of studies conducted in practice is quite limited. Despite being the native language of 
over 60 M speakers in a wide geography, Turkish has been a relative late-comer into natural 
language processing and the development of tools and resources for Turkish natural language 
processing has only been attempted in the last two decades. Therefore, more studies are needed to 
establish a research infrastructure in Turkish. Turkish is spoken as a native language by millions 
of people in a wide geography. However, natural language processing studies on the Turkish 
language accelerated only in 10-15 years. Although Turkish has led to some very interesting 
problems for language processing due to its specific characteristics detailed in the this study, it 
has been observed that the solutions obtained for them can be adapted to a much wider set of 
languages when adequately isolated. Even though a number of sources have been developed for 
the Turkish Language over time, there are still some obstacles and deficiencies. In future studies, 
taking into account such deficiencies, a new application based on interactive and deep learning 
will be developed using Turkish natural language processing techniques.   
 
References 
Adalı, E. (2012). Doğal Dil İşleme. Türkiye Bilişim Vakfı Bilgisayar Bilimleri ve Mühendisliği 
Dergisi, 5(2). 
Ali, C. B., Haddad, H., & Slimani, Y. (2019). Empirical evaluation of compounds indexing for 
turkish texts. Computer Speech & Language, 56, 95-106. 
Amasyalı, M. F., & Diri, B. (2005). Bir soru cevaplama sistemi: Baybilmiş. Türkiye Bilişim 
Vakfı Bilgisayar Bilimleri ve Mühendisliği Dergisi, 1(1). 
Aşliyan, R., Günel, K., & Yakhno, T. (2007, December). Detecting misspelled words in Turkish 
text using syllable n-gram frequencies. In International Conference on Pattern 
Recognition and Machine Intelligence (pp. 553-559). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
210 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
Berk, G., Erden, B., & Güngör, T. (2018). Turkish verbal multiword expressions corpus. In 2018 
26th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU) (pp. 1-4). 
IEEE. 
Çakıroğlu, Ü., & Özyurt, Ö. (2006). Türkçe Metinlerdeki Yazım Yanlışlarına Yönelik Otomatik 
Düzeltme Modeli. Elektrik-Elektronik-Bilgisayar Mühendisliği Sempozyumu ve Fuarı 
(Eleco 2006), BURSA, TÜRKIYE, ss.7-9 
Çetin, F. S., & Eryiğit, G. (2018). Türkçe Hedef Tabanlı Duygu Analizi İçin Alt Görevlerin 
İncelenmesi–Hedef Terim, Hedef Kategori Ve Duygu Sınıfı Belirleme. Bilişim 
Teknolojileri Dergisi, 11(1), 43-56. 
Coşkun, N. (2013). Türkçe Tümcelerin Öğelerinin Bulunması(Doctoral dissertation, Fen 
Bilimleri Enstitüsü). 
Dönmez, İ., & Adalı, E. (2015). Türkçe Tümce Çözümlemede Vektör Yaklaşımı. Afyon 
Kocatepe Üniversitesi Fen Ve Mühendislik Bilimleri Dergisi, 15(3), 1-11. 
Ergün, K., Kubat, C., Çağıl, G., & Cesur, R. (2000). İnternet ortamındaki tüketici yorumlarından 
özet bilgi çıkarımı. Sakarya University Journal of Science, 17(1), 33-40. 
Eryiğit, G. (2006). Türkçe’nin bağlılık ayrıştırması (Doctoral dissertation). 
Eryiğit, G., Nivre, J., & Oflazer, K. (2008). Dependency parsing of Turkish. Computational 
Linguistics, 34(3), 357-389. 
Gündoğdu, Ö. E., & Duru, N. (2016). Türkçe Metin Özetlemede Kullanılan Yöntemler. 18. 
Akademik Bilişim Konferansı-AB'16. 
Güneş, A., & TantuĞ, A. C. (2018). Turkish named entity recognition with deep learning. 
In 2018 26th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference 
(SIU) (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
Güzey, C. ve Oflazer, K., 1994. Spelling Correction in Agglutinative Languages, Bilkent 
University Department Of Computer Engineering and Information Systems Technical 
Report, BU-CEIS-94-01, Ankara, Turkey.  
Kılıçaslan, Y., Özlem, U. Ç. A. R., Güner, E. S., & Kemal, B. A. L. (2006).Otistik Ve Zihinsel 
Engelli Çocuklar İçin Doğal Dil İşleme Tabanlı Bir Yardım Aracı: Bir Başlangıç 
Çalışması. Trakya Üniversitesi Fen Bilimleri Dergisi, 7(2), 101-108. 
Küçük, D., & Arıcı, N. (2016). Türkçe için Wikipedia Tabanlı Varlık İsmi Tanıma 
Sistemi. Politeknik Dergisi, 19(3), 325-332. 
Kutlugün, M. A., & Şirin, Y. (2018). Turkish meaningful text generation with class based n-gram 
model. In 2018 26th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference 
(SIU)(pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
Oflazer, K. ve Solak, A., 1992. Parsing Agglutinative Word Structures And Its Application to 
Spelling Checking for Turkish, In Proceedings of the 15thInternational Conference On 
Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France, August 23-28, p. 39-45. 
Natural and Engineering Sciences                       
211 
                                                                                         
 
 
   
Oflazer, K., 1993. Two-level Description Of Turkish Morphology, In Proceedings of the Sixth 
Conference Of The Europen Chapter Of The Assotiation For Computational Linguistics, 
Utrecht, Netherlands, April 1993. 
Oflazer, K. (2014). Turkish and its challenges for language processing. Language resources and 
evaluation, 48(4), 639-653. 
Oyucu, S., Sever, H., & Polat, H. (2019). Overview of automatic speech recognition, approaches 
and challenges: Way the future to Turkish speech recognition. Gazi Univ. Sci. J. Part C 
Des. Technol, 7, 834-854. 
Ozyurt, O., & Kose, C. Türkçe Tabanlı Diyalog Sistemi Tasarimi ve Kodlanmasi 
Polat, N., Mahalingappa, L., & Mancilla, R. L. (2020). Longitudinal growth trajectories of 
written syntactic complexity: The case of Turkish learners in an intensive English 
program. Applied Linguistics, 41(5), 688-711. 
Sak, H., Güngör, T., & Saraçlar, M. (2011). Resources for Turkish morphological 
processing. Language resources and evaluation, 45(2), 249-261. 
Saygılı, N. Ş., Amghar, T., Levrat, B., & Acarman, T. (2017, May). Taking advantage of Turkish 
characteristic features to achieve authorship attribution problems for Turkish. In 2017 
25th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU) (pp. 1-4). 
IEEE. 
Solak, A., (1991). Design And Implementation of A Spelling Checker For Turkish, M.S. Thesis, 
Bilkent University, Ankara. 
Şahin, G. G., & Adalı, E. (2018). Annotation of semantic roles for the Turkish proposition 
bank. Language Resources and Evaluation, 52(3), 673-706. 
Topçu, S., Şen, C., Amasyalı, M.F,.(2012). Türkçe Sohbet Robotu. Akıllı Sistemler ve 
Uygulamaları, ASYU. 
Yeniterzi, R., & Oflazer, K. (2010, July). Syntax-to-morphology mapping in factored phrase-
based statistical machine translation from English to Turkish. In Proceedings of the 48th 
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (pp. 454-464). 
Yuret, D., & Türe, F. (2006, June). Learning morphological disambiguation rules for Turkish. 
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Main 
Conference (pp. 328-334). 
