Title: Testing network clustering algorithms with Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17135v1
--------------------------------------------------

Testing network clustering algorithms
with Natural Language Processing
Journal Title
XX(X):1–10
©The Author(s) 2024
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/
SAGE
Ixandra Achitouv1, David Chavalarias1,2 and Bruno Gaume1
Abstract
The advent of online social networks has led to the development of an abundant literature on the study of online social
groups and their relationship to individuals’ personalities as revealed by their textual productions. Social structures
are inferred from a wide range of social interactions. Those interactions form complex – sometimes multi-layered –
networks, on which community detection algorithms are applied to extract higher order structures. The choice of the
community detection algorithm is however hardily questioned in relation with the cultural production of the individual
they classify. In this work, we assume the entangled nature of social networks and their cultural production to propose
a definition of cultural based online social groups as sets of individuals whose online production can be categorized
as social group-related. We take advantage of this apparently self-referential description of online social groups with a
hybrid methodology that combines a community detection algorithm and a natural language processing classification
algorithm. A key result of this analysis is the possibility to score community detection algorithms using their agreement
with the natural language processing classification. A second result is that we can assign the opinion of a random user
at > 85% accuracy.
Keywords
community detection, natural language processing, social network, classification
Introduction
The advent of online social networks has led to the
development of an abundant literature on the study of
online social groups and their relationship to individuals’
personalities as revealed by their textual productions [1][2].
Social structures are usually represented as graphs where the
individuals are the nodes and the links can represent a wide
range of social interactions.
These graphs feature community structures (CS), which
can
be
defined
as
subsets
of
nodes
within
which
interactions are denser than with the rest of the network.
These communities, identified through community detection
algorithms, provide insight into the social structures of the
online social network under study.
Identifying relevant community structures within complex
networks is however a challenging task and most algorithms
are based on the intrinsic optimization of scoring functions
that are often not comparable. Indeed, given a graph
with a set of nodes and edges, enumerating all possible
communities is an NP-Complete problem [3]. Hence many
Community Detection Algorithms (CDA) aim to optimize a
quality function or scoring function that is not universal, and
do not necessarily find the optimal communities (when they
are known) [4, 5].
A wide variety of CDA have been proposed based
on different scoring functions [6]. These functions can
maximize internal connectivity between nodes (e.g. density,
number of edges between members of a community),
external connectivity (e.g. number of edges per nodes that
point outside a cluster [7]), or both (e.g. the fraction
of total edge volume that points outside the cluster [8]).
Alternatively, the modularity is another scoring function
introduced in [9] and is defined as the difference between
the number of edges between nodes in a community and the
expected number of such edges in a random graph with the
same degree sequence. Assessing the quality of these CDA
(validation procedure) is usually performed using ‘ground
truth’ known communities or by generating artificial graphs
[10].
However one could wonder if we can introduce a scoring
function independent of the properties of the network, which
would rely on the actual exchanges of information among
the nodes such as the content of messages between users
that are identified as nodes. This is the scope of this
article – using a Natural Language Processing Classification
Algorithm (NLPCA), we introduce a new scoring function
for comparing the outputs of CDA on online social network
data. In addition one might wonder how this scoring
maps into understandable social communities, and how
can a random user within such communities be precisely
categorized.
We will address these questions and introduce a scoring
function based on a trade-off between precise categorization
of users and coverage of the user categories (recall),
among a reduced number of communities. These textual
1 ISC-PIF - Institut des Syst`emes Complexes - Paris Ile-de-France,
CNRS
2CAMS - Centre d’Analyse et de Math´ematique sociales
Corresponding author:
ISC-PIF, 113 Rue Nationale, 75013 Paris France
Email: ixandra.achitouv@cnrs.fr
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]
arXiv:2406.17135v1  [cs.SI]  24 Jun 2024
2
Journal Title XX(X)
Figure 1. Visualisation of climate change related tweets from
2022-07-01 until 2022-10-30, where colors represent different
communities: cold/warm colors correspond to
pro-climate/denialist users respectively. In total there are 29347
accounts (nodes) and 361559 retweets (edges) among those
accounts.
classifications/CDA have direct applications in social science
where we want to analyse meaningful communities. A
second key result of our analysis is the high accuracy in
classifying a random user opinion based on NLPCA. Our
approach is different than other works [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]
that use NLPCA without fine tuning models on the CDA.
In our case, we use a CDA on a given interaction network
to define social groups whose cultural production is used to
train a NLPCA. Then we use the performance of the NLPCA
in the categorization of new individuals based on their online
cultural production, to assess the quality of the CDA. This
makes it possible to assess in an integrated way methods to
define cultural based online social groups i.e. social groups
whose online interactions are consistent with the cultural
production of their members. Coherent methods are those for
which the choice of the interaction networks to analyse, and
the associated community detection algorithm, lead to the
highest prediction scores in terms of user categorization by
the best possible NLPCA.
As a case study, we perform this assessment on Twitter
data related to climate change to identify the different types
of social groups that debate on this topic. We show that we
can identify pairs of CDA/NLPCA that predict the opinion
of a random user at > 85% accuracy with ≤3 succinct
sentences. We hence provide a pipeline to identify the best
community structure algorithms and identify their optimal
parameters (if any).
This work is organised as follows: first, we introduce
the social network considered for this study and the CS
algorithms cases selected to illustrate our analysis, as well as
some fundamental concepts of natural language processing.
We then describe our methodology and present our results,
and finally we conclude our analysis.
Communities in the Twitter Social Network
Climate change related tweets
We used the data from the Climatoscope project [16] to
extract the retweet network of online Twitter (now ‘X’)
discussions about climate change over the year 2022.
The Climatoscope project used Twitter’s track API, which
allowed to capture all tweets mentioning a given expression,
collecting tweets based on a list of several dozens of English
and French keywords related to climate change. This data
collection was not exhaustive but represents a sufficiently
large and diverse sample of climate change Twitter debates
to understand the diversity of the social groups involved in
them. Over the year 2022, 57M tweets have been collected,
32.1M of them being retweets.
We computed the retweet network, from 2022-07-01 until
2022-10-30, where the weight of an edge between two
accounts equals the maximum number of retweets in either
direction. The resulting network, weighted and undirected
such that it can be processed by most CDA, was made of
roughly 226,000 nodes and 430,000 edges. To identify the
English speaking communities, we ran a standard Louvain
community detection [17] on this graph. We removed loosely
connected nodes with degree strictly lower than 3, and kept
the largest English-speaking communities only, pro-climate
and denialist.
The resulting graph was made of 30,000 nodes and
362,000 links. On one hand, these included international
organizations (UN, COPX, UNICEF, NASA, etc.), climate
activists (Greta Thunberg, Greenpeace, etc.) and communi-
ties centered on US Democrats: the left wing of the Demo-
cratic Party - around Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-
Cortez - and the mainstream Democratic party around Joe
Biden, Kamala Harris and Barack Obama. On the other hand,
the denialist communities feature Donald Trump’s support-
ers and ‘Make America Great Again’ (MAGA) Republicans,
accompanied by other right-wing political leaders such as
those of the United Kingdom Independence Party, and com-
munities of influencer ‘experts’ in climate science, who have
their own audience and are densely connected to each other.
It is in this latter denialist community that one finds accounts
like JunkScience (Steve Milloy) notoriously supported by the
fossil fuel industries such as the Heart Land Institute or the
Competitive Enterprise Institute.
Our
network
is
publicly
available
at
https:
//github.com/IxandraAchitouv/CDA_NLPCA.
git, with user IDs anonymized.
Community Detection Algorithms (CDA)
In what follows we explain how NLPCA can be used as
a ‘ground-truth’ community structure to test CDA, and
illustrate our results with three known CDA.
The Louvain algorithm.
The Louvain CDA is a method to
extract non-overlapping communities from large networks
[17]. It runs in time O [n · log n] where n is the number
of nodes in the network. In the Louvain method, small
communities are found by optimizing modularity locally on
all nodes, then each small community is grouped into one
node and the first step is repeated, where the modularity is
the difference between the number of edges between nodes
in a community and the expected number of such edges in
a random graph with the same degree sequence [9]. It is
defined as a value in the range [−1/2, 1],
Q =
m
X
i=1
wii
w −win
i wout
i
w2
.
(1)
Here wii is the total weight of links starting and ending
in module i, win
i
and wout
i
the total in- and out-weight
Prepared using sagej.cls
Achitouv, Chavalarias and Gaume
3
of links in module i, and w the total weight of all links
in the network. To estimate the community structure in a
network, Eq. 1 is maximized over all possible assignments
of nodes into any number m of modules. In [18], a stability
criterion of a network partition is introduced, a measure of
its quality defined in terms of the statistical properties of a
dynamical process taking place on the graph. The time-scale
of the process acts as an intrinsic parameter that uncovers
community structures at different resolutions. This method
has been applied to find multi-scale partitions in the Louvain
algorithm with a scale that we refer as ‘c’ in what follows.
BEC. [5] propose a clustering method based on the
optimization of the precision and recall (F-score) of a
clustering relative to its ability to classify the edges of a
network into clusters. It runs as an agglomeration process
that reviews each edge of a network only once and merges
the clusters of their nodes if this operation does not decrease
the F-score. Hence there is a natural scale that is introduced,
s which corresponds to the trade-off between precision and
recall. It runs in time ∼O [3|E|] where |E| is the number of
edges in the network.
Infomap. Infomap reveals community structure in weighted
and directed networks. The method decomposes a network
into modules by optimally compressing a description of
information flows on the network [19]. It is a two-level
description that allows to describe the path of a random walk
visiting nodes, using fewer bits than a one-level description.
Basically when a walk is within a module (cluster of
nodes), it spends long periods of time there. To optimize the
compression, Infomap uses the map equation L(M) which
gives the average number of bits per step that it takes to
describe an infinite random walk on a network partitioned
according to M:
L(M) = q↷H(Q) +
m
X
i=1
pi
⟳H(Pi).
(2)
where M is a module partition among m modules. The first
term corresponds to the entropy of the movements between
modules and the second is the entropy of movements within
modules. Each entropy is weighted, with q↷being the
probability that the random walk switches modules on any
given step and pi
⟳the fraction of intra-module movements
occurring in module i, plus the probability of exiting module
i such that Pm
i=1 pi
⟳= 1 + q↷.
The running time of Infomap depends on several factors,
including the size of the network (number of nodes and
edges) and the structure of the network (such as the density
and distribution of edges).
Assigning Tweets to Categories
Natural Language Processing (NLP). Natural Language
Processing is one of the key pillars of artificial intelligence
that enable to understand, interpret, and generate human
language in an automated way. NLP algorithms are designed
to understand and interpret the meaning of text data by
mapping text into high dimensional mathematical vectors
(this mapping is refereed as the embedding). If two vectors
are close to one another in this space, it means that the two
words or sentences are closely related. In the state of the art
of NLP, this mapping relies on machine learning algorithms
(see [20] for a summary of the NLP techniques over the
last decade), including transformer models [21], to better
learn latent semantic links between words in a sentence.
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT), is a natural language processing method based on
the transformer architecture [22]. It represents a significant
advancement in the field of language understanding and has
been widely adopted for various language-related tasks as
it is designed to capture contextual information from both
the left and right context of words in a sentence. BERT can
be fine-tuned for specific tasks, such as sentiment analysis,
question answering, or named entity recognition. This fine-
tuning process adapts the model to more specialized tasks
and datasets. For this analysis we use the freely available
BERTweet model [23] which is a fine-tuned model of BERT
trained using a large corpus of tweets, allowing it to analyse
and generate representations for Twitter-specific language
elements, such as hashtags, mentions, and emoticons.
The classification algorithms. In order to classify the
tweets into categories (selected communities), we test
several algorithms and select the best performing ones
on our test datasets. Those are: (a)-linear classifiers with
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) learning [24]; (b)-
Support Vector Classification (SVC) [25]; (c)-Multi-layer
Perceptron Classifier (MLPC) [26], with ReLU-activation
and hidden layer sizes of (5,2), and (d)- a Random Forest
classifier (RFC) [27].
The weighted ensemble model. In order to reduce the
variance of the errors we use all 4 classifiers with a weight
according to their performance. For a given tweet, we weight
the output of classifier (a) and (c) once (wa = 1, wc = 1),
twice the output of classifier (d) (wd = 2) and 3 times more
the output of classifier (c) (wc = 3). Then we assign the
tweet to the category that has the largest number count
among the 7 dimensional vector prediction (P
i wi = 7).
Methodology
In what follows every node is a user and every weighted edge
corresponds to the number of tweets user i has re-tweeted
from user j. For every CDA under review, we convert the
directed network to an undirected graph and proceed as
follows:
Step 1: attribution of a CDA categories.
We run the CDA on the network resulting in N community
structures that we map to Ncut < N. To do so we keep
the first Ncut −1 communities with the largest number
of users and we assign all other users to community i =
Ncut. This first step is essential for two reasons. First,
the classification algorithms require a minimum size for
the training set to perform accurate classification. When
there are not enough user in a community, the number of
tweets is too low. Second, depending on the parameters
of the CDA, we generally have a number of communities
that varies from a few hundreds to a few thousands (the
limit being the number of nodes). These large numbers
are not what a human interpretation of the community
can handle if one is interested in classifying opinions of
Prepared using sagej.cls
4
Journal Title XX(X)
Figure 2. Histogram of user eigencentrality in our network. The
vertical line corresponds to the .75-quantile, which corresponds
to the cut between anchors and tested users.
users. For instance in the climate tweets some communities
can be climate denialists, pro-climate activists, pro-climate
scientists, denialists advocating for fuel energy, etc. Larger
numbers of communities with only a couple of users each are
not particularly interesting to understand group dynamics.
Hence the last category i = Ncut is a “catch-all term” one
and is not used later on to evaluate the accuracy of the
predictions.
Step 2: splitting users into training, testing lists.
For each user we have its category attribution from the
CDA. In order to run a ML classification on tweets, we split
users into training and testing sets. For the training data we
consider a fraction of users that corresponds to the most
influential people. All the others are assigned to the testing
set. This is motivated by (a) the fact that we don’t need
CDA to identify the most famous users (anchors) in a social
network and (b) anchor tweets are often retweeted by many
users, hence performing a ML classification on these tweets
can help us find the community a random user belongs to. To
select the most influential users, we could use a few metrics
(page-rank, eigenvector centrality, degree centrality, etc) or
select by hand users that we believe have representative
ideas. In what follows we consider influential people as users
with an eigencentrality greater than .75-quantile, which is a
measure of the influence of a node in a connected network
[28, 24].
Fig.2 displays the histogram of user eigencentrality. In
social networks, power-law distributions are often associated
with degree distributions, where a few nodes (users)
have significantly more connections than others. However,
eigenvector centrality takes into account not just the number
of connections but also the importance of those connections.
The vertical line corresponds to the .75-quantile. Users on
the right-hand side are selected as anchors for training and
users on the left-hand side are used to perform the testing.
We end up with 7,330 users (out of 29,000) for the anchors
(training set) and the other users are assigned to the testing
set. At the end we obtain 1,467,399 tweets from the anchors
(for the training set) and 1,948,232 tweets from the other
users (for the testing set).* Then we select every tweet of all
anchors flagged into i ∈[1, Ncut] categories in our training
sets such that every tweet has a category associated to it,
given by the category of the anchor who emitted it (identified
in Step 1 above).
Step 3: performing a NLPCA classification
training.
In order to have unbiased training and testing datasets, given
a CDA we select a fixed number of tweets per categoryi:
N i
train for i ∈[1, Ncut]. For instance, we find that for
Ncut = 5, we have obtained a convergence of the accuracy of
the classification for N i
train = 25, 000 tweets for the training
sample of category i. We also select the same number of
testing tweets for each category. Then we run the NLP
classification algorithms described previously.
Step 4: evaluation of CDA performance.
The final step is to evaluate each CDA classification of a
user based on its agreement with the NLPCA. For each
tested tweet we have both the category of the CDA and the
category of the NLPCA. Each tweet is associated with a user,
so we can reconstruct the NLPCA classification of the user
using the k-tweets this user made in the testing set, with
k ∈[1, N] and N is an integer. His category i corresponds
to the maximum count of his tweet flagged as i by NLPCA.
Global Results
Can we precisely classify a random user?
If one is interested in classifying a random user, the precision
of the CDA needs to be privileged. In Fig 3 (top panel)
we display the accuracy of the CDA based solely on the
agreement with the NLPCA. Using the testing dataset with
25, 000 × Ncut −1 = 100, 000 tweets we show on the left
panel, for all CDA, the fraction of users that agrees with
the NLPCA. The error bar corresponds to 1-sigma statistical
deviation computed from a Jackknife resampling while the
vertical dotted line corresponds to the average agreement
using all CDA, here it is 85% agreement.
From this figure, we deduce that the best re-scaled
modularity parameters for the Louvain correspond to c <
0.025 while the optimal parameter for the BEC is b < 7.
For these parameters the CDA classifications agree with the
NLPCA at a precision > 90%, remarkably.
On the lower panel of Fig 3, we display the fraction of
user where the NLPCA agrees with the CDA as a function
of the number of tweets made by users in the testing set.
The binning of tweets number is logarithmic. The first bin
corresponds to [1, 3] tweets, second to a number between
[4, 10], third to [11, 31], and then ≥32 tweets. As expected,
it is more challenging to classify a user based on a few
tweets compared to a larger number of tweets. However it
is still quite impressive to see an agreement at ∼85% for
several CDA, considering that [1, 3] tweets can characterize
an unknown random user from the training set. Then we
observe that the agreement increases with the number of
∗We note that the total number of anchors does not impact our analysis
when this number is divided by at least 3 times. The only issue in reducing
the number of anchors is that we obtained sometimes a smaller amount of
tweets than our threshold for training a given category of a given CDA. This
is particularly true when the number of CS is greater than a few thousand.
Prepared using sagej.cls
Achitouv, Chavalarias and Gaume
5
Figure 3. CDA accuracy based on its agreement with the
NLPCA. Lc corresponds to Louvain with parameter c, Bs
corresponds to BEC with parameter s and IM to Informap. Top
panel: fraction of users where the NLPCA agrees with CDA
regardless of the number of tweets. The error bars are 1-sigma
deviation computed by Jackknife resampling. The vertical dotted
line corresponds to the mean of the accuracy for all CDA we
consider. Lower panel: fraction of user where the NLPCA agree
with CDA as function of the number of tweet a user made in the
testing set.
tweets. The decrease of some curves is not statistically
significant as the number of users who posted more than 15
tweets reduces to less than 10 in some cases. Poisson errors
are displayed in light grey on the figure.
Precision vs. coverage: can we categorize most
users?
A key point to address in the CDA is the number of
users covered by our selected categories. Indeed, when
Figure 4. Lower panel: number of communities found by the
CDA. Top panel: Precision (percentage of agreement between
CDA and NLPCA categorization), Coverage (percentage of
users covered by our 4 selected categories) and F-score
(weighted score between precision and coverage)
the percentage of users in our selected categories is
low, one might doubt the utility of communities towards
understanding the opinion of most users.
In Fig.4 (lower panel) we show the number of identified
communities per CDA. Depending on the algorithm and on
the parameters (if any), the number of communities can
change by an order of magnitude. Hence the 4 selected
(biggest) communities for each algorithm range from a few
per cent of the total number of users, to most of them.
This is what we refer to as the coverage (black curve) in
the top panel of Fig.4. This coverage can be compared
with the precision we previously considered (percentage of
agreement between CDA and NLPCA in the classification
of test set users). As one can expect, when the coverage is
Prepared using sagej.cls
6
Journal Title XX(X)
low, the precision is high because the narrative within small
communities is not diverse. The precision decreases as the
coverage increases, until a minimum is reached. Then we
see the opposite trend for Louvain and BEC: precision and
coverage increase together.
For instance, if one is interested in categorizing 80% of
users with a precision of 90% then we see that the best option
is to use Louvain with parameter c ≥8.
For group analysis in social science, the coverage of the
users is most certainly of primary importance hence a good
and natural score to use is the F-score,
Fβ = (1 + β2) P × R
β2P + R
(3)
where R is the recall, here corresponding to the coverage,
P the precision, and β is a real factor chosen such that the
recall is considered β times as important as the precision . In
Fig.4 (top panel) we display the F-score function weighting
the coverage at 0.1, 0.25 and 0.75. In such a case it is clear
that the best performing CDA corresponds to the Louvain,
with a best re-scaled modularity parameter c ≥8, while the
optimal scale s for BEC is ≥40 (maximum of all F-scores).
The number of categories identified by the CDA is also
something interesting to consider. In Fig.4 (lower panel)
we see that the number of communities decreases when
the coverage increases. Interestingly, there is a case where
BEC, Infomap and Louvain have approximately the same
number of communities: (B7
s; IM; L0.01
c
). For this triplet,
the Coverage is (15%; 33%; 3%) while the Precision is
(83%; 78%; 94%). This means that for Infomap we have a
bigger clusters than for the Louvain, BEC being in between.
Another interesting triplet is (B7
s; IM; L2
c) for which the F-
score with weight 0.1 is similar and about ∼80%. Finally,
for (B15
s ; IM; L0.5
c ) the coverage is the same but the
precision (82%; 78%; 73%) shows that Louvain provides a
better choice.
A Pseudo-Entropy measure of the NLPCA.
Interestingly we may characterize the average number of
distinct NLPCA categories for a user based on all his tweets.
For instance if a user made 10 tweets, the NLPCA can
assigns the 10 tweets to his CDA category, e.g. category 1,
but it can also assign 5 tweets to category 1, 2 tweets to
category 2 and 3, and 1 tweet to category 4. This provides
a measure of the entropy of the categorization that we test
for all CDA. If the entropy is null then it means that the
NLP categorization of a user is without a doubt in the CDA
category.
In Fig. 5 we display on the top panel the average of this
entropy over all tested users as a function of their number of
tweets. The more tweets a user has posted, the more likely
it becomes for the NLPCA to assign a tweet to a different
category than his CDA category. So for a fixed number of
tweets we can compare the entropy of the different CDA. On
the lower panel we display the fraction of users where the
NLPCA categorization agrees with the CDA, as a function
of this entropy measure.
Interestingly, the Louvain algorithm is the CDA algorithm
that leads to the more stable NLPCA (users are assigned to
a fewer number of categories) compared to the BEC CDA,
Figure 5. correlation between the entropy measure and the
number of tweets (top panel) and the classification agreement
with NLPCA (lower panel).
while Infomap lies in the middle. This could be interpreted as
a more subtle community structure in the BEC, where users
are not necessarily central in their own community. This
intuition is also confirmed by the coverage of users the CDA
find. For BEC, the entropy is clearly related to the coverage
of users: the entropy decreases as coverage increases. For the
Louvain, this entropy is stable for c ≥8, similar to what we
find for the coverage in Fig.4, while it increases when the
coverage ≤80% which corresponds to c < 8.
Again, for the triplets case we previously considered
with a similar number of communities (B7
s; IM; L0.01
c
),
(B7
s; IM; L2
c) where we have a similar F-score and (B15
s ;
IM; L0.5
c ) where the coverage is the same, we observe
that the entropy among these CDA is significantly different,
suggesting different community properties for each CDA.
Prepared using sagej.cls
Achitouv, Chavalarias and Gaume
7
Figure 6. Infomap community structures for the selected users.
Yellow boxes correspond to one of our four categories while the
grey box correspond to the catch-all-term category. The
percentage in each box corresponds to the fraction of all users
in each of the category.
Finally, we have checked that the wrongly assigned
users do not show distinguishable global properties on
the network. For each CDA, we compare the distribution
of the vector centrality of the wrongly assigned users
to the distribution of all users without finding significant
deviations. This is also true when comparing the CDA among
them because the test set of users is mostly the same for all
CDA. Among the two best performing CDA: B60
s
and L10
c
we find the 15% and the 12% of wrongly assigned users in
both CDA (respectively), are about half the same users. This
category of users are either ”indecisive” or easily influenced,
and can be an interesting social group to study in their own
right.
Comparison analysis of the CDA in the light
of NLP
We now turn to a more refined analysis of the CDA
categories by flagging influential users that belong to
them. Those are the users from the training set that are
public figures, or represent political parties, media, or
are influencers. We also report a few users that have
tens to hundreds of thousands of followers with a strong
view on climate change. Among the pro-climate users
we have CleanAirMoms 37,000 followers, a community
of ‘moms and dads who are uniting for clean air and
our kids’ health’; wtpBLUE, 12,000 followers, and
a ‘grassroots GOTV organization dedicated to electing
Democrats’. Among the American denialists we select
MattH4America, 100,000 followers defined as ‘America
First - Patriot ’; Catturd, 2.5M followers, a MAGA
influencer; DrEliDavid, 620,000 followers, entrepreneurs;
for the Australian denialists: AlexandraMarshall 77,300
followers, writer/artist; PeterDClarck, 37,000 followers,
journalist advocating for carbon emission. In the Canadian
denialists we have: GasPriceWizard, 54,000 followers, a
former liberal MP; Sunlorrie, 108,000 followers, journalist;
TheRealKeean, 300,000 followers, a journalist.
Community structures for the same coverage.
Infomap does not provide a scale parameter, the four biggest
communities cover 32.5% of all users. These communities,as
displayed in Fig.6, are easy to interpret. The largest (14.8%)
corresponds to pro-climate activists, scientist and media.
The second (8.1%) corresponds to climate denialists that
focus on denying that CO2 and fossil fuel are the cause of
climate change. The third (5.5%) corresponds to Democrats
and some mainstream media, while the fourth (4.1%)
corresponds to communities around MAGA influencers for
whom climate change is a“hoax” or a“cult”.
Figure 7. BEC Dendogram of our selected users community as
function of the BEC parameters s (displayed on the edges).
Yellow boxes correspond to one of our 4 categories while the
grey box correspond to the catch-all-term category. The
percentage in each box corresponds to the fraction of all users
in each of the category.
We can compare these communities to what Louvain and
BEC provide for about the same coverage (for c = 0.5 and
s = 15, respectively). Interestingly, they differ in the way
they categorize the top influencers. On the denialist side,
Prepared using sagej.cls
8
Journal Title XX(X)
Figure 8. Louvain Dendogram of our selected users community
as function of the rescaled modularity parameter c (displayed
on the edges). Yellow boxes correspond to one of our 4
categories while the grey box correspond to the catch-all-term
category. The percentage in each box corresponds to the
fraction of all users in each of the category.
Infomap and BEC tend to agree on the cluster of clear
MAGA supporter and on another more dedicated to“experts”
and lobbies, while Louvain places some big influencer from
the lobbies cluster into the MAGA cluster.
The situation is different for the pro-climate communities.
Here, Infomap and Louvain agree to make a environmental
NGO/activits cluster and another with Democrat leaders
such as Biden, Obama, Hilary Clinton and Bernie Sanders,
while BEC includes Bernie Sanders in the environmental
NGO/activits cluster. Both clustering make sense but we
might argue that from the point of view of the climate debate,
Bernie Sanders was indeed closer to NGO/activits than the
mainstream Democrats in his public statements, which is
reflected in the BEC clustering.
From a narrative perspective, the precision provides a
measure of how homogeneous the textual content of these
communities is. For the same coverage, the Louvain provides
the best precision (∼82%), followed by Infomap (∼78%)
and BEC (∼73%).
Community structure evolution for different
parameters.
The analysis of the evolution of community structures as a
function of the scale parameters s for BEC (Fig. 7) and c for
Louvain (Fig. 8) provides more insight into these differences.
Similarly to the coverage evolution, for small values of s or
c we have many small communities, and hence most users
belong to the catch-all-term category (displayed in grey).
As the values of these parameters increase, the number of
communities decreases and the fraction of users in our four
categories increases. For our selection of users we observed
that they merge into only two groups at high scales: s ≥60
and c ≥8, for BEC and Louvain respectively (the other two
categories do not contain our selected influencers). These
two groups are the same for the two CDA and can be
interpreted as climate denialists and pro-climates. In these
cases, the coverage > 85% and the precision > 85% for the
two CDA becomes similar.
Interestingly, BEC identifies well the four categories of
opinion among the top four communities even for low
scale resolution (community sizes < 1%) and integrates
more actors as the scale is increased, Louvain focuses on
peripheral communities and important ones appear only for
medium scales (community sizes 2 −15%). This is not
surprising because optimizing modularity leads to merging
small communities into larger ones, even when those small
communities are well defined and weakly connected to one
another [29]. Thus, we only see the four categories (given
our selected users), when c = 0.1. Moreover, it seems that
BEC faithfully reflects the structure of positions on climate,
with an initial integration of Bernie Sanders’ current into the
community of pro-climate activists, followed by a merger of
all pro-climates into a single community for high values of
s.
Conclusion & Discussion
The study of social networks has experienced significant
growth, leading to substantial advancements in understand-
ing the dynamics of social structures and interactions
[30],[31], [32]. When analysing social networks, CDA are
Prepared using sagej.cls
Achitouv, Chavalarias and Gaume
9
key tools that allow to reduce the analysis of a complex net-
work system with exchanges among many users to a bigger
picture where we study the exchanges between communities:
we quantify the structure of large complex networks in terms
of a smaller number of cohesive components.
These components are densely connected but does not
make the assumptions that users within produce a similar
cultural production. Indeed, CDA require edges/links to
define the relationship between the nodes (users) rather than
their cultural production. We assume in this work that users
within a given community share a similar opinion. To run
a CDA on a network, the edges/links (relationship) between
users can be dynamic (such as retweets) or static (such as
a list of followers). By considering the entangled nature of
the produced social network communities and the cultural
production of the users, we derive a new metric to asses
the quality of the CDA. This metric is not based upon the
network properties but on the coherence of the narratives
within a community. It allows us to identify optimal
parameters of the CDA and make a direct comparison for
the precision of different CDA.
In addition we find an interesting application in classifying
users via their textual publication. Once we have an optimal
CDA we can further predict with high accuracy (∼> 85%)
the opinion of a new user with only a few sentences, by
performing a supervised training with NLPCA.
Finally, this work shows interesting features of ‘wrongly
assigned communities’: by taking the intersection of users
that were assigned to a different category between a couple
(or more) CDA and NLPCA, we can identify these users as
being either ‘indecisive’ or easily influenced, as they produce
textual information that is inconsistent with their CDA
communities. These users are an interesting social group that
can be studied in the framework of opinion dynamics, as they
are likely bridges between distinct communities.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Complex Systems Institute of
Paris ˆIle-de-France (ISC-PIF) and the EU NODES project (LC-
01967516).
References
[1] Golbeck J, Robles C, Edmondson M et al. Predicting
personality from twitter.
In 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk
and
Trust
and
2011
IEEE
Third
International
Conference on Social Computing. IEEE, pp. 149–156.
[2] Gosling SD, Augustine AA, Vazire S et al. Manifes-
tations of personality in online social networks: Self-
reported facebook-related behaviors and observable
profile information.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
Social Networking 2011; 14(9): 483–488.
[3] Garey M, Johnson D and Stockmeyer L.
Some
simplified np-complete graph problems.
Theoretical
Computer Science 1976; 1(3): 237–267.
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(76)90059-1.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0304397576900591.
[4] Chakraborty T, Dalmia A, Mukherjee A et al. Metrics
for community analysis: A survey, 2016.
1604.
03512.
[5] Gaume B, Achitouv I and Chavalarias D.
A
unified
graph
clustering
framework
for
complex
systems
modeling.
SSRN
2024;
DOI:10.2139/
ssrn.4766265. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.4766265.
[6] Yang J and Leskovec J.
Defining and evaluating
network communities based on ground-truth, 2012.
1205.6233.
[7] Radicchi F, Castellano C, Cecconi F et al. Defining and
identifying communities in networks. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 2004; 101(9):
2658–2663.
DOI:10.1073/pnas.0400054101.
URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0400054101.
[8] Shi J and Malik J.
Normalized cuts and image
segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 2000; 22(8): 888–905. DOI:
10.1109/34.868688.
[9] Newman
MEJ
and
Girvan
M.
Finding
and
evaluating community structure in networks. Physical
Review E 2004; 69(2).
DOI:10.1103/physreve.69.
026113. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevE.69.026113.
[10] Lancichinetti A, Fortunato S and Radicchi F. Bench-
mark graphs for testing community detection algo-
rithms. Physical Review E 2008; 78(4). DOI:10.1103/
physreve.78.046110. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevE.78.046110.
[11] Frank MR, Sun L, Cebrian M et al.
Inferring user
demographics from social media text.
Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 2018; 115(25):
7697–7702.
URL https://www.pnas.org/
content/115/25/7697.
[12] Van Hee C, Jacobs G, Wijnhoven W et al.
Gender
classification and bias mitigation in twitter analytics.
Social Network Analysis and Mining 2018; 8(1):
50.
URL
https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s13278-018-0501-3.
[13] Schwartz
HA,
Eichstaedt
JC,
Kern
ML
et
al.
Personality, gender, and age in the language of
social
media:
The
open-vocabulary
approach.
PLOS ONE 2013; 8(9): e73791.
URL https:
//journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0073791.
[14] Ferrara MA, De Meo P, Ferrara E et al. User classi-
fication in online social networks.
ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 2014; 47(3): 21.
URL https://
dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2700489.
[15] Le
Mens
G
and
Vedres
B.
Detecting
influencers
in
online
social
networks:
The
role
of
individual
communicative
factors.
Social
Prepared using sagej.cls
10
Journal Title XX(X)
Networks
2019;
56:
15–28.
URL
https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0378873318301670.
[16] Chavalarias D, Bouchaud P, Chomel V et al. The new
fronts of denialism and climate skepticism, 2023. URL
https://hal.science/hal-04103183.
[17] Blondel VD, Guillaume JL, Lambiotte R et al.
Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal
of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008;
2008(10): P10008. DOI:10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/
p10008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/
1742-5468/2008/10/P10008.
[18] Lambiotte R, Delvenne JC and Barahona M.
Ran-
dom walks, markov processes and the multiscale
modular organization of complex networks.
IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineer-
ing 2014; 1(2): 76–90.
DOI:10.1109/tnse.2015.
2391998. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TNSE.2015.2391998.
[19] Rosvall M and Bergstrom CT.
Maps of random
walks on complex networks reveal community struc-
ture.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 2008; 105(4): 1118–1123.
DOI:10.1073/pnas.
0706851105.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.0706851105.
[20] Achitouv I, Gorduza D and Jacquier A.
Natural
language processing for financial regulation, 2023.
2311.08533.
[21] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N et al. Attention is all
you need. Advances in NeurIPS 2017; 30.
[22] Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K et al.
Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding, 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.04805.
[23] Nguyen DQ, Vu T and Nguyen AT.
Bertweet: A
pre-trained language model for english tweets, 2020.
2005.10200.
[24] Bottou L. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic
gradient descent. In Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010.
Physica-Verlag HD, pp. 177–186.
[25] Cortes C and Vapnik V.
Support-vector networks.
Machine Learning 1995; 20(3): 273–297.
[26] Rumelhart DE, Hinton GE and Williams RJ. Learning
representations by back-propagating errors.
Nature
1986; 323(6088): 533–536.
[27] Breiman L. Random forests. Machine Learning 2001;
45(1): 5–32.
[28] Shaw ME.
Group structure and the behavior of
individuals in small groups. The Journal of psychology
1954; 38(1): 139–149.
[29] Kumpula JM, Saram¨aki J, Kaski K et al.
Limited
resolution in complex network community detection
with potts model approach.
The European Physical
Journal B 2007; 56(1): 41–45.
DOI:10.1140/epjb/
e2007-00088-4. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1140/epjb/e2007-00088-4.
[30] Borgatti SP and Halgin DS. Analyzing Social Networks.
SAGE Publications, 2011.
[31] Lazer D, Pentland AS, Adamic L et al. Computational
social science. Science 2009; 323(5915): 721–723.
[32] Newman ME. The structure and function of complex
networks. SIAM Review 2003; 45(2): 167–256.
Prepared using sagej.cls
