Title: Semi-supervised Classification for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.7612v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1409.7612v1  [cs.CL]  25 Sep 2014
Semi-supervised Classiﬁcation for
Natural Language Processing
Rushdi Shams
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada.
email: rshams@csd.uwo.ca.
Abstract—Semi-supervised classiﬁcation is an interesting idea
where classiﬁcation models are learned from both labeled and
unlabeled data. It has several advantages over supervised clas-
siﬁcation in natural language processing domain. For instance,
supervised classiﬁcation exploits only labeled data that are ex-
pensive, often difﬁcult to get, inadequate in quantity, and require
human experts for annotation. On the other hand, unlabeled
data are inexpensive and abundant. Despite the fact that many
factors limit the wide-spread use of semi-supervised classiﬁcation,
it has become popular since its level of performance is empirically
as good as supervised classiﬁcation. This study explores the
possibilities and achievements as well as complexity and limita-
tions of semi-supervised classiﬁcation for several natural langue
processing tasks like parsing, biomedical information processing,
text classiﬁcation, and summarization.
Keywords: Semi-supervised learning, classiﬁcation, natural
language processing, data mining.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Classical supervised methods use labeled data to train
their classiﬁer models. These methods are widespread and
used in many different domains including natural language
processing. The key material used in different natural language
processing tasks is text. The number of text, however, is
increasing everyday due to the pervasive use of computing.
There are more unlabeled than labeled text since data labeling
is expensive due to engagement of human for data annotation.
The process also consumes time. These difﬁculties have serious
effects on supervised learning since a good ﬁt of a classiﬁer
model requires as much labeled data as possible for its training
[1].
Semi-supervised learning can be a good means to overcome
the aforementioned problems. The basic principle of semi-
supervised learning is simple: use both unlabeled and labeled
data to generate classiﬁer models. This makes semi-supervised
learning substantially useful for a domain like natural lan-
guage processing because of a good note, unlabeled text is
inexpensive, abundant, and more available than labeled text.
In addition, empirically, semi-supervised models have good
performance records. On many tasks, they are as good as
supervised models and in most cases, they are better than
cluster-based, unsupervised models [2]. However, many of
these results are not conclusive and proper care therefore
should be taken due to some serious concerns related to semi-
supervised learning.
This study explores the use of semi-supervised learning
for natural language processing. Interestingly, like traditional
machine learning methods, semi-supervised learning can be
used to solve classiﬁcation, regression, and clustering prob-
lems. The particular focus of this study, however, is on semi-
supervised classiﬁcation. In this study, popular research papers
and classic books are explored to outline the possibilities and
achievements of semi-supervised classiﬁcation for natural lan-
guage processing. As well, thorough investigations are carried
out, both from theoretical and empirical data, to explain the
complexity and limitations of this method. Natural language
processing is one of the largest research areas of artiﬁcial
intelligence. The scope of this study is, however, limited to
most popular tasks such as parsing, biomedical information
processing, text classiﬁcation, and summarization.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II
presents an overview of semi-supervised learning that includes
learning problems, and different types of semi-supervised
algorithms and learning techniques. Following that Section III
outlines the use of semi-supervised classiﬁcation for different
natural language processing tasks. In Section IV, several
considerations and conclusions are drawn.
II.
OVERVIEW OF SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING
Unlike
supervised
and
unsupervised
learning,
semi-
supervised learning exploits both labeled and unlabeled data.
To start with, semi-supervised methods train models with a
very little labeled data. Surprisingly, test results show that
marginal labeled data are sufﬁcient to train models with good
ﬁt for semi-supervised learning [3]. The generated models are
then applied on unlabeled data in an attempt to label them.
The conﬁdence of the models in labeling them is measured
against a conﬁdence threshold set a priori by users. Note that
Fig. 1: The overview of semi-supervised learning. The ﬁgure
also outlines the scope of transductive and inductive learning.
(a) Supervised decision boundaries for labeled data.
(b) Supervised and semi-supervised decision boundaries for
labeled and unlabeled data.
Fig. 2: Supervised and semi-supervised decision boundaries drawn by a random classiﬁer for two labeled and 100 unlabeled data
[2]. In 2a, the supervised decision boundary is in the middle by averaging the values of the data points. In 2b, the supervised
decision boundary produces more classiﬁcation errors due to the distribution of the data.
learning algorithms often have their own conﬁdence measures
that generally depend on their working principles. For instance,
class probability values for each data instance are considered
as conﬁdence measures for Na¨ıve Bayes models [4]. For an
unlabeled data, if the models reach the pre-set conﬁdence
threshold, then the newly labeled data are added to the pool of
originally labeled data. This process continues unless (i) the
models’ conﬁdences for the labels stop reaching the threshold,
or (ii) the models conﬁdently label all the unlabeled data and
there are no unlabeled data remaining in the dataset. The
interesting cycle of labeling and re-labeling of semi-supervised
learning is illustrated in Figure 1.
A. Learning Problems
Semi-supervised learning problems can be broadly cat-
egorized into two groups: (i) transductive learning and (ii)
inductive learning. Transductive learning is like a take-home
exam. This group of semi-supervised learning tries to evaluate
the goodness of a model assumption on unlabeled data after
training a classiﬁer with the available labeled data. Inductive
learning, on the contrary, is often seen as an in-class exam—
it evaluates the goodness of a model assumption on unseen,
unlabeled test data after training a classiﬁer with both labeled
and unlabeled data. Figure 1 shows the boundaries between
these two types of semi-supervised learning. While the entire
cycle in the ﬁgure illustrates inductive learning, steps 1—3
describe transductive learning.
B. Working Principle
Figure 2 can be referred to understand how semi-supervised
learning works with a very few labeled but abundant unlabeled
data. Figure 2a shows that based on the position of a positive
(x = 1) and a negative (x = −1) labeled data, a supervised
decision boundary is drawn right at x = 0 based on the average
of the data points. However, given only these two labeled data
and 100 unlabeled data (represented by green dots in Figure
2b), this supervised decision boundary still remains at x = 0.
In contrast, had a semi-supervised classiﬁer been used, the
boundary would have shifted more to the right (say some point
at x = 0.4) than the supervised decision boundary. This shift
is due to the distribution of unlabeled data points considering
the position of the positive and negative examples. In this
particular case, the semi-supervised classiﬁer assumes that the
green dots near to the red cross point form one kind of data
distribution while the green dots near to the blue circle form
a different one. Interestingly, semi-supervised learning fails in
many intriguing cases, where the distributions of labeled and
unlabeled data are not as distinguishable as seen in Figure 2.
C. Types of Algorithms
There are several semi-supervised algorithms and most
of them can be categorized into two groups based on their
properties: (i) generative algorithms and (ii) discriminative
algorithms. The models generated by these two types of
algorithms are therefore called generative and discriminative
models, respectively. The following can explain the key dif-
ference between the two types of models. Say, we are given
a set of speeches given by human presenters. As well, a set
of languages are provided. The task is to simply classify
every speech into one of the languages. This learning problem
can be solved in either of the following two ways: ﬁrst, the
learner learns each language and then attempts to classify
the speeches according to its learning. Second, the learner
learns the differences among the speeches according to various
attributes or features present in them and then attempts to
classify the speeches according to its learning. Note that
for the second case, the learner does not need to learn all
the languages. The prior is called a generative learner and
the latter is known as a discriminative learner. Let us take
a look into these two types of algorithms mathematically.
Say, we are given a set of instances x and their classes y
in the form of (x, y): (1, 0), (1, 0), (2, 0), (2, 1). Generative
algorithms attempt to ﬁnd out the joint probability, p(x, y)
(a) Joint probability calculated
by generative algorithms
(b) Conditional probability cal-
culated by discriminative algo-
rithms.
Fig. 3: Probability distribution of the data as seen by generative
and discriminative algorithms. Generative algorithms calculate
the joint probability distribution of the data while discrimina-
tive algorithms deal with their conditional probability.
from these data (see Figure 3a) while discriminative algorithms
calculate their conditional probability, p(x|y) (Figure 3b).
Now, for supervised algorithms a discriminative model predicts
the label y from training example x as follows:
f(x) = argmax
y
p(y|x).
(1)
However, from the Baye’s theorem, we know that
p(y|x) = p(x|y)p(y)
p(x)
.
(2)
However, for Equation 1, p(x) can be ignored since it ﬁnds
the function, f(x) for the maximum value of y. Therefore,
ignoring p(x) in Equation 2 gives us
f(x) = argmax
y
p(x|y)p(y).
(3)
Interestingly, Equation 3 is what supervised, generative
algorithms use to induce their models. In other words, for
supervised algorithms, Equation 1 is used to ﬁnd out class
boundaries based on the given training instances x and Equa-
tion 3 is used to generate x for any given y. The latter,
however, is not found as easily for semi-supervised algorithms
as for supervised algorithms. The ﬁrst and foremost reason
for this is that in semi-supervised problems, the algorithms
cannot completely ignore p(x) because most of what it has are
the distributions of training examples (i.e., p(x)). Moreover,
for semi-supervised algorithms, a very few class labels are
provided (for training examples) and therefore from the few
given y’s, the conditional probabilities, p(x|y) are difﬁcult to
generate. This is a key difference between supervised and
semi-supervised algorithms. An example is provided to un-
derstand the difference better. For semi-supervised algorithms,
Equation 1 can be substituted by
p(y|x) =
p(x|y)p(y)
P
y′ p(x|y′)p(y′),
(4)
where y′ denotes the classes of the few given training examples
x. Equation 4 has a probability density function p(x|y) in its
numerator. If the distribution of x comes from a Gaussian and
it is a function of mean vector and covariance matrix of the
Gaussian, then using a Maximum Likelihood Estimate, the
mean vector and covariance matrix can be tuned to maximize
the density function. Thereafter, this tuning can be optimized
using an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. Note that
according to the distribution of x, different algorithms use
different techniques for tuning and optimizing the density
function p(x|y) in Equation 4. Among the semi-supervised
algorithms, Transductive Support Vector Machine (TSVM) and
graph-based methods are generative algorithms while EM and
self-learning are discriminative algorithms.
D. Types of Learning
The semi-supervised learning can be broadly categorized
into three: (i) self-training, (ii) co-training, and (iii) active
learning.
1) Self-training: In self-training, from a set of initially
labeled data L, a classiﬁer, C1 is generated. This classiﬁer is
then applied on a set of initially unlabeled data U. According to
a pre-set conﬁdence threshold, the classiﬁcations of unlabeled
data are observed. If the classiﬁer’s conﬁdence reaches the
threshold, the newly classiﬁed instances are concatenated with
L to produce a set Lnew and removed from U to produce Unew.
A second classiﬁer, C2 is generated from Lnew, and thereafter
applied on Unew. This cycle continues until the classiﬁer
converges—which means that either (a) all the unlabeled data
are conﬁdently labeled by the classiﬁer or (b) the classiﬁer’s
conﬁdence stops reaching the threshold for several cycles.
Self-training is very simple and particularly useful if the
supervised algorithm is difﬁcult to modify. Nonetheless, self-
training performs poorly for datasets that contain large number
of outliers.
2) Co-training: In contrast to self-training, for co-training,
two partitions L1 and L2 are created from the initially labeled
data L. The partitions are based on two different sets of
attributes or features V1 and V2 (in semi-supervised literature,
they are often referred to as views). Then, two classiﬁers
independently generates respective models F1 and F2 from L1
and L2 using V1 and V2. Following that, from the unlabeled
data pool U, k most conﬁdent predictions of F1 are added to
L2 and k most conﬁdent predictions of F2 are added to L1.
These added examples are removed from U. F1 is re-trained
with L1 and F2 is re-trained with L2. This cycle continues until
the classiﬁers converge. Finally, using a voting or averaging
method, test data are classiﬁed. Note that co-training can be
seen as self-training with two or more classiﬁers. Co-training
is very useful if the attributes or features naturally split into
two distinguishable sets. However, there are two important
conditions that should be met for co-training to work. Given
enough labeled data,
1)
each view alone should be sufﬁcient to make good
classiﬁcations and
2)
the co-trained algorithms should individually perform
good.
3) Active Learning: Finally, for active learning a model is
generated from labeled data and attempts to classify unlabeled
instances. The classiﬁcation it makes is then provided to a
human expert called the oracle for her judgment. The correctly
labeled instances according to the oracle are then added to the
pool of labeled data while the instances with incorrect labels
remain in the unlabeled data pool. This process continues until
the unlabeled data pool becomes empty. Active learning is very
useful for limited available data (both labeled and unlabeled).
Because of the presence of an oracle, this semi-supervised
learning is slow and almost always expensive.
III.
SEMI-SUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION FOR NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
In this section, different natural language processing ap-
plications of semi-supervised classiﬁcation are discussed. The
discussion is mainly based on the ﬁndings from several classic
and state-of-the-art literature from the domain of parsing, text
classiﬁcation, text summarization, and biomedical information
mining.
A. Parsing
Steedman et al. [5] found that self-training has very small
effects on parser improvements. Similar results are reported
by Clark et al. [6] who applied self-training to part-of-speech
(POS) tagging. The only works that reported successful ex-
ecution of self-training to improve parsers are very few [7]
[8]. This paper concentrates on the work of McClosky et al.
because they do not adapt the parser in use that because
adaptation has some drastic effects on self-training. Rather
than using an adaptive parser, the Charniak parser used in
their research utilized both labeled and unlabeled data that
come from the same source domain. Using of a re-ranker
besides the parser is also what makes their work different
than many contemporary work. The parser uses third order
Markov grammar and ﬁve probability distributions that are
conditioned with more than ﬁve linguistic attributes. Firstly,
the parser produces 50-best parses for the sentences in the
datasets. Secondly, a maximum entropy re-ranker with over
a million attributes re-ranks these parses. The experiment is
extensive: datasets used in this experiment are Penn treebank
section 2 −21 for training (approximately 40, 000 wall street
journal articles), section 23 for testing, and section 24 for held-
out data. 24 million LA Times articles were used as unlabelled
data collected from the North American News Text Corpus
(NANC). The authors experiment with and without the re-
ranker as they added unlabelled sentences to their labeled data
pool. They found that the parser performs better with the re-
ranker system. The improvement reported is about 1.1% F-
score—among which the self-trained parser contributes 0.8%
and the re-ranker contributes 0.3%). The authors also did
some experiments with sentences in section 1, 22, and 24
to see how the self-trained parser performs at sentence level.
Each sentence in these sections was labelled as better, no
change or worse compared to the baseline F-score for the
sentences. Interestingly, the outcomes showed that the parser
had improvement neither for unknown words nor for prepo-
sitional phrases. However, there was an explicit improvement
for intermediate-length sentences but no improvement for the
extremes (Goldilocks effect). The parser performs poorly for
conjunctions.
Zhu [9], however, asserted that in semi-supervised classi-
ﬁcation, unlabeled sentences for which the parser accuracy is
unusually better than normal should be restricted to be included
in the pool of labeled data. McClosky et al. [7], however,
stated that they did not followed this approach particularly. The
speed of the semi-supervised Charniak parser is similar to its
supervised version but it requires more memory to execute the
cycles involved in self-training. Also, the labeled and unlabeled
data were collected from two different datasets (although they
are both newspaper sources) that usually limits the success of
self-training. Nevertheless, the experiment is a success and this
question is unanswered in their paper.
B. Text Classiﬁcation
Semi-supervised classiﬁcation has been used widely in
natural language processing tasks such as spam classiﬁcation,
which is a form of text classiﬁcation. The results in 2006
ECML/PKDD spam discovery challenge [10] indicated that
spam ﬁlters based on semi-supervised classiﬁcation outper-
formed supervised ﬁlters. Extensive experiments showed that
semi-supervised ﬁlters work better when source of available
labeled examples differs from those to be classiﬁed. Interest-
ingly, Mojdeh and Cormack [11] found completely different
results when they re-designed the challenge with different
collections of email datasets.
The 2006 ECML/PKDD discovery challenge had two in-
teresting tasks. The ﬁrst task is called the Delayed Feedback
where the ﬁlters are trained with emails T1 and then they
classify some test emails t1. In their second cycle of training,
they are trained with T1 and t1 combined and the training
continues for the entire dataset for the challenge. The best
(1−AUC) reported in the challenge is a remarkable 0.01%.
The second task for the challenge is called the Cross-user
Train where the classiﬁers are trained on one particular set of
emails and then tested on a completely different set of emails.
The best (1−AUC) reported for this task is greater than the ﬁrst
task: 0.1%. The best performing ﬁlters in the challenge were all
semi-supervised ﬁlters and based on support vector machines
SVM and TSVM [12], Dynamic Markov Compression (DMC)
[13], and Logistic regression with self-training (LR) [14]. On
the other hand, in 2007 TREC Spam Track Challenge [15], the
participating spam ﬁlters were trained with publicly available
emails and their model accuracy was tested on emails collected
from user inboxes (i.e., personalized emails). In an attempt
to see whether semi-supervised ﬁlters perform as good as it
was reported in [10], Mojdeh and Cormack [11] reproduced
the work by replacing the datasets of ECML/PKDD challenge
with TREC challenge datasets. The delayed feedback task
was reproduced as follows: ﬁrst, 10, 000 messages were used
for training and the next 60, 000 messages were divided into
six batches each containing 10, 000 messages. Second, the
remaining 5, 000 messages were kept for testing the models.
On the other hand, to reproduce the Cross-user Train task,
30, 338 messages from particular user inboxes were used for
training while 45, 081 messages from other users were used
for model evaluation.
The experimental outcomes showed that for both the
tasks, the semi-supervised versions of DMC, LR, and TSVM
underperformed for LREC dataset. Their respective 1−AUC
scores for the delayed feedback task were 0.090, 0.046, and
0.230. On the other hand, the 1−AUC of their supervised
versions were 0.016, 0.049, and 0.030 for the task. For the
cross-user task, the 1−AUC of the semi-supervised DMC, LR,
and TSVM ﬁlters were 9.97, 10.72, and 24.3, respectively.
For the same task, their supervised versions performed way
better. The authors also reported a cross-corpus experiment
to reproduce the results of ECML/PKDD Challenge. Here,
the ﬁrst 10, 000 messages from the TREC 2005 dataset were
considered. Besides, the TREC 2007 dataset was split into
10, 000 message segments. The outcomes again showed that
self-training is harmful for the ﬁlters. Except the TSVM ﬁlter,
the rest of the two semi-supervised ﬁlters failed to perform as
good as their supervised versions.
Keeping the aforementioned results in mind, we can say
that semi-supervised classiﬁcation is applicable to text clas-
siﬁcation but the performance depends on the labeled and
unlabeled training data, and the source from which the data
are derived.
C. Extractive Text Summarization
Wong et al. [16] have conducted a comparative study
where they produced extractive summaries by using both
supervised and semi-supervised classiﬁers. The authors used
four traditional groups of attributes to train their classiﬁers: (1)
surface (2) relevance (3) event, and (4) content attributes. They
tried different combinations of the attributes and found that the
classiﬁers had produced better summaries when the surface,
relevance, and content attributes were combined. The novelty
of their work is that they used supervised SVM as well as
its semi-supervised version called probabilistic SVM or PSVM
to generate classiﬁers and compared their performances. As
performance measure they considered ROUGE scores and found
that the ROUGE-I score of their SVM classiﬁer is 0.396 while
the human ROUGE-I was 0.42 when compared to the gold
standard summaries. On the other hand, the co-training with
the PSVM and Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁers produced summaries
that have ROUGE-I of 0.366. Although this performance is not
better than what they found with the supervised SVM or human
summaries, it was better than supervised PSVM and Na¨ıve
Bayes classiﬁers. Note that as their datasets, the authors used
the DUC 2001 dataset1. The dataset contains 30 clusters of
relevant documents. Each cluster comes with model summaries
created by the dataset annotators. 50, 100, 200, and 400-word
summaries are provided for each cluster. Among the clusters,
25 are used as training data while the remaining 5 clusters are
used for testing. The authors also concluded that the ROUGE-I
scores of their classiﬁer are better if they produce 400-word
summaries for the test clusters.
Nevertheless, the reported methodology of the paper has
some serious drawbacks. Many of the methods used in this
research are not in line with what had been found by classic
empirical studies. For instance, the co-training is done on the
same attribute space that violates the primary hypothesis of co-
training: two classiﬁers used in co-training should use separate
views (see Section II-D2). Secondly, the authors selected the
set of attributes (surface, relevance, and content attributes) by
only considering the performance of PSVM with them and
ignoring the performance of the supervised Na¨ıve Bayes with
them.
D. Biomedical Information Mining
Now-a-days, there is much impetus for information mining
from biomedical research papers. Researchers put signiﬁcant
effort to mine secondary information such as protein in-
teraction relations from biomedical research papers to help
identify primary information like DNA replication, genotype-
phenotype relations, and signaling pathways. The ﬁrst and
foremost task for protein interaction relation miners is to
classify sentences in research papers that describe one or more
protein interactions. These sentences are called the candidate
sentences. A number of supervised tools are developed to
classify candidate sentences from biomedical articles (see
for example [17], [18], and [19]). However, the ﬁrst semi-
supervised approach for the task was reported by Erkan et al.
[20]. Their approach identiﬁed candidate sentences using sim-
ilarities of the paths present between two protein names found
from the dependency parses of the sentences. What follows are
1Download at: http://duc.nist.gov
the brief descriptions of their method. The authors produced
dependency trees for each sentence from two given datasets.
The paths between two protein names in the parse trees were
then analyzed. According to these paths, the sentences were
labeled and treated as the gold standard for the tool’s eval-
uation. Given the paths, two distance-based measures, cosine
similarity and edit distance, were used by their tool to ﬁnd
out interactions between the proteins. These measures were
provided to both supervised and semi-supervised algorithms to
generate models to classify the sentences in the datasets. The
labels predicted by the supervised and semi-supervised classi-
ﬁers were then evaluated against the gold standard. According
to the outcomes, the semi-supervised classiﬁers performed
better than their supervised versions by a wide margin. Four
algorithms were used to generate the classiﬁers among which
two are supervised (SVM and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN))
and the rest were their respective semi-supervised versions
(TSVM and Harmonic Functions). The distance-based measures
were used to generate attributes for the classiﬁers and were
extracted from two datasets named AIMED and Christine-
Brun (CB). The AIMED dataset contains 4, 026 sentences of
which 951 describe protein interactions while the CB dataset is
composed of 4, 056 sentences of which 2, 202 describe protein
interactions. Each of the four algorithms then generated a
classiﬁer from the two sets of attributes found from the two
distance measures. Experimental outcomes show that for the
AIMED dataset, TSVM with edit distance attributes performed
the best with 59.96% F-score. This F-score was signiﬁcantly
better than the F-scores found using the supervised classiﬁers.
Comparisons showed that the F-score with TSVM was signif-
icantly better than those reported by two contemporary work
[18] [21]. On the other hand, the tool performed even better
on the CB dataset where its TSVM classiﬁer with edit distance
based attributes produced an F-score of 85.20%. Similar to
the result found with the AIMED dataset, the performances
of the supervised classiﬁers were not satisfactory. The authors
also examined the effect of the size of the labeled training
data for the classiﬁers. In the case of AIMED, the authors
found that with small labeled training data, semi-supervised
algorithms were better. In addition, SVM performed poorly
with less training data but as more data became available for its
training, it started to perform well. On the other hand, for the
CB dataset, KNN performed poorly with much labeled data.
Interestingly, SVM performed competitively with the semi-
supervised classiﬁers with more labeled data.
Note that TSVM is susceptible to the distribution of the
labeled data. However, the work did not report any test on the
data distribution. The AIMED dataset, in addition, has class
imbalance problem that seriously affects the performance of
TSVM classiﬁers. This can be seen as the limitation of the work
since it did not explain why in their case the TSVM classiﬁer
performed better than the rest.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The ﬁndings of empirical research on parsing, text classiﬁ-
cation, text summarization and biomedical information mining
are investigated in this study. According to most of them,
semi-supervised classiﬁcation has substantial advantages over
supervised classiﬁcation when labeled data are difﬁcult to
manage and unlabeled data are abundant. This paper also
outlines the theories behind the success of semi-supervised
Fig. 4: The use of labeled and unlabeled data in semi-
supervised classiﬁcation. A dot represents a paper that uses
semi-supervised classiﬁcation. Light gray dots mean older
papers while dark gray dots mean newer papers [9].
classiﬁcation. According to the theories, there is no free lunch
for semi-supervised classiﬁcation rather its success depends on
underlying data distribution, data complexity, model assump-
tion, choice of proper algorithm, problem in hand, and most of
all—experience. Surprisingly, the investigation has found that
the classic studies often do not consider the do’s and don’ts
suggested by the theories. Despite the success reported in the
empirical studies, it is therefore inconclusive whether semi-
supervised classiﬁcation can be really as useful as supervised
classiﬁcation.
The complexity associated with semi-supervised classiﬁ-
cation limits its use. This can be seen from the illustration
in Figure 4. It shows the use of labeled and unlabeled data
in semi-supervised classiﬁcation. Each dot in the illustration
represents a paper that uses semi-supervised classiﬁcation.
While the light gray dots represent older papers, the dark gray
dots represent recent papers. We can come to two conclusions
from this data:
1)
there are not much reported work that implement
semi-supervised classiﬁcation and a bulk of the re-
ported work are old and
2)
although the main purpose of using semi-supervised
classiﬁcation is the abundance of unlabeled data, the
amount of unlabeled data used in research are at most
106 so far—in layman’s term, which is just above the
number of people in a stadium.
Nevertheless, semi-supervised classiﬁcation is the only op-
tion until now to deal the natural language processing problems
where there are more unlabeled than labeled data. This study,
however, points out the following suggestions for dealing with
semi-supervised classiﬁcation more effectively:
1)
The model assumption for semi-supervised algo-
rithms must match the problem in hand. For in-
stance, if the classes produce well-clustered data
then expectation-maximization is a good algorithm
to choose; if the attribute space can be naturally
split into two sets then co-training is preferred; if
two points with similar attribute values tend to be
in the same class then graph-based method (not
discussed in this paper) can be a reasonable choice;
if SVM performs well on labeled data then TSVM is a
natural extension; and given the supervised algorithm
is complicated and difﬁcult to modify, self-training is
useful.
2)
The distributions of both labeled and unlabeled data
need to be investigated. TSVM, for instance, per-
forms poorly with unlabeled data that have highly
overlapped positive and negative distribution since it
assumes that its decision boundary would go right
through the densest region. Therefore, in this case
a TSVM classiﬁer usually produces a lot of false
positives and false negatives.
3)
The proportion of labeled and unlabeled data is
important to notice before choosing an algorithm.
However, there is not conclusive remark on how the
proportion affects the overall classiﬁcation perfor-
mance.
4)
It has been found empirically that there is an effect
of dependency among attributes on semi-supervised
classiﬁcation. To be more speciﬁc, with fewer labeled
examples, the number of dependent attributes should
be kept as low as possible.
5)
Data noises should be investigated as they have effect
on classiﬁcation performance. It is easier to detect
noise in the labeled data than in unlabeled data. Note
that data noise has less effect on semi-supervised
classiﬁcation than supervised classiﬁcation.
6)
The labeled and unlabeled data, usually, are collected
from different sources and this can affect the classiﬁ-
cation performance. If the labeled and unlabeled data
are collected from completely different sources and
their properties differ, then rather than using semi-
supervised classiﬁcation, transfer learning and self-
taught classiﬁcation are encouraged to use [22].
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Shih, J. D. Rennie, Y.-H. Chang, and D. R. Karger, “Text
bundling: Statistics based data-reduction.” in ICML, T. Fawcett and
N. Mishra, Eds.
AAAI Press, 2003, pp. 696–703. [Online]. Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/icml/icml2003.html#ShihRCK03
[2]
X. Zhu, A. B. Goldberg, R. Brachman, and T. Dietterich, Introduction
to Semi-Supervised Learning.
Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2009.
[3]
O. Chapelle, B. Schlkopf, and A. Zien, Semi-Supervised Learning,
1st ed.
The MIT Press, 2010.
[4]
G. H. John and P. Langley, “Estimating continuous distributions in
bayesian classiﬁers,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on
Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ser. UAI’95.
San Francisco, CA,
USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1995, pp. 338–345.
[5]
M.
Steedman,
M.
Osborne,
A.
Sarkar,
S.
Clark,
R.
Hwa,
J. Hockenmaier, P. Ruhlen, S. Baker, and J. Crim, “Bootstrapping
statistical parsers from small datasets,” in Proceedings of the Tenth
Conference on European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics - Volume 1, ser. EACL ’03.
Stroudsburg, PA, USA:
Association
for
Computational
Linguistics,
2003,
pp.
331–338.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1067807.1067851
[6]
S. Clark, J. R. Curran, and M. Osborne, “Bootstrapping pos taggers
using unlabelled data,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Conference
on Natural Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003 - Volume
4,
ser.
CONLL
’03.
Stroudsburg,
PA,
USA:
Association
for
Computational Linguistics, 2003, pp. 49–55. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1119176.1119183
[7]
D. Mcclosky, E. Charniak, and M. Johnson, “Effective self-training for
parsing,” in In Proc. N. American ACL (NAACL, 2006, pp. 152–159.
[8]
M.
Bacchiani,
M.
Riley,
B.
Roark,
and
R.
Sproat,
“Map
adaptation
of
stochastic
grammars,”
Comput.
Speech
Lang.,
vol.
20,
no.
1,
pp.
41–68,
Jan.
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2004.12.001
[9]
X. Zhu, “Semi-supervised learning literature survey,” Computer Sci-
ences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Tech. Rep. 1530, 2005. [On-
line]. Available: http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/∼jerryzhu/pub/ssl survey.pdf
[10]
S. Bickel, “Ecml-pkdd discovery challenge 2006 overview,” in Proceed-
ings of the ECML-PKDD Discovery Challenge Workshop, 2006.
[11]
M. Mojdeh and G. V. Cormack, “Semi-supervised spam ﬁltering: does it
work?” in SIGIR, S.-H. Myaeng, D. W. Oard, F. Sebastiani, T.-S. Chua,
and M.-K. Leong, Eds. ACM, 2008, pp. 745–746. [Online]. Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/sigir/sigir2008.html#MojdehC08
[12]
T.
Joachims,
“Advances
in
kernel
methods,”
B.
Sch¨olkopf,
C.
J.
C.
Burges,
and
A.
J.
Smola,
Eds.
Cambridge,
MA,
USA: MIT Press, 1999, ch. Making Large-scale Support Vector
Machine
Learning
Practical,
pp.
169–184.
[Online].
Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=299094.299104
[13]
A. Bratko, G. V. Cormack, D. R, B. Filipic, P. Chan, T. R. Lynam, and
T. R. Lynam, “Spam ﬁltering using statistical data compression models,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 7, pp. 2673–2698, 2006.
[14]
G. V. Cormack, “Harnessing unlabeled examples through iterative
application of dynamic markov modeling,” in In Proceedings of the
ECML-PKDD Discovery Challenge Workshop, 2006.
[15]
G. Cormack, “Trec 2006 spam track overview,” in Proceedings of TREC
2006, 2006.
[16]
K.-F. Wong, M. Wu, and W. Li, “Extractive summarization using
supervised and semi-supervised learning,” in Proceedings of the
22Nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume
1, ser. COLING ’08.
Stroudsburg,
PA, USA: Association
for
Computational Linguistics, 2008, pp. 985–992. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1599081.1599205
[17]
I.
M.
Donaldson,
J.
D.
Martin,
B.
de
Bruijn,
C.
Wolting,
V.
Lay,
B.
Tuekam,
S.
Zhang,
B.
Baskin,
G.
D.
Bader,
K.
Michalickova,
T.
Pawson,
and
C.
W.
V.
Hogue,
“Prebind
and
textomy
-
mining
the
biomedical
literature
for
protein-protein
interactions
using
a
support
vector
machine.”
BMC
Bioinformatics,
vol.
4,
p.
11,
2003.
[Online].
Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/bmcbi/bmcbi4.html#DonaldsonMBWLTZBBMPH
[18]
T.
Mitsumori,
M.
Murata,
Y.
Fukuda,
K.
Doi,
and
H.
Doi,
“Extracting
protein-protein
interaction
information
from
biomedical
text
with
svm.”
IEICE
Transactions,
vol.
89-D,
no.
8,
pp.
2464–2466,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/ieicet/ieicet89d.html#MitsumoriMFDD06
[19]
K. Sugiyama, K. Hatano, M. Yoshikawa, and S. Uemura, “Extracting
information on protein-protein interactions from biological literature
based on machine learning approaches,” Genome Informatics Series,
pp. 699–700, 2003.
[20]
G. Erkan, A. ¨Ozg¨ur, and D. Radev, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation for
extracting protein interaction sentences using dependency parsing,” in In
Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL), 2007, pp. 228–237.
[21]
A. Yakushiji, Y. Miyao, Y. Tateisi, and J. Tsujii, “Biomedical in-
formation extraction with predicate-argument structure patterns,” in
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural
Language Processing, 2005, pp. 60–69.
[22]
R. Raina, A. Battle, H. Lee, B. Packer, and A. Y. Ng, “Self-taught
learning: Transfer learning from unlabeled data,” in Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. ICML ’07.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 759–766. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1273496.1273592
