Title: Differential Privacy and Natural Language Processing to Generate Contextually Similar Decoy Messages in Honey Encryption Scheme
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.15985v1
--------------------------------------------------

Differential Privacy and Natural Language
Processing to Generate Contextually Similar Decoy
Messages in Honey Encryption Scheme
Kunjal Panchal
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
kpanchal@umass.edu
November 2, 2020
Abstract
Honey Encryption is an approach to encrypt the messages using low min-entropy keys, such as weak passwords, OTPs, PINs,
credit card numbers. The ciphertext is produces, when decrypted with any number of incorrect keys, produces plausible-looking
but bogus plaintext called “honey messages”. But the current techniques used in producing the decoy plaintexts do not model
human language entirely. A gibberish, random assortment of words is not enough to fool an attacker; that will not be acceptable
and convincing, whether or not the attacker knows some information of the genuine source.
In this paper, I focus on the plaintexts which are some non-numeric informative messages.
In order to fool the at-
tacker into believing that the decoy message can actually be from a certain source, we need to capture the empirical and
contextual properties of the language. That is, there should be no linguistic difference between real and fake message, without
revealing the structure of the real message. I employ natural language processing and generalized differential privacy to solve
this problem. Mainly I focus on machine learning methods like keyword extraction, context classiﬁcation, bags-of-words, word
embeddings, transformers for text processing to model privacy for text documents. Then I prove the security of this approach
with ϵ-differential privacy.
I.
Introduction
A
s the computer hardware (GPUs and mining
rigs) got “cheaper” and widely available; dif-
ﬁculty of password cracking got more depen-
dent on number of characters in a character encod-
ing scheme, the lentgh of the password and hashing
scheme. The possibilities of combinations of passwords
are: combination = #char|password|. Table 1 shows com-
parison between two hashing schemes: MD5 and SHA1,
which were analyzed in HashCat [Cyberpunk, 2020]
benchmark to correlate different types of hashes on a
machine with two Sapphire R580(8GB) cards.
In theory, with a 20726 MH/s machine, we can crack
a 8 all alphabets lowercase characters MD5 password
in
2
hours
[268/(20726 × 106)
≈
9500seconds].
With
SHA1,
it
would
be
approximately
7.5
hours
[268/(7328.7 × 106)
≈
27410seconds].
[Cyberpunk, 2018]
Even the stupendous guessing rates do not yet
make it feasible for an attacker to use a dumb brute-
force technique of trying all possible combinations of
characters to discover a password. Instead, password
crackers rely on the fact that some people choose easily
guessable passwords [Stallings, 2011].
Some users,
when permitted to choose their own password, pick
one that is absurdly short.
The results of one study at Purdue University
observed that among approximately 7000 users, almost
3% of the passwords are of length of 8 characters.
Password length is only a part of a much larger
issue. Many users, when allowed to pick their own
password, pick a password that is easily guessable,
like their own name, their street name, or a common
dictionary word.
This makes the job of password
cracking straightforward. The cracker simply has to
test the password ﬁle against lists of likely passwords.
Because many people use guessable passwords, such a
strategy should succeed on virtually all systems. There
exists password attacks like “dictionary attack” where
we just check each word of a certain high frequency
1
arXiv:2010.15985v1  [cs.CR]  29 Oct 2020
MD5
SHA
Message Digest Length
128 bits
160 bits
Attacks required to ﬁnd
original message
2^128 bit operations required to
break
2^160 bit operations required to
break
Attacks to try and ﬁnd
two messages producing
the same MD
2^64 bit operations
2^80 bit operations
Speed
64 iterations (faster)
80 iterations
Table 1: Comparison of MD5 and SHA1[Cyberpunk, 2018]
wordlists; “hybrid/rules attack” where we augment
those wordlists by adding characters before or after
the high frequency words; “markov attack” where
machine learning techniques are used to assemble
possible guesses; “mask attacks” where the focus of
the attack is on the structure of a password’s character
composition; and ﬁnally, “brute force attack” where
we try every possible combination of characters. If
the adversary knows the length of a password to be
signiﬁcantly short (PINs are normally of 4 digits, OTP
lengths are publicly known for each system, generally
6, minimum length of passwords are mostly 8 or 12),
then brute forcing the key space would not take very
long [Dunning, 2015]
Bottom line is, users need to improve their pass-
word
selection
strategy
through
user
education
about network security, use of computer generated
passwords, reactive or proactive password checking
by the system.
But some the password crackers
are getting more sophisticated and smart too; and
where the length of the password is limited, we face a
roadblock.
Honey Encryption [HE] [Juels and Ristenpart, 2014]
provides security beyond the brute-force bound. It
is a scheme where adversary is not able to succeed
in recovering the message even after trying every
possible combination of password. But it is difﬁcult
to apply where the context of the message is known;
e.g., adversary is trying to brute force into a military
website, or the adversary knows that on a certain time,
Alice and Bob are going to exchange messages about a
certain topic, the messages will be conﬁdential, but not
the subject of the messages - then for a false password
attempt, if our HE scheme returns a grammatically
incoherent, gibberish message about “toys”, adversary
might not be fooled and will keep brute-forcing
it until he ﬁnds a contextually similar or relevant
message.
That way adversary can get hold of the
correct password combination.
To tackle this problem, Juels in [Chatterjee, et al., 2015]
discussed how strength of HE depends on fake
but semantically and contextually realistic natural
language decoy message. So here, I propose a method
to generate realistic and deceitful messages on false
password attempts.
First, we need to classify the
message into a category like “politics”, “sports”,
“military”, “traveling” and so on; the owner of message
is free to manually classify the message into one of
the options.
This classiﬁcation is needed to glean
the semantic context of the message. To classify the
messages, we need to extract keywords from the
message. Later, with WordNets, we can uniformly
randomly pick words with similar embeddings which
will work as our new keywords for the fake text
synthesis process. These will be mostly nouns and
adjectives, because they can specify more context than
verbs, which are almost always common and can be
used with any kind of subject.
This will give us a bag-of-word representation.
We can either generate deepfake text (a portmanteau
of “deep learning” and “fake”) from a two-layer
neural network called Word2Vec or for much better
realism, we can employ a transformer like GPT-2
[Radford, et al., 2019] or Grover [Zellers, et al., 2019].
Next, I prove the security of the approach with ideas
inspired by ϵ-differential privacy, a metric-based exten-
sion of differential privacy [Fernandes, et al., 2019]. I
will deﬁne semantic similarity in terms of embedding
score and Earth Mover’s distance used for machine
learning for classiﬁcation. “Eϵ-privacy” is related to the
Earth Mover’s metric and is used for text obfuscation
2
problems faced in the concept of differential privacy.
II.
Prior Work
There’s a comprehensive review of the HE scheme
[Omolara, et al., 2018]
where
the
most
discussed
issue with HE scheme is supposed to be designing
a human and machine convincing decoy text with-
out revealing the structure of the actual message.
Basically, our goal is to design a fake text, which
if juxtaposed with the actual text, the adversary
(human or machine) will have negligible probability
of differentiating between.
The paper on how to
synthesize decoy text [Omolara and Oludare, 2018,
Omolara and Jantan, 2019] discussed its use in HE
scheme where the content of messages are textual
in nature. The approach is semantically sound and
coherent, but it does not address the issue of adversary
having prescience about the context of the message.
It only works for the situations where there is zero
foreknowledge of the messages.
The paper on cracking resistant password vaults
[Chatterjee, et al., 2015]
with
Natural
Language
Encoder [NLE] deals with “decoy passwords” in a
sense that if a master password to some vault is given
false (as a consequence of a brute-force attack), the
passwords inside the vault will be generated by an
NLE, where a password having a natural language
word will be encoded into some other password,
without revealing its structure. But as the passwords
are always context-free (only few words at most)
and they have a certain probability distribution; this
approach is hard to transfer into our “decoy text”
problem. There’s an extensive study of probabilistic
password models [Ma, et al., 2014] is given which
supports the NLE approach of [Chatterjee, et al., 2015].
This is useful when studying the nature of distribution-
transforming encoders [DTE] used in original HE
scheme [Jaeger, et al., 2016].
An
alternative
approach
[Ghassami, et al., 2016]
to HE scheme addresses the loss in security due
to non-uniformity of the decoy messages.
It maps
DTE’s randomness to a larger set of messages which
are nearly uniform.
But its security is not always
“nearly achieving the information-theoretic converse
on the probability of the success of the adversary”, it
doesn’t establish the precise performance of the new
scheme. They lack the converse bounds needed for the
comparison.
An article on universality of structured passwords
[Dunning, 2015] shows how top 13 unique mask
structures make up 50% of the passwords from the
sample size of over 34 million publicly exposed
passwords which included famous password dumps.
It gives a deep insight into the statistics like having an
uppercase requirement, over 90% of the time it is put
as the ﬁrst character. This kind of statistical password
cracking bolsters the need of brute-force attack safe
encryption schemes even more.
GPT-2 [Radford, et al., 2019] is a large transformer-
based language model with 1.5 billion parameters,
trained on a dataset of 8 million web pages. When
it generates text, it uses that knowledge to make the
sentences more realistic.
Therein lies the power of
GPT-2: the text it generates actually contains real
world facts and ﬁgures. Grover is a modiﬁed version
of GPT-2 where the next predicted word is not only
based on the previous words in the text, but also based
on other pieces of metadata text [Zellers, et al., 2019].
Finally,
[Fernandes, et al., 2019]
discusses
the
se-
curity through differential privacy in textual data.
III.
Goal
First I deﬁne few concepts which we are using in our
approach:
DTE:
Distribution-Transforming
Encoder
is
an
encoding
scheme
where
the
randomized
algo-
rithm encode takes an input message M ∈M and
outputs a seed value from a set of seed space S.
The deterministic algorithm decode takes a seed
value S ∈S and outputs a message M ∈M.
IF
Pr[decode(encode(M)) =
M] = 1, then the DTE
scheme is correct.
Let A be an adversary attempting to distinguish
between two DTE games where encoding game G1
randomly takes M ∈M and a seed based on M; it
produces a bit b, where b = 1 if A maps the ciphertext
to correct seed, message pair. And the decoding game
G0 randomly takes S ∈S and a message decoded
from that seed. It produces a bit b, where b = 1 if A
maps the ciphertext to correct seed, message pair.
3
Advdte
DTE,pm(A)
=
|Pr[G1A
DTE,pm
=⇒
1] −
Pr[G0A
DTE =⇒1]|
Framework of HE schemes:
For encryption,
we get a password and a plaintext message; we
generate a seed encoding from the message, and a
uniformly random binary string. The ciphertext is an
“or”ed value between the seed and the keyed hash of
the random string where the key is our password. A
pair of the random string and ciphertext is returned.
For decryption, we get a password and the ran-
dom string and ciphertext pair. We compute a seed
by “or”ing the ciphertext with the keyed hash of the
random string we get as the input, where the key is
the password. We decode the seed to a message. That
message is the output, the decrypted text.
NLTK:
Natural Language Toolkit provides cor-
pora of different categories and lexical resources
like WordNet, Word2Vec which are useful in ﬁnding
contextually similar words.
Text Classiﬁcation:
This is where I assign a
category to our message, according to its content.
NLTK’s brown corpus [Brown Corpus] is a million-
word corpus in English. It has 46 subcategories, few of
them being “Political”, “Sports”, “Society”, “Financial”,
“Government Documents”, “College Catalog” and
such. Our goal is to classify our message into one of
these categories, because our keyword extraction will
depend on the classiﬁed category.
Keyword Extraction:
This is a task where from
a text, the terms that best describe the context of it are
automatically identiﬁed. Extraction is a process where
we choose the terms which are explicitly mentioned in
the original text.
In information retrieval,
Term Frequency-Inverse
Document Frequency [TF-IDF] score shows how
important a word is in a given categorical corpus of
a text.
It increases as the number of times a term
shows up in a text increases, and that is offset by
the number of documents in the classiﬁed corpus. A
survey [Breitinger, et al., 2015] showed that 83% of
text-based recommender systems in digital libraries
use TF-IDF.
Word2vec:
Word embedding is a mathematical
embedding where words are mapped into a con-
tinuous vector space - Vec
: S
→Rn, given a
pseudorandom
distribution
on
Rn.
The
simi-
larity of two words will be in S × S
→
R as
distVec(w1, w2) := 1 −dist(Vec(w1), Vec(w2)). It aims
to quantify and categorize semantic similarities
between natural language terms based on their
distribution in the classﬁed corpus. As John Firth said,
“a word is characterized by the company it keeps”.
This mapping is mostly done with neural networks,
a team at Google in 2013 created a toolkit named
Word2vec, which can train vector space models faster
than previous approaches using n-gram models or
unsupervised learning. It takes a corpus as input, and
produces embedding score of each terms.
Point of this model is that it will produce a similar
embedding score for the terms used in similar context.
This is what we need for our contextually similar
decoy message.
GPT-2:
It is a generative model of a language.
It is a unsupervised, statistical model of how English
is used on the Internet. When we feed it a few words,
it starts predicting what the next word is most likely to
be. And it takes all the history of text generated so far
into account too. So it doesn’t deviate a lot from the
context. A transformer module encodes the meaning
of each word based entirely on the words around it
in the current sentence.
Using sentence context is
what makes it work so well. For more detail about
the working and usage, reader can refer [Geitgey, 2019]
Grover:
It was released at University of Wash-
ington. It is a modiﬁed version of GPT-2. It has better
mechanisms for a recurrent neural network with
“attention” as it also depends on metadata of the terms
we want to synthesize text on.
Differential Privacy:
If M and M′ are classiﬁed to
be similar in context, then depending on a private
parameter ϵ the outputs determined by a contextually
similar words ﬁnding mechanism K, will be K(M)
and K(M′) and they are also similar to each other,
regardless of the authorship [Fernandes, et al., 2019].
Possible results of K are determined by the distribution
of the Laplace probability density function quantiﬁed
by the scores of word embeddings generated by
Word2vec and a similarity metric called Earth Mover’s
distance.
4
Earth Mover’s Distance:
If dS is a metric over
S.
The Earth Mover’s Distance with respect to
dS, EdS is a solution to a linear optimization prob-
lem:
EdS
:=
min ∑xi∈X ∑yj∈Y dS(xi, yj)Fij
where
∑k
i=1 Fij = bj/|Y| and ∑l
j=1 Fij = ai/|X|.
Earth Mover’s Privacy:
If S is a set,
dS
is a
pseudo-metric on S and EdS is a Earth Mover’s Dis-
tance on S relative to dS. Given ϵ ≥0, a contextually
similar words ﬁnding mechanism K : S →D(S)
satisﬁes ϵEdS -privacy if and only is for any M, M′ ∈S
and Z ⊆S there is K(M)(Z) ≤eϵEdS (M,M′)K(M′)(Z).
It says that if two messages are calculated to be
very close, that ϵEdS (M, M′) is close to 0, then
eϵEdS (M,M′) wil be approx 1. And thus, the outputs
are almost identical. And if two messages are more
distinguishable, the more their exponents will differ.
For the proof, refer to [Fernandes, et al., 2019].
Now I can move ahead with putting all these
pieces together to form an efﬁcient decoy message
generation scheme. Let’s think of two scenarios:
1.
Adversary knows or expects a certain subject
for the chosen ciphertext attack.
2.
Adversary does not have any knowledge of
the subject of the ciphertext.
For the second case, even if the adversary does
not and should not know the semantic context of the
actual message M, just sending a random message M′
everytime will diminish the indistinguishableness of
the scheme. If the words of two different categories are
outputted for two different brute-forced passwords,
then the Earth Mover’s Privacy with have a large value
of eϵEdS (M,M′) and thus, the adversary will be able to
distinguish between them and thus, will know that
one of those passwords are incorrect.
Although,
it
still
doesn’t
mean
that
adversary
will know which password is incorrect as there’s no
way of knowing the actual context, both passwords
might be incorrect too, adding more obfuscation. So,
we can either choose to pick one random context for
the case 2, let’s call it case 2.1 or we just give random
decoy texts, disregarding the what context they are
of, call it case 2.2. We will discuss approaches to all 3
cases in the next section.
On an abstract level, our goal is:
a. to classify our text with one of the categories of
Brown Corpus,
b. to glean out the keywords from M with TF-IDF,
c. climb up in a WordNet to get the hypernyms of the
original keywords,
d. randomly stop in this tree-net traversal and the
node we stopped at can be counted as a root, now
randomly pick nouns and adjectives from the subtree
of this root (those will be the hyponyms),
e. create a modiﬁed set (bag of words) of keywords
with the nouns and adjectives picked at random, from
the root hypernym of the original keywords,
f. run a Word2vec trained on the Brown Corpus to give
embedding scores to all the elements in the modiﬁed
set of keywords,
g.
synthesize the message M′ with a transformer
model like GPT-2, feeding it the similar words picked
from the output of Word2vec,
NOTE: the synthesized messages M′s are one to
one mapped with the seed value from the set S of
seed-space. Each encoding of M uniformly at random
produces a seed and corresponding to that seed, a
decoy message produced from the above procedure.
We can store this in form of an associative array.
Decoding a seed value is just an inverse process.
In the end, I prove security and efﬁciency of this
approach with the concepts of differential privacy I
mentioned in this section.
IV.
Method
For the case where adversary has knowledge of the
context [case 1]; to generate decoy messages, we must
have a large enough repository of related words that
the messages formed from those can fool the adversary.
For the case where adversary has no knowledge
[case 2], we can pick a categorical corpus at random;
and still the security will hold, as shown in the next
section.
Therefore,
our ﬁrst step is to classify the mes-
sage into one of the categories like “Political”, “Sports”,
“Financial”, “Government Documents”. In case 2, we
just randomly sample from any category for each seed
encoding of the original message.
5
i.
Text Classiﬁcation
Brown corpus is partitioned into different categories.
Each category contains many documents,
those
documents have words pertaining to the mostly used
nouns, adjectives, phrases, verbs of the articles on web
tagged under those categories. We ﬁrst need to make a
bag-of-words model for all the words of each category,
and our plaintext message M. These bags-of-words
do not contain stopwords (non-informative words)
like articles, pronouns, prepositions, referential verbs;
because they are almost in all the documents, in high
frequency too. But contextually, they add nothing to
the classiﬁcation. As a part of preprocessing, we also
need to remove inﬂection by lemmatization as tenses
or sufﬁxes might count two words as different just
because of their different parts of speeches.
A naive Bayes classiﬁer is a simple probabilistic
classiﬁer using the a posteriori decision rule in a
Bayesian setting.
P(A|B) = P(B|A)P(A)
P(B)
Here the A is category cis and B is the bag-of-words of
each ci. Hence, the categorization of the bag-of-words
for the original message [BM] will be done once we
train the model as follows
P(ci|Bi) ∝P(Bi|ci)P(ci)
The category for BM will be computed as
cM = argmaxciP(ci)P(BM|ci)
This is called Maximum A Posteriori decision rule as we
only used the likelihood and prior terms.
ii.
Keyword Extraction
The most popular approach to extract keywords from
the original message M is to compute each word’s
TF-IDF score as mentioned in previous section.
Term Frequency of w[TF(w)] = #word w appears in M
#words in M
Inverse Document Frequency of w[IDF(w)] = log( N
n )
where N is “#documents” and n is “#documents with
word w”. Thus, it will be high for a rarer word.
TF −IDF(w) = TF(w) × IDF(w)
Here, IDF(w) is calculated using the whole category
of the corpus to which the original message M
is classiﬁed to (or the category which is picked
uniformally at random).
The words with higher scores of TF −IDF are
the keywords which presents the context of M, not
necessarily in some order or a sequence, but that
will be dealt with the word embeddings. There are
other techniques besides TF-IDF, like Rapid Automatic
Keyword
Extraction
[Rose, et al., 2010]
which
is
unsupervised and thus, does not need a corpus.
iii.
Modiﬁed Set of Keywords with WordNet
WordNet is a lexical database of semantic relations
between words. It links words into semantic relations.
Those relations can be “is-a” type, which are called
hypernyms and hyponyms.
If “dog” is one of the
keyword, then it’s knowledge structure in WordNet
tree consists of the hierarchy:
dog→canine→carnivore→mammal→. . . animal
If U is a hypernym of V, then every V is a U.
Similarly, if U is a hyponym of V, then every U is a V.
These synsets are arranged in a context-appropriate
hierarchies.
Thus, it’s matter of how far we want to go up the tree
and get the contextually similar words at random.
We can choose to ﬂip a coin on each level, to decide
whether to go one more level up or halt on the current
level, till the root of the tree is reached, in which case,
the entire tree will be a candidate for the random
sampling. If we halt before reaching the root, then at
whatever node we stop will be the new root and that
subtree will be the new tree.
With this new tree, we can again use random sampling
techniques like Reservoir sampling [Vitter, 1985] to
pick nodes.
The goal is to stay in the same context but switch
the original keywords with the randomly sampled
ones. While this works on heuristics, a much robust
technique to modify the bag of keyword is as follows:
We have introduced Word2vec in the previous
section, there are many off-the-shelf implementation
available for it, which gets us the most similar words to
a word given as input. The word embeddings denotes
a coordinate system where related words, based on
6
Figure 1: RNN with Long Term Dependency - LSTM
any category, are placed close together.
Word2vec
takes the corpus category which is chosen during text
classiﬁcation and the bag of keywords, it produces
the modiﬁed bag of keywords where the words are
replaced by the contextually similar words.
As an
example:
Input: ice, steam
Output: solid, gas, water
We can use the synset tree approach as a preprocessing
step to the Word2vec, so that the randomness is intact.
This is how we preserve the context and obfuscate the
structure of the original message.
iv.
Decoy Message Generation from Modi-
ﬁed Set of Keywords
Recurrent neural networks are sometimes employed as
generative models. One speciﬁc kind of RNN, called
“Long-Short Term Memory” or LSTM takes words in
an array form and from the memory of the previously
presented words, text generated so far, and the current
word in the queue, it can generate the next word
which is the most likely. It needs to get trained on
the corpus beforehand. See Figure 1. But LSTMs are
not very polished with respect to the coherency and
grammatical accuracy of the generated text. That’s
where the concept of transformer comes into picture.
The goal of the transformer is not just to predict the
next likely word, but it is trained by letting it predict
“missing words” based on the rest of the sentence. As
an example, we feed it
“Thomas Jefferson was an ______ statesman.”
The model is trained to ﬁll in the blank (suppose that
actual answer is “American”), and the model is also
measuring how much the words of the sentence were
related to the word it predicted. The words “was” and
“an” will be hardly related to “American” because
they are used in many more contexts, but the word
“Jefferson” is strongly related to the word “American”.
Figure 2: Text Generation with Transformer Modules and an RNN
The transformer module repeats this for every word
of the corpus sentences. GPT-2 [Radford, et al., 2019]
has been trained on millions of web articles.
It
has covered every possible context already.
The
transformer module is encoding semantic meaning
of every word, using the context around this word
makes it very effective and efﬁcient.
See Figure 2,
the input here is our modiﬁed bag of words. Grover
[Zellers, et al., 2019] works on the same concept,
except that it also always considers metadata of the
words in its current memory.
If our input is,
“Cook the pizza in ice water for 15-20 minutes. Let it steam ,
then drain off the water.”
After the keyword extraction, WordNet tree random
sampling, word embedding and processing through
transformer modules and the neural network, the
result we get is:
1. Ice cold water is best, as the steam kills the bacteria that
produces the food -borne pathogens.
2. Cook ice water for 15 -20 minutes . Add 1 tablespoon of
Italian seasoning. The steam of the pressure cooker heats the
seasoning.
V.
Security
Differential privacy in text processing is related to the
topic-related contents of a message. The concept of
Plausible Deniability says that the output obtained from
a query can easily have been from a database that
does not consists of sender’s details. That means, for
the privacy of our original message M, producing a
decoy message M′; it should be hard for the adversary
to distinguish between the original author and our
decoy message generating system. Thus, the aim here
is to prove that obfuscating the origins of the context
preserved message is secure.
Let dM be a metric on M and K a contextually
similar words ﬁnding mechanism satisfying ϵdM-
privacy:
K(M)(Z) ≤eϵEdM(M,M′)K(M′)(Z) for all M, M′ ∈M
7
and Z ⊆M.
If K∗is the mechanism obtained by applying
K independently to each element of M, then K∗↓N
should satisfy ϵNEdM-privacy for a bag-of-word of
size N. [Fernandes, et al., 2019]
Proof:
There are two messages M and M′, for
ease of establishing a base case, let’s say both are
of size N. We call the output of K∗, c, also of size
N. We show that K(M)(Z) ≤eϵEdM(M,M′)K(M′)(Z)
is satisﬁed for a set of a singleton element c and a
multiplier ϵN, from there it follows that the equation
is satisﬁed for all Z.
The minimization problem of the Earth Mover’s
Distance described in the Goal section is optimized
for all values in the transportation matrix F (which
speciﬁes the “conversion” cost of M to M′), Fij are
either 0 or 1/N.
That means, the optimal transportation for EdM(M, c)
is achieved by comparing each word embedding
score from M to each word embedding score from
c.
Similarly, we also do all the comparisons for
EdM(M′, c) and thus, for EdM(M, M′).
We introduce a new message M where each keyword
in M appears in M. The optimal transportation for
EdM(M, M′) is
EdM(M, M′) = 1
N dM(M, M′).
Here, there is a link between K∗on message of
size N and K∗on entire message space M by applying
K independently to each message. For permutation
of keywords in M, σ, the following equality between
probabilities of the contextual similarity holds:
K∗(M){c} = ∑σ K∗(M){cσ}
which says sum of all combinations of modiﬁed
keywords will be contextually close to the original bag
of keywords.
K∗(M){c} = ∑
σ
K∗(M){cσ}
≤∑
σ
eϵMd(M,M′)K∗(M′){cσ}
= eϵNEd(M,M′) ∑
σ
K∗(M′){cσ}
= eϵNEd(M,M′)K∗(M′){c}
as required.
ϵ ↓\# Decoy Messages→
100
500
-
43
67
30
34
46
25
29
27
20
16
13
15
9
12
10
2
4
Table 2: Amount of times the adversary can distinguish between
original author’s message and the decoy message for ϵ-
privacy
ϵ ↓\# Decoy Messages→
100
500
-
23
43
30
19
46
25
22
41
20
20
36
15
17
38
10
16
33
Table 3: Amount of times the adversary can distinguish between
original message’s context and the decoy message’s con-
text for ϵ-privacy
VI.
Results
Inference Mechanism:
The adversary mechanism
for author identiﬁcation works by representing each
decoy message M′ as a vector of word embeddings
and comparing those to the known plaintext samples
and calculating the cosine similarity with those two
word embeddings. We set the threshold of that cosine
score proportional to the ϵ value we choose for the
differential privacy measurement.
Table 2 shows the results for ϵ between 0 to 30
and unmodiﬁed ϵ = none for the both messages
generated by the author. At values ϵ > 30, there is not
much change captured; at ϵ < 10 there is not much
similarity captured. Table 3 shows more consistency
with a distinguisher which is distinguishing the
contexts of the messages with comparison to a
distinguisher which is distinguishing between source
of the messages.
That
can
be
because
the
discriminator
neural
network used for the context distinguishing had more
data to work on (entire corpus) as opposed to smaller
amount of user’s data which was available to us (a
particular news website also varies widely in style of
8
writing because there are multiple authors, this is the
concept Grover works on).
VII.
Conclusion and Future Work
I showed how natural language processing can be
used to generate contextually similar decoy messages
in Honey Encryption scheme, with author identity
and message structure obfuscation. With large enough
available data on the context similar to the message, we
can identify keywords of that message, to get similar
words having closer word embeddings and then feed
it to an already trained transformer-neural network
combination, to generate realistic decoy messages.
I
proved
it
used
ϵ-differential
privacy
mecha-
nisms. I also showed the trade-off between author
discrimination and context discrimination.
Naturally,
with
supervised
learning,
we
need
more and more data to achieve higher levels of
obfuscation. GPT-2 is trained on millions of webpages,
but author styles will vary widely, if not the context of
the messages.
Future work can be focused towards extracting
the context from an unsupervised learning technique,
so that the requirement of large corpus data on
a subject which is not much discussed on, can be
eliminated. That will mean less processing time as well.
We can also ﬁnd a method to bring down the
author identiﬁcation probability, in case adversary has
lots of publicly data available for a certain author.
References
[Cyberpunk, 2018] Cyberpunk (2018).
Password Cracking and
Login Brute-force [Stats]. https://www.cyberpunk.rs/password-
cracking-and-login-brute-force
[Cyberpunk, 2020] Cyberpunk (2020). HashCat: Advanced Pass-
word Cracking Tool. https://www.cyberpunk.rs/hashcat-advanced-
password-cracking-tool
[Stallings, 2011] Stallings W., (2011). Cryptography and Network
Security: Principles and Practice 5th Edition. Prentice Hall
Press, ISBN: 0-1360-9-7049.
[Dunning, 2015] Dunning J., (2015). Statistics Will Crack Your Pass-
word. https://www.praetorian.com/blog/statistics-will-crack-your-
password-mask-structure, Security Insights.
[Juels and Ristenpart, 2014] Juels A., Ristenpart T. (2014). Honey
Encryption: Security Beyond the Brute-Force Bound. Advances
in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2014, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 8441.
[Chatterjee, et al., 2015] Chatterjee, R., Bonneau, J., Juels, A., Ris-
tenpart, T. (2015). Cracking-resistant password vaults using
natural language encoders. 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, pp. 481-498.
[Omolara and Oludare, 2018] Omolara A., Oludare I., Jantan A.,
Poston H. (2018). A Novel Approach for the Adaptation of
Honey Encryption to Support Natural Language Message.
Proceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and
Computer Scientists 2018 Vol I
[Ma, et al., 2014] Ma, J., Yang, W., Luo, M., Li, N. (2014). A study
of probabilistic password models. 2014 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy, SP 2014, Berkeley, CA, USA, 18–21 May,
pp. 689–704. IEEE Computer Society.
[Omolara and Jantan, 2019] Omolara A., Jantan A. (2019). Modiﬁed
honey encryption scheme for encoding natural language mes-
sage. International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering
(IJECE), Vol. 9, No. 3, June 2019, pp. 1871 1878, ISSN: 2088-8708,
DOI: 10.11591/ijece.v9i3.pp1871-1878.
[Ghassami, et al., 2016] Ghassami A., Cullina D., Kiyavash N. (2016).
Message Partitioning and Limited Auxiliary Randomness: Al-
ternatives to Honey Encryption. 2016 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory
[Jaeger, et al., 2016] Jaeger J., Ristenpart T., Tang Q. (2016). Honey
Encryption Beyond Message Recovery Security. Advances in
Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2016, 2016, Volume 9665, ISBN :
978-3-662-49889-7.
[Fernandes, et al., 2019] Fernandes N., Dras M., McIver A. (2019).
Generalised Differential Privacy for Text Document Processing.
Principles of Security and Trust, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 11426.
[Omolara, et al., 2018] Omolara A., Jantan A., Abiodun I. (2018). A
comprehensive review of honey encryption scheme. Indone-
sian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vol.
13, No. 2, February 2019, pp. 649 656, ISSN: 2502-4752, DOI:
10.11591/ijeecs.v13.i2.pp649-656.
[Radford, et al., 2019] Radford A., Wu J., Child R., Luan D., Amodei
D., Sutskever I., (2019).
Language Models are Unsuper-
vised Multitask Learners. https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-
models/language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf
[Zellers, et al., 2019] Zellers R., Holtzman A., Rashkin H., Bisk
Y., Farhadi A., Roesner F., Choi Y., (2019).
Defending
Against Neural Fake News. DBLP Computer Science Journals
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.12616
[Brown Corpus] Brown
University
Standard
Cor-
pus
of
Present-Day
American
English,
(1991).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brown_Corpus#Sample_distribution
[Breitinger, et al., 2015] Breitinger C., Gipp B., Langer, Stefan, (2015).
Research-paper recommender systems: a literature survey.
International Journal on Digital Libraries. 17 (4):
305–338.
doi:10.1007/s00799-015-0156-0. ISSN 1432-5012
9
[Google, 2013] Mikolov
T.,
(2013).
Word2vec.
https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
[Geitgey, 2019] Geitgey
A.,
(2019).
Faking
the
News
with
Natural
Language
Processing
and
GPT-2.
https://medium.com/@ageitgey/deepfaking-the-news-with-
nlp-and-transformer-models-5e057ebd697d
[Rose, et al., 2010] Rose S., Engel D., Cramer N., Cowley W.,(2010).
Automatic
Keyword
Extraction
from
Individual
Docu-
ments.
Text Mining: Applications and Theory, pp.1 - 20 doi:
10.1002/9780470689646.ch1
[Vitter, 1985] Vitter J.,(1985). Random sampling with a reservoir.
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software. 11 (1): 37–57. doi:
10.1145/3147.3165
10
