Title: Cluster Workload Allocation: Semantic Soft Affinity Using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2601.09282v2
--------------------------------------------------

This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
Cluster Workload Allocation: Semantic Soft 
Affinity Using Natural Language Processing 
Leszek Sliwko1, (Member, IEEE), Jolanta Mizeria-Pietraszko2, (Member, IEEE) 
1Standard Chartered Bank, EC2V 5DD London, U.K.  
2Department of Computer Science, Opole University of Technology, Opole, Poland 
Corresponding author: Leszek Sliwko (e-mail: leszek.sliwko@sc.com). 
This work was supported in part by the AI Research & Experiment department, Standard Chartered Bank. 
ABSTRACT Cluster workload allocation often requires complex configurations, creating a usability gap. 
This paper introduces a semantic, intent-driven scheduling paradigm for cluster systems using Natural 
Language Processing. The system employs a Large Language Model (LLM) integrated via a Kubernetes 
scheduler extender to interpret natural language allocation hint annotations for soft affinity preferences. A 
prototype featuring a cluster state cache and an intent analyzer (using AWS Bedrock) was developed. 
Empirical evaluation demonstrated high LLM parsing accuracy (>95% Subset Accuracy on an evaluation 
ground-truth dataset) for top-tier models like Amazon Nova Pro/Premier and Mistral Pixtral Large, 
significantly outperforming a baseline engine. Scheduling quality tests across six scenarios showed the 
prototype achieved superior or equivalent placement compared to standard Kubernetes configurations, 
particularly excelling in complex and quantitative scenarios and handling conflicting soft preferences. The 
results validate using LLMs for accessible scheduling but highlight limitations like synchronous LLM 
latency, suggesting asynchronous processing for production readiness. This work confirms the viability of 
semantic soft affinity for simplifying workload orchestration and presents a proof-of-concept design. 
INDEX TERMS Artificial Intelligence, Kubernetes, Load Balancing, Semantic Parsing, Soft-Affinity, Task 
Assignment
I. INTRODUCTION 
In any large-scale computing environment, from cloud data 
center to supercomputing cluster, the scheduler is one of 
the most critical components. Its fundamental purpose is to 
act as a primary coordinator, intelligently assigning user-
submitted tasks, ranging from long-running services 
through short-lived data analysis jobs, to the most 
appropriate machines. The design of these schedulers has 
been a central research topic for decades, resulting in 
influential systems that define contemporary resource 
management. Representative examples include Google’s 
Borg [9], which demonstrates how to orchestrate a vast and 
diverse collection of applications at unprecedented scale; 
Apache Hadoop YARN [8], which decouples resource 
management from job execution and has become the 
standard for big data workloads; and the SLURM Workload 
Manager, 
which 
dominates 
in 
High-Performance 
Computing (HPC) environments. 
Schedulers typically make decisions based on two 
categories of rules: hard and soft ones. Hard rules, also 
known as constraints, represent absolute, non-negotiable 
requirements that a program needs to satisfy. For example, 
a graphics-intensive application may require a node 
equipped with a specific type of GPU. The scheduler first 
filters out all the machines that do not satisfy these 
constraints. If none of them qualify, the job is not 
scheduled, ensuring that applications never run in 
incompatible environments. 
Once the scheduler identifies the machines satisfying all 
the hard rules, it applies the soft rules, or the preferences, 
to select the optimal candidate. These act as a guidance 
rather than some strict requirements, i.e. for preferring 
nodes that are lightly loaded or located near a data source 
in order to minimize latency. The scheduler assigns scores 
to the valid machines based on these preferences, 
optimizing for metrics such as performance or energy 
efficiency. Considerable research has focused on fairness 
and preference models, including Dominant Resource 
Fairness (DRF), which ensures equitable resource 
allocation among heterogeneous users [1]. 
These principles have been implemented in various 
systems. The Apache Mesos scheduler introduced a 
“resource offer” mechanism to manage constraints [3], 
while Firmament adopted a network-flow-based model to 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
accelerate placement decisions [2]. Despite their significant 
architectural differences, these systems share a common 
limitation: they require operators to express scheduling 
goals in rigid, machine-readable syntax. 
This leads to a significant semantic gap between human 
intent and machine-level configuration. A developer might 
express an intuitive request such as “Run this machine 
learning job on a powerful node, preferably one that isn’t 
overloaded and is located in Europe.” To achieve this in 
systems like Kubernetes, users must write complex YAML 
files specifying numerous fields and weighted values. This 
process is time-consuming, error-prone, and demands deep 
system expertise. 
This paper introduces a new system designed to bridge 
that gap. The presented intelligent scheduler employs a 
Large Language Model (LLM) as a translation layer 
between natural-language user intent and the scheduler’s 
structured directives. Developers can specify scheduling 
preferences in plain English (or any other supported 
language), and the model automatically generates the 
corresponding configuration, enabling the scheduler to 
make human-aligned placement decisions. The current 
prototype is intended as a research artifact to demonstrate 
the feasibility and is not production-ready. 
The 
primary 
contribution 
is 
the 
design 
and 
implementation of a semantic, intent-driven scheduling 
paradigm for Kubernetes, which leverages an LLM to 
translate natural-language requirements into low-level 
scheduling logic. Specifically, the other contributions are: 
• Semantic Scheduling: A shift from declarative, syntax-
bound configuration (e.g., YAML with nodeAffinity) 
toward semantic, intent-based expressions. This 
reduces cognitive overhead for developers and supports 
more flexible workload specification. 
• Dynamic and Extensible Logic: Traditional schedulers 
require writing and compiling new plug-ins in the Go 
programming language to incorporate custom logic. 
The presented approach allows new scheduling 
behaviors to be introduced dynamically by defining new 
Intent classes and updating the LLM prompt, with the 
aim of improving adaptability. 
• Real-Time Contextual Awareness: By combining a 
live cluster state cache with the reasoning capabilities 
of an LLM, the system enables nuanced soft-affinity 
decisions 
(e.g., 
prefer_colocate_same_deployment, 
spread_zones) that go beyond static affinity and anti-
affinity mechanisms. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II reviews related work in cluster scheduling, 
highlighting existing approaches to affinity and resource 
management. 
Section 
III 
details 
the 
design 
and 
implementation of the prototype system and testbed 
environment, including the Kubernetes cluster simulation, 
the Cluster State Cache, the Score Extender Service, and 
the LLM-based Intent Analyzer module responsible for 
semantic parsing. Section IV details the mathematical 
formulas underlying the intent-driven scoring logic and 
explains the scalarization of the final score. Section V 
presents the empirical evaluation, focusing first on the 
accuracy of intent recognition using various LLMs against 
an evaluation dataset and then outlining the methodology 
for assessing scheduling efficiency and placement quality. 
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper by summarizing the 
key findings, discussing the limitations of the current 
prototype, and proposing directions for future research. 
 
II. RELATED WORKS 
This section surveys foundational and contemporary 
research pertinent to the proposed system, structured across 
four principal domains. The first is AI in Cluster 
Scheduling, 
contrasting 
conventional 
policy-driven 
schedulers with ML and LLM-assisted approaches. The 
topic of semantic soft affinity intersects resource 
scheduling, ML-driven affinity prediction, and semantic 
analysis, drawing from workload trace analysis and AI-
based scheduling. The second, Multi-Objective Scheduling 
(MOO), addresses the trade-offs in competing performance 
goals. The prototype's additive scoring model is a 
weighted-sum strategy. The third, Intent-Based Systems 
(IBS), focuses on bridging the “semantic gap” between 
high-level intents and low-level configurations. Lastly, 
Parsing and Natural Language Interfaces covers semantic 
parsing for converting linguistic input into machine-
interpretable policies. 
These research areas directly influence the system’s 
architectural design. Insights from IBS and Natural 
Language Parsing (NLP) inform the Intent Analyzer. The 
foundations of MOO underpin the Score Extender Service, 
while advances in AI-assisted Scheduling guide the Cluster 
State Cache.  
A. AI IN CLUSTER SCHEDULING 
Cluster scheduling is a central topic in distributed systems. 
Foundational systems like Google Borg [9], Apache Mesos 
[3], Quincy [4], and Firmament [2] established principles 
of fairness and resource sharing. Hadoop YARN [8] and 
SLURM are standards for big data and HPC. These 
schedulers rely on hard-coded rules and manual, 
declarative configuration. 
Real-world traces, like Google's Cluster Data, offer 
foundations for understanding workload patterns. Alam et 
al. [38] clustered workloads by resource usage, revealing 
job distributions and symmetries. This supports semantic 
soft affinity by showing how clustering can identify 
resource preferences without hard constraints, enabling 
NLP-based grouping. Research conducted by Mishra et al. 
[42] also characterized Google workloads, noting elasticity 
and variability that inform soft affinity models. 
ML is increasingly used to predict node-task affinities. 
Research by [40] proposed an ML ensemble to detect 
constraint operators, achieving 98% accuracy in affinity 
prediction. This predictive method could integrate NLP to 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
parse metadata for softer, meaning-based affinities. 
Similarly, Mao et al. [6] introduced Decima, an RL 
framework that learns scheduling policies, improving job 
completion times. Decima's approach offers a basis for 
using NLP-derived semantic similarities. 
Reviews highlight AI's role in overcoming traditional 
scheduling limitations. A study by [39] surveyed DL 
workload 
scheduling 
in 
GPU 
datacenters, 
noting 
techniques to optimize utilization, which underscores the 
need for semantic tools like NLP to handle diverse 
workloads. The survey conducted by [44] on AI-driven job 
scheduling examines ML, RL, and hybrid models for 
dynamic allocation. Zhou et al. [43] reviewed deep RL for 
cloud resource scheduling, emphasizing adaptive policies 
for NP-hard problems and suggesting semantic parsing 
extensions. 
ML-assisted 
scheduling, 
using 
models 
to 
guide 
placement, is seen in systems like DeepRM [5] and Decima 
[6]. However, these approaches use fixed quantitative 
inputs, lack a natural language UI, and do not address the 
semantic gap between intent and configuration. 
The emergence of LLMs inspired research into semantic, 
intent-driven configuration. OpenDevin [10] shows LLMs 
can interpret natural-language DevOps commands into 
configurations, using schema-guided extraction for 
deterministic parsing. Research by [7] also shows models 
can translate high-level goals into actions, though often 
outside latency-critical paths. 
A growing body of research explores LLM-assisted 
cluster management, using natural-language understanding 
for configuration or categorization. Recent work by Jaillet 
et al. [11] focuses on scheduling LLM inference tasks with 
Key-Value cache constraints. These studies show an 
increasing intersection between natural-language reasoning 
and resource management. The present work extends this 
by focusing on semantic intent translation for soft-affinity 
scheduling, using an LLM with a live scheduler extender 
and a reproducible testbed. It contributes to integrating 
natural-language 
interfaces 
into 
infrastructure 
orchestration, emphasizing reproducibility, determinism, 
and quantitative evaluation. 
B. MULTI-OBJECTIVE SCHEDULING 
The task of cluster scheduling is fundamentally a MOO 
problem, 
requiring 
trade-offs 
between 
conflicting 
objectives [33]. For example, maximizing fault tolerance 
by spreading pods (a spread_zones intent) conflicts with 
minimizing network latency by co-locating them on the 
same nodes (a prefer_colocate_same_deployment intent). 
Other conflicts include balancing resource utilization 
versus consolidating workloads for energy savings [31], or 
minimizing cost versus minimizing job completion time 
[34]. 
Formally, these problems seek Pareto optimal solutions, 
where no objective can be improved without degrading 
another. 
Research 
employs 
two 
main 
strategies: 
evolutionary algorithms (e.g., Non-dominated Sorting 
Genetic Algorithm II) to find the Pareto front, or 
scalarization. Scalarization, the more common approach, 
converts the multi-objective problem into a single-
objective one, often via a weighted-sum method [34]. 
A key challenge is that presenting an entire Pareto front 
is impractical for real-time decisions. This led to 
preference-based optimization, using high-level user 
preferences to guide the selection of a single best-fit 
solution. User preferences define the weights or constraints 
for the scalarization function [32]. The allocation hint 
proposed in this work serves this function; it is a 
mechanism for capturing unstructured preferences and 
translating them, via an LLM, into the quantitative weights 
for the scheduler's multi-objective cost function.  
C. INTENT-BASED SYSTEMS 
Research in IBS addresses the “semantic gap” between 
high-level human goals and low-level system configuration 
[13]. The premise is that operators should specify what they 
want (e.g., “ensure low latency”) rather than how to achieve 
it (e.g., setting specific routing rules) [14]. This declarative, 
policy-driven model aims to replace imperative, error-
prone manual configurations, reducing human error and 
cognitive overhead [16]. The core challenge is translating 
these abstract, human-centric goals into precise, machine-
executable instructions. 
An IBS typically operates as a continuous, closed-loop 
lifecycle [21]. This loop includes: intent ingestion 
(capturing the objective); translation (converting the intent 
into formal policies); validation (ensuring policies are 
achievable and non-conflicting); actuation (orchestrating 
policies via controllers); and assurance (continuously 
monitoring the state to ensure the intent is met) [18]. If 
intent drift is detected, the system takes corrective action, 
completing the autonomous loop. 
The intent ingestion and translation phases are most 
relevant to this work. Traditionally, these use structured 
inputs like GUIs or, more commonly, Domain-Specific 
Languages (DSLs) [17]. DSLs allow operators to define 
complex intents formally [20]. While an improvement, 
DSLs still require specialized training and present a steep 
learning curve, creating a usability gap. 
IBS principles are most applied in Intent-Based 
Networking (IBN), particularly in SDN and managing 5G 
[24] and 6G [18] networks. Intents are used for traffic 
engineering, network slicing, and enforcing dynamic QoS 
[21]. The paradigm is also used in multi-cloud deployment 
[22] and defining dynamic security policies [19]. 
To address the usability limitations of formal DSLs, 
research has emerged to use natural language as the primary 
intent input. Early work explored NLP for translating user 
commands into network control actions [23] or verifiable 
policies [24]. The present work builds on this trajectory, 
proposing that modern LLMs can serve as a more powerful 
“universal translator” for intent. By accepting unstructured 
allocation hints, this approach aims to eliminate specialized 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
syntax, making intent-based scheduling accessible without 
the steep learning curve of traditional IBS. 
D. PARSING AND NATURAL LANGUAGE INTERFACES 
The Intent Analyzer's core function—translating an 
unstructured hint into a structured JSON object—is a 
semantic parsing challenge. This is extensively studied in 
Natural Language Interfaces to Databases (NLIDB), which 
aim to translate plain text into a formal query language like 
SQL [12]. While traditional NLIDB systems struggled with 
ambiguity, advances in deep learning and LLMs have 
significantly enhanced semantic parser performance [15]. 
This research applies these techniques to cluster 
scheduling, mapping text to a scheduling policy rather than 
a database query. 
To enable semantic soft affinity, NLP-driven clustering 
of textual workload descriptions (e.g., job requirements) is 
crucial. Veremyev et al. [41] apply graph-based clustering 
to semantic spaces from word embeddings, revealing dense 
communities that capture contextual meanings—directly 
applicable to grouping similar jobs for soft allocation. This 
aligns with broader NLP applications in resource 
management, though explicit integration with cluster 
scheduling remains underexplored. 
The advent of deep learning introduced new text-to-SQL 
architectures. 
Early 
sequence-to-sequence 
models 
struggled with rigid SQL syntax [30]. This led to sketch-
based methods, where models like SQLNet learned to fill 
slots in a predefined SQL sketch, improving accuracy [29]. 
Pre-trained transformers like BERT enabled models such 
as SQLova to consider both the question's context and the 
database schema's structure [27]. A critical sub-task is 
schema linking: identifying relevant database tables and 
columns for a question. In large databases, including the 
entire schema is inefficient; effective schema linking 
prunes the schema to only relevant parts. However, 
incorrectly omitting a required table can impede correct 
query generation [26]. 
More recently, general-purpose LLMs have been applied 
to the NLIDB problem. Unlike earlier models needing 
extensive fine-tuning, LLMs can often perform text-to-
SQL translation in a zero-shot or few-shot setting, 
generating correct queries for new schemas with little to no 
task-specific training [28]. This approach bypasses the 
costly data annotation process. 
Despite progress, significant challenges remain [25]. 
Models still struggle with domain adaptation (handling 
specialized 
terminology) 
and 
logic 
grounding 
(understanding abstract concepts). Generating highly 
complex SQL queries remains a research frontier. These 
works form a strong foundation, with gaps in NLP-specific 
semantic affinity offering opportunities for novel 
contributions. Future research could hybridize RL 
schedulers with NLP models for intent-based soft affinities. 
 
III. PROTOTYPE AND TESTBED DESIGN 
To empirically evaluate the performance and efficacy of an 
intent-based 
scheduling 
paradigm, 
a 
robust 
and 
reproducible testbed is required. This section details the 
design and implementation of such an environment. The 
testbed is built around a multi-node Kubernetes cluster 
simulated using Minikube, alongside a custom scheduler 
extender. The extender intercepts scheduling requests and 
translates high-level, natural-language intents into concrete 
node-scoring decisions. 
The environment (see Figure 1 for detail) is designed as a 
self-contained representation of a topology-aware data 
center, enabling the evaluation of complex scheduling 
policies such as proximity preference, resource affinity, 
and workload spreading. The core components include: 
• Local Kubernetes Cluster: A multi-node Minikube 
cluster deployed via Minikube with the Docker driver, 
with nodes labeled to simulate a multi-level physical 
topology. 
• Cluster State Cache: A real-time, thread-safe 
subsystem that maintains an up-to-date in-memory 
representation of cluster state. 
• Score Extender Service: A stateful scheduler extender 
microservice where the custom node-scoring logic 
resides. 
• Intent Analyzer: An NLP module leveraging AWS 
Bedrock to access an LLM to translate user-provided 
hints into structured scheduling intents. 
Each of these modules, along with the testbed environment 
as a whole, is described in detail in the following sections. 
A. LOCAL KUBERNETES CLUSTER 
The foundation of the experimental testbed is a local 
Kubernetes version 1.31.4 cluster deployed using Minikube, 
configured with the Docker driver for node virtualization. This 
setup provides a fully contained, reproducible environment 
suitable for rapid iteration and controlled experimentation. 
Figure 2 shows how the cluster is initialized with nine nodes: 
one dedicated control-plane node (minikube) and eight worker 
nodes (minikube-m02 through minikube-m09). This topology 
offers sufficient scale to evaluate scheduling behaviors across 
multiple failure domains while maintaining the manageability 
required for iterative testing. 
The Minikube testbed is initialized using the Docker 
driver, 
providing 
lightweight, 
containerized 
node 
virtualization instead of full virtual machines. This 
approach 
offers 
several 
advantages: 
it 
eliminates 
hypervisor configuration, reduces resource overhead 
compared to VM-based drivers, and shares the host’s 
networking stack for fast pod-scheduler communication. 
These containerized nodes can be managed via the Docker 
dashboard and programmatically scripted (e.g., labeled, 
tainted), which makes the testbed highly reproducible. This 
setup simplifies dependency management by using the 
host's OS and runtime, providing a flexible platform for 
experimenting with topology-aware scheduling, custom 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
extenders, and LLM-driven intent analysis without 
requiring a production cluster. 
 
 
FIGURE 1. Prototype system architecture, illustrating the interaction 
between the main components: the Local Kubernetes Cluster (Minikube), 
Cluster State Cache, Score Extender Service, Intent Analyzer, and AWS 
Bedrock. 
 
A critical feature of the testbed is its emulation of a 
physical network topology, necessary for validating 
topology-aware 
scheduling 
intents 
such 
as 
prefer_colocate_same_deployment, 
spread_zones, 
and 
prefer_nearby_nodes_same_deployment. 
Immediately 
after cluster initialization, a setup script programmatically 
labels the worker nodes to define a hierarchical topology 
consistent with standard Kubernetes conventions. The 
hierarchy uses the following topology keys: 
• Region (topology.kubernetes.io/region): All nodes 
share a single region label, us-east-1. 
• Zone (topology.kubernetes.io/zone): Two simulated 
availability zones, us-east-1a and us-east-1b, are 
assigned across the worker nodes. 
• Rack (topology.kubernetes.io/rack): Five logical racks 
(rack-1 through rack-5) are distributed across the zones, 
with two nodes per racks 1, 3, and 4, and one node per 
rack 2 and 5. 
 
TABLE I 
EVALUATION CLUSTER TOPOLOGY 
Node 
Region 
Zone 
Rack 
minikube-m02 
us-east-1 
us-east-1a 
rack-1 
minikube-m03 
us-east-1 
us-east-1a 
rack-1 
minikube-m04 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-2 
minikube-m05 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-3 
minikube-m06 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-3 
minikube-m07 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-4 
minikube-m08 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-4 
minikube-m09 
us-east-1 
us-east-1b 
rack-5 
Table I details the topology structure used in the further 
evaluation scenarios. The labeling scheme enables the 
prototype scheduler to interpret placement hints and make 
decisions based on synthetic but realistic topology 
metadata, closely mimicking the conditions of a multi-
zone, multi-rack data center environment. To ensure 
isolation of control-plane operations, the control-plane 
node is tainted with node-role.kubernetes.io/control-
plane=:NoSchedule, preventing the placement of user 
workloads and reserving the node exclusively for critical 
cluster management services such as etcd, kube-apiserver, 
and kube-scheduler. 
 
 
FIGURE 2. Minikube cluster startup sequence (Kubernetes version 
1.31.4). The cluster consists of nine nodes: one control-plane node 
(minikube) and eight worker nodes (minikube-m02 through m09). 
 
 
FIGURE 3. Minikube nodes displayed in the Docker Desktop dashboard. 
This GUI tool provided a convenient way to monitor the state of the 
Kubernetes cluster nodes and manage associated persisted state 
(Volumes). 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
The Score Extender Service, which encapsulates the 
semantic intent-based scheduling logic, is integrated 
directly into the Kubernetes control-plane via a custom 
scheduler configuration file. This configuration modifies 
the kube-scheduler manifest to include the custom extender 
and adjust its scheduling behavior. Two configuration 
aspects are especially important: 
• Extender Weight: The extender’s weight in the 
scheduler configuration is set to 100, the maximum 
possible value. This ensures that the extender’s node 
scores (ranging from 0-100) dominate those from 
Kubernetes’ native scoring plugins, giving the 
prototype primary control over node selection. 
• Disabling Default Scoring Plugins: To isolate the 
effects of intent-based scheduling, several built-in 
Kubernetes scoring plugins are explicitly disabled, 
including 
NodeResourcesFit, 
TaintToleration, 
InterPodAffinity, 
and 
DefaultPodTopologySpread. 
Disabling these ensures that all node scoring and 
prioritization decisions originate from the custom NLP-
driven scheduler extender, allowing for accurate 
evaluation of its independent behavior. 
This Minikube-based testbed thus provides a controlled, 
topology-aware sandbox that replicates key aspects of real-
world cluster scheduling while remaining lightweight and 
reproducible. It enables precise measurement of scheduling 
latency, accuracy, and correctness under various intent 
configurations, while isolating the impact of the LLM-
driven logic from external Kubernetes behaviors. Notably, 
in Kubernetes, the scheduler evaluates resource availability 
based on requested values rather than real-time monitoring 
of current CPU load. Pod specifications include requests 
and limits for CPU and memory, which are used during the 
filtering phase to ensure a node has enough unallocated 
capacity to satisfy a pod's requirements. During this initial 
filtering phase (/filter), native Kubernetes plugins like 
NodeResourcesFit remain active to exclude nodes that 
cannot support the pod's mandatory resource needs. Only 
after nodes have passed these hard-rule filters are they sent 
to the prioritization phase (/prioritize), where the 
prototype’s custom extender applies its additive scoring 
logic. 
B. CLUSTER STATE CACHE 
The scheduler extender must make rapid decisions based on 
the current state of the entire cluster. Continuously 
querying the Kubernetes API server for each /prioritize 
request is computationally infeasible, as it would introduce 
prohibitive latency and place an unsustainable load on the 
API server. To address this, a thread-safe state management 
subsystem the Cluster State Cache was implemented. 
The Cluster State Cache is designed as a distributed state 
synchronization mechanism that balances low-latency 
responsiveness with eventual consistency. This service 
maintains 
a 
continuously 
updated, 
in-memory 
representation of all nodes and pods, effectively serving as 
a high-speed local mirror of the cluster’s state. It employs 
a hybrid update strategy designed to balance real-time 
accuracy with long-term consistency and fault tolerance: 
• Real-time 
Watchers: 
The 
cache’s 
low-latency 
synchronization is achieved through a set of real-time 
watchers. Two dedicated background threads establish 
persistent watch connections to the Kubernetes API 
server: the first for v1.list_node and the second for 
v1.list_pod_for_all_namespaces. These watchers are 
event-driven, receiving immediate notifications for 
ADDED, MODIFIED, and DELETED events. Upon 
receiving an event, the cache acquires a lock and 
updates its internal dictionaries, ensuring that the in-
memory state reflects cluster changes with sub-second 
latency. This real-time stream is essential for 
maintaining accurate, up-to-date context for the 
scheduler’s scoring logic. 
• Periodic Refresh: To protect against transient failures, 
missed events, or watch disconnects, the watcher model 
is complemented by a periodic reconciliation thread. 
This background process performs a full re-list of all 
nodes and pods at regular intervals (e.g., every 60 
seconds). This brute-force refresh ensures eventual 
consistency and acts as a self-healing mechanism to 
recover from desynchronization or partial state loss. All 
modifications to shared data structures are protected by 
lock objects guaranteeing full thread safety under 
concurrent access. 
To quantify the impact of cache update delays on dynamic 
affinity 
intents, 
the 
Effective 
Pod 
Set 
( 
𝒫ℯ𝒻𝒻) model is defined. During high-velocity pod bursts, 
the system compensates for the inherent latency of the 
Kubernetes API by merging confirmed API state (𝒫𝒶𝓅𝒾) 
with a short-lived, 10-second TTL local placement cache 
(𝒫ℓℴ𝒸𝒶ℓ). This hybrid approach effectively neutralizes race 
conditions, ensuring that subsequent scheduling requests 
are aware of pending placements before they are persisted 
in the central etcd datastore. 
Furthermore, the performance loss associated with the 
cache locking mechanism is mitigated through a data 
normalization strategy. Rather than storing raw Kubernetes 
API objects, the system converts them into lightweight 
CachedNode and CachedPod data classes upon receipt. 
During this one-time conversion, all computationally 
complex parsing and normalization steps, such as 
converting resource strings (”100m”, “10Gi”) into numeric 
values, and filtering topology labels, are performed. As a 
result, the scoring logic can directly access pre-computed 
fields 
like 
cached_node.cpu_count 
or 
cached_node.topology_labels, eliminating runtime parsing 
overhead and significantly accelerating the scoring loop. 
By converting raw API objects into lightweight data classes 
during the update phase, all computationally expensive 
parsing is performed once and stored in memory. This 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
enables the scoring logic to achieve 𝑂(1) complexity for 
metadata access, representing a significant theoretical 
efficiency gain over the 𝑂(𝑁) complexity and network I/O 
overhead required by a full API query model. 
C. SCORE EXTENDER SERVICE 
The core of the custom scheduling logic resides in an 
external microservice, implemented as a Python Flask 
application, which exposes endpoints adhering to the 
Kubernetes scheduler extender webhook API [35]. This 
service is reachable by the kube-scheduler process and 
handles two types of requests: 
• /filter: This verb is used by the kube-scheduler to pre-
filter nodes. The current implementation performs 
minimal validation, such as ensuring nodes do not 
possess a NoSchedule taint. 
• /prioritize: This verb is responsible for scoring. The 
kube-scheduler sends the pod specification and a list of 
candidate nodes (those that passed the filter phase) to 
this endpoint. The service returns a list of nodes with an 
integer score from 0 to 100. 
The extender service is stateful and integrates two key 
subsystems: the Cluster State Cache and the Intent 
Analyzer. A significant challenge in this design is handling 
the high-velocity burst-like creation of pods, such as during 
a deployment scale-up. The Kubernetes API-driven Cluster 
State Cache may not observe the placement of Pod 1 before 
Pod 2 is already being scheduled. This race condition 
would 
render 
intents 
like 
spread_nodes 
or 
prefer_colocate_same_deployment ineffective during the 
burst. To mitigate this, the service implements a secondary, 
local cache of recent placements with a very short time-to-
live (10 seconds). When the /prioritize endpoint selects a 
node, it immediately writes this decision into the local 
cache. Subsequent scoring requests query an "effective" list 
of pods, a composite of the main Cluster State Cache and 
the recent placements cache, ensuring that affinity logic 
functions 
correctly 
even 
during 
rapid, 
successive 
scheduling events. 
The scoring logic within the /prioritize endpoint is a 
multi-step process. First, the service retrieves the allocation 
hint from the pod’s annotations and passes it to the Intent 
Analyzer. This module returns a structured dictionary of 
detected Intent objects, along with their LLM-derived 
confidence and strength scores. Once the intents are parsed, 
the service iterates through each candidate node, 
calculating a final node score that starts at zero. A base 
score is calculated for each intent (100 divided by the total 
number of intents) to provide an initial weight. The system 
then applies specific logic based on the Intent class: 
• Resource Preferences: For intents like prefer_gpu or 
prefer_memory_gb, the service compares the metadata 
value from the intent (e.g., prefer_gpu_cores: 4.0) 
against the node's corresponding property (e.g., 
cached_node.gpu_count) retrieved from the Cluster 
State Cache. 
• Topology Preferences: For intents like prefer_zones or 
avoid_racks, the service checks the node’s topology 
labels against the list of zones or racks provided in the 
intent’s metadata. 
• Dynamic Affinity: For colocation intents like 
prefer_colocate_same_deployment, the service queries 
the "effective" pod list and counts existing pods from 
the same deployment on the node. 
• Spread Logic: For spread_ intents (e.g., spread_zones, 
spread_nodes), the system builds a histogram of 
existing pods from the "effective" pod list across the 
relevant topology (e.g., {'zone-a': 5, 'zone-b': 2}). A 
least-loaded algorithm is applied, assigning the highest 
score to nodes in the least-populated domains. 
If a node satisfies an intent, the calculated score is added 
to its node score. This score is multiplied by both the intent 
confidence and strength values provided by the Intent 
Analyzer. This weighting ensures that a high-confidence, 
high-strength (e.g., “must have”) intent has a greater impact 
than a low-confidence, low-strength (e.g., “maybe prefer”) 
one. Conversely, “avoid” intents subtract a weighted score. 
Finally, after all nodes are scored, the service normalizes 
the results: the highest-scoring node is deterministically 
assigned a score of 100, and all other nodes are scaled 
between 1 and 99. This deterministic step ensures a single, 
unambiguous node is selected by the kube-scheduler in the 
event of a tie. The scoring functions are detailed in the 
Section IV. 
D. INTENT ANALYZER 
The core technical challenge Intent Analyzer solves is an 
NLP task known as semantic parsing [36]: translating an 
unstructured natural language utterance into a structured, 
machine-readable scheduling policies - in this case: a JSON 
object with intents and metadata. Intent Analyzer key 
functionalities are as follows: 
• Reading and Sanitizing Allocation Hints: The Intent 
Analyzer retrieves a natural language string from the 
allocation_hint annotation on the Pod object, passed via 
the /prioritize REST call. The hint is first processed 
through a sanitization function to strip potentially 
malicious characters and mitigate prompt injection 
risks. 
• LLM-Based Intent Translation: The sanitized hint is 
sent to an LLM endpoint as a part of larger prompt (see 
Listing 1). In the testbed, AWS Bedrock with the 
Amazon Nova Pro model is used by default. The prompt 
instructs the LLM to analyze the hint and return a JSON 
object mapping the user’s request to a predefined list of 
intents along with accompanying metadata. To ensure 
deterministic behavior and repeatable results, the model 
parameters are set to temperature = 0.0 and nucleus 
sampling (top-p) = 1.0. The maximum response length 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
is limited to 512 tokens; however, token encoding 
conventions vary between models, so this limit may be 
interpreted differently depending on the model used. 
• Strength and Confidence Annotation: The LLM is 
prompted to return not only the detected intents but also 
a confidence score (0.0-1.0) and a strength multiplier 
(0.5, 1.0, or 1.5), reflecting the perceived importance of 
each request. For transparency and auditing purposes, 
the LLM also includes a strength explanation field, 
briefly describing the rationale for the assigned strength 
value. 
To improve efficiency, the results of allocation hint 
analysis are cached. Since pods within a single deployment 
frequently share identical allocation hints, analyzing each 
pod individually would be redundant and slow. The Intent 
Analyzer stores the structured JSON output keyed by the 
hint string, ensuring that the expensive LLM call is 
performed only once per unique allocation hint. 
Table II outlines the specific scheduling intents 
recognized by the Intent Analyzer. Each row specifies a 
unique intent, its semantic meaning, and the required 
metadata, including field names, data types, and example 
formats. The description content is incorporated directly 
into the LLM prompt during analysis to guide intent 
extraction. The intents are logically grouped according to 
their scope or type of scheduling preference. This 
hierarchical organization mirrors the operational scope of 
each scheduling rule: 
• Colocation / Proximity: Placement of pods relative to 
others within the same deployment. 
• Topological Constraints: Region-level, zone-level, 
and rack-level intents for preferring, avoiding, or 
distributing pods across these boundaries. 
• Node-level: Target specific servers based on node 
characteristics. 
• Deployment-level: Focus on proximity or separation 
relative to pods from other applications. 
• Resource-based: Define requirements related to 
intrinsic node characteristics, such as CPU, memory, 
GPU/TPU availability, storage type, or network 
features. 
This structure enables the LLM to systematically map 
natural language hints to actionable scheduling policies 
while maintaining clarity, reproducibility, and operational 
relevance. 
Listing 1 presents the comprehensive prompt template 
engineered to direct the AI in its specialized capacity as a 
semantic parser for the Kubernetes scheduler. The prompt 
explicitly establishes an accurate structured data extraction 
task, assigning the LLM the persona of an “expert AI 
assistant”. This role definition aims to prime the model for 
precision and adherence to instructions. Its articulated 
"ONLY goal" is to analyze the unstructured allocation hint 
annotation provided by users and translate it solely based 
on a predefined list of intents into a machine-readable 
JSON format, adhering strictly to the specified output 
format and extraction rules. 
The 
core 
of 
the 
prompt 
is 
the 
“CRITICAL 
INSTRUCTIONS” section. These rules guide the AI’s 
behavior and were developed through testing: 
• Defining the Input Text: The prompt clearly marks 
where the user’s request begins and ends using 
delimiters (---HINT START--- and ---HINT END---). 
This instruction ensures the LLM focuses precisely on 
the user’s text and does not misinterpret the surrounding 
instructions. 
• Matching Requests to Defined Intents: The AI is 
provided with a list of known scheduling requests, i.e., 
Intents. It must match phrases from the user’s hint to 
these predefined intents. The instructions emphasize 
selecting only obvious and clearly stated matches, 
minimizing guesswork or subjective interpretation by 
the AI. 
• Extracting Details Correctly (Metadata): This is a 
vital and carefully refined instruction. When an intent is 
matched, the AI must extract specific details accurately: 
(i) using exact names - the AI must use the exact 
predefined names for details (e.g., prefer_cpu_cores) so 
the scheduler program correctly interprets them; (ii) 
maintaining correct formats - details must adhere to 
specified formats, e.g., numbers as floats (like 16.0), 
lists as JSON arrays (like ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"]); 
(iii) listing all Items - if the user lists multiple items (like 
several regions), the AI is explicitly instructed to list all 
of them exactly as written, without summarizing or 
using wildcards (like us-east-1*). This prevents loss of 
information needed by the Score Extender Service; and 
(iv) applying defaults - if the AI identifies an intent but 
cannot confidently extract a required detail from the 
text, it is instructed to use a default value (1.0 for 
numbers, [] for lists) rather than omitting the field. This 
ensures the output JSON maintains a consistent 
structure. 
• Indicating Confidence: For each intent identified, the 
AI must provide a confidence score (0.0 to 1.0). This 
score quantifies the AI’s certainty about the match, 
allowing the scheduler logic to potentially weigh more 
confident interpretations more heavily. 
• Assessing Importance (Strength): The AI assigns a 
strength score based on specific keywords identified in 
the hint. A simplified three-point scale (0.5 for weak 
words like “prefer”, “maybe”; 1.5 for strong words like 
“must”, “critical”; 1.0 otherwise) is used, as initial tests 
showed nuanced (i.e., float values between 0.0 to 1.0) 
scores were unreliable. If a non-default strength is 
assigned, the AI must provide a brief explanation 
quoting the keyword that justified it. 
• Adhering to JSON Output Format: The prompt 
strictly mandates that the AI output ONLY a single, 
valid JSON object, without any extra conversational 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
text, explanations, or code formatting. This is essential 
so the scheduler program can directly parse the output 
without needing complex pre-processing. 
• Handling Untrusted Input: The user's hint is explicitly 
labeled as untrusted, and the AI is instructed not to 
follow any instructions it might contain. This serves as 
a safeguard, directing the AI to treat the hint purely as 
text for analysis according to the predefined rules, 
rather than as commands to execute. 
Below the main instructions, the prompt template also 
dynamically builds a list of possible intents with 
descriptions and metadata fields. This section provides the 
definitive list (schema) of all valid scheduling requests the 
AI can identify. Including detailed descriptions and 
metadata requirements (see Table II) helps the AI perform 
the matching task accurately. Finally, the prompt also 
includes the JSON output example, reinforcing the required 
format, data types, and overall organization. 
Together, these designed sections and instructions aim to 
guide the LLM effectively, ensuring it reliably transforms 
user requests into the structured data needed for the intent-
based scheduling system. The detailed nature of the prompt 
reflects the iterative refinement process informed by 
empirical evaluation on multiple LLMs. 
 
IV. SCORING MODEL 
The decision-making engine within the Score Extender 
Service employs a deterministic, weighted additive utility 
function to evaluate candidate nodes. Unlike traditional binary 
filtering, this approach allows for nuanced trade-offs between 
conflicting soft preferences. Table III summarizes the symbols 
used in the following equations. 
Formally, let 𝒩 represent the set of candidate nodes 
filtered by the Kubernetes scheduler, and let ℐ represent the 
set of unique scheduling intents extracted by the Intent 
Analyzer. The system calculates a raw score, 𝑆)*+(𝑛), for 
each node 𝑛∈𝒩. The fundamental scoring equation is 
defined as the summation of the weighted utility of all 
identified intents: 
𝑆!"#(𝑛) = & 𝜇(𝑛, 𝑖)
$∈ℐ
 
(1) 
where µ(𝑛, 𝑖) represents the utility function of a specific 
intent 𝑖 applied to node 𝑛. This utility function is derived 
from the base weight of the intent relative to the total number 
of directives, modulated by the LLM's confidence and the 
user's semantic intensity. 
 
A. UTILITY FUNCTION COMPONENTS 
The utility function µ(𝑛, 𝑖) is calculated as follows: 
 
𝜇(𝑛, 𝑖) = 𝛽⋅𝐶$ ⋅𝑊$ ⋅𝜙$(𝑛) 
(2) 
 
The components are defined as: 
• Base Weight (𝛃): To ensure equal initial influence 
among multiple directives, a base weight is calculated 
dynamically as β = 100/|ℐ|. 
• Confidence (𝑪𝒊): A scalar value 𝐶- ∈[0,1], provided by 
the Intent Analyzer, representing the probability that the 
intent was correctly identified. 
• Strength (𝑾𝒊): A multiplier 𝑊- ∈{0.5,1.0,1.5} derived 
from linguistic modifiers, allowing the user's urgency to 
scale the impact of specific rules. 
• Evaluation 
Logic 
(𝛟_𝒊(𝒏)): 
A 
domain-specific 
evaluation function that returns a scalar value based on 
how well node 𝑛 satisfies intent 𝑖. 
 
B. EVALUATION LOGIC CATEGORIES 
The evaluation logic ϕ-(𝑛) varies based on the semantic 
category of the intent: 
 
1. Binary Preference Logic: For resource or topology 
attributes (e.g., prefer_gpu), the function acts as a binary 
indicator: 
 
𝜙'!()(𝑛) = /1
if 𝑛 satisfies condition
0
otherwise
 
(3) 
 
2. Avoidance Penalty Logic: For negative constraints (e.g., 
avoid_zones), the system applies a weighted penalty. To 
enforce avoidance strongly, the prototype applies a 
doubled magnitude subtraction: 
 
𝜙"*+$,(𝑛) = /−2
if 𝑛 matches criteria
0
otherwise
 
(4) 
 
3. Distribution and Spreading Logic: For intents requiring 
high availability (e.g., spread_zones), the system 
calculates a least-loaded score. Let 𝑘. be the count of 
pods belonging to the same deployment in the topology 
domain of node n, and M be the maximum count of such 
pods in any domain. The spreading score is normalized 
as: 
 
𝜙-'!(",(𝑛) = 𝑀−𝑘. + 1
𝑀+ 1
 
(5) 
 
C. NORMALIZATION AND DETERMINISTIC SELECTION 
To ensure compatibility with the Kubernetes scheduler 
extender API, raw scores are normalized to the range 
[0,100]. First, negative scores are clamped to zero. Then, 
scores are scaled relative to the highest raw score observed 
in the current iteration: 
 
𝑆.+!/(𝑛) = maxG0, 𝑆!"#(𝑛)H
max
/∈𝒩G𝑆!"#(𝑚)H × 100 
(6) 
 
To eliminate non-determinism in tie-breaking scenarios, the 
system enforces an only-one-winner-node adjustment. The 
node 𝑛/012 with the highest score (resolving ties 
alphabetically) is assigned a final score of 100, while all 
other nodes are clamped to [1,99]: 
 
𝑆)$."1(𝑛) = K
100
if 𝑛= 𝑛2(-3
minG99, maxG1, 𝑆.+!/(𝑛)HH
otherwise  
(7) 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
TABLE II 
INTENT CLASSES WITH REQUIRED METADATA 
Intent 
(grouped by scope) 
Description 
(used as a part of LLM prompt template) 
Required Metadata 
Colocation 
/ Proximity 
prefer_colocate_same_ 
deployment 
Prefer scheduling this pod on the SAME node as existing pods from the SAME deployment. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
prefer_nearby_nodes_ 
same_deployment 
Prefer scheduling this pod on a node TOPOLOGICALLY CLOSE (same rack > zone > region) to 
existing pods from the SAME deployment. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
Topological Constraints 
prefer_regions 
Prefer scheduling in specific regions. Extract a list of region names. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_regions' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['us-east-1', 'eu-west-1']). 
['prefer_regions'] 
avoid_regions 
Avoid scheduling in specific regions. Extract a list of region names to avoid. 
Metadata field: 'avoid_regions' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['us-east-1', 'eu-west-1']). 
['avoid_regions'] 
spread_regions 
Distribute pods of the same deployment across different REGIONS. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
prefer_zones 
Prefer scheduling in specific availability zones. Extract a list of zone names. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_zones' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['us-east-1a', 'us-east-1b']). 
['prefer_zones'] 
avoid_zones 
Avoid scheduling in specific availability zones. Extract a list of zone names to avoid. 
Metadata field: 'avoid_zones' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['eu-central-1c']). 
['avoid_zones'] 
spread_zones 
Distribute pods of the same deployment across different availability ZONES. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
prefer_racks 
Prefer scheduling in specific server racks. Extract a list of rack names. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_racks' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['rack-a1', 'rack-b2']). 
['prefer_racks'] 
avoid_racks 
Avoid scheduling in specific server racks. Extract a list of rack names to avoid. 
Metadata field: 'avoid_racks' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['rack-c3']). 
['avoid_racks'] 
spread_racks 
Distribute pods of the same deployment across different server RACKS. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
Node-level 
prefer_nodes 
Prefer scheduling on specific nodes (servers/hosts). Extract a list of node names. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_nodes' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['node-101', 'node-102']). 
['prefer_nodes'] 
avoid_nodes 
Avoid scheduling on specific nodes (servers/hosts). Extract a list of node names to avoid. 
Metadata field: 'avoid_nodes' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['node-maint']). 
['avoid_nodes'] 
spread_nodes 
Distribute pods of the same deployment across different NODES (servers/hosts). 
No metadata required. 
[] 
Deployment-
level 
prefer_deployments 
Prefer scheduling near pods from specific other deployments/applications. Extract a list of deployment 
names. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_deployments' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['database', 'cache']). 
['prefer_deployments'] 
avoid_deployments 
Avoid scheduling near pods from specific other deployments/applications. Extract a list of deployment 
names to avoid. 
Metadata field: 'avoid_deployments' (MUST be a JSON list of strings, e.g., ['batch-job']). 
['avoid_deployments'] 
Resource-based 
prefer_memory 
Prefer nodes with a minimum amount of available RAM. Extract the amount in Gigabytes as a float 
number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_memory_gb' (MUST be a float, e.g., 128.0 for 128GB). 
['prefer_memory_gb'] 
prefer_cpu 
Prefer nodes with a minimum number of CPU cores. Extract the number of cores as a float number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_cpu_cores' (MUST be a float, e.g., 16.0 for 16 cores). 
['prefer_cpu_cores'] 
prefer_gpu 
Prefer nodes with GPU hardware (CUDA cores). Extract the minimum number of GPUs required as a 
float number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_gpu_cores' (MUST be a float, e.g., 4.0 for 4 GPUs). 
['prefer_gpu_cores'] 
prefer_tpu 
Prefer nodes with TPU hardware (Tensor Processing Unit). Extract the minimum number of TPU cores 
required as a float number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_tpu_cores' (MUST be a float, e.g., 8.0 for 8 TPU cores). 
['prefer_tpu_cores'] 
prefer_ssd 
Prefer nodes with Solid State Drive (SSD) storage. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
prefer_public_ip 
Prefer nodes that have a public or external IP address. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
prefer_network_speed 
Prefer nodes with a minimum network bandwidth. Extract the speed in Gigabits per second (Gbps) as a 
float number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_network_gbps' (MUST be a float, e.g., 100.0 for 100Gbps). 
['prefer_network_gbps'] 
prefer_network_type 
Prefer nodes with a specific network interface type. Extract the network type name as a string. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_network_type' (MUST be a string, e.g., 'infiniband', 'ena'). 
['prefer_network_type'] 
prefer_ephemeral_ 
storage 
Prefer nodes with a minimum amount of local ephemeral storage. Extract the amount in Gigabytes as a 
float number. 
Metadata field: 'prefer_ephemeral_storage_gb' (MUST be a float, e.g., 500.0 for 500GB). 
['prefer_ephemeral_storage_gb'] 
Utility / 
Testing1 
no_schedule 
Administrative override to prevent all pod placement. Assign strength 1.5. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
no_intent_cache 
Do not cache this allocation hint or its extracted intents. It must be prompted again every time.  
Extract this intent if the user uses keywords like 're-analyze', 'do not cache', 'fresh look', or 'evaluate now'. 
No metadata required. 
[] 
1 Utility intents are used for testing and debugging purposes. 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
D. TOPOLOGICAL PROXIMITY QUANTIFICATION 
For 
intents 
requiring 
topological 
affinity 
(e.g., 
prefer_nearby_nodes_same_deployment), 
the 
system 
employs a hierarchical proximity function. This function 
quantifies the "gravitational pull" of existing workloads on a 
candidate node by aggregating pod counts across three 
topological boundaries: Rack, Zone, and Region. 
Let 𝒯= {𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘, 𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑒, 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛} be the set of topological 
domains. We define 𝑘.,2 as the count of existing pods 
belonging to the target deployment within the specific 
domain 𝑡 of node 𝑛. To prioritize tighter locality, the system 
assigns a decaying weight vector ω to the domains: 
 
𝜔= {𝜔!"45: 2.0,  𝜔6+.(: 0.5,  𝜔!(7$+.: 0.2} 
(8) 
 
The raw proximity score 𝑃(𝑛) is calculated as the dot 
product of the weight vector and the topology counts: 
 
𝑃(𝑛) = 𝜔!"45 ⋅𝑘.,!"45 + 𝜔6+.( ⋅𝑘.,6+.( + 𝜔!(7$+. ⋅𝑘.,!(7$+. 
(9) 
 
To prevent unbounded growth of this score in large clusters, 
𝑃(𝑛) is normalized against the maximum observed 
proximity score across all candidate nodes in the current 
scheduling cycle. The final evaluation logic ϕ4)56(𝑛) is 
defined as: 
𝜙'!+9(𝑛) =
𝑃(𝑛)
max
/∈𝒩G𝑃(𝑚)H 
(10) 
 
This hierarchical weighting ensures that nodes sharing a rack 
with existing pods are mathematically favored over those 
sharing a zone or region, aligning the scheduler's decisions 
with physical network topology constraints. 
 
E. TEMPORAL STATE CONSISTENCY 
To mitigate the latency inherent in asynchronous Kubernetes 
API updates which can lead to race conditions during high-
velocity "burst" scheduling, the system implements a hybrid 
state model. 
Let 𝒫𝒶𝓅𝒾 represent the set of confirmed pods retrieved from 
the Kubernetes API (via the Cluster State Cache), and let 
𝒫ℓℴ𝒸𝒶ℓ represent the set of tentative scheduling decisions 
recorded in the extender's local short-term memory. The 
local set is defined by a Time-To-Live (TTL) constraint τ, 
set to 10 seconds: 
 
𝒫ℓℴ𝒸𝒶ℓ= {𝑝∈𝒫𝒹ℯ𝒸𝒾𝓈𝒾ℴ𝓃𝓈∣G𝑡.+# −𝑡-4C(,D1(,(𝑝)H < 𝜏} 
(11) 
 
The Effective Pod Set, 𝒫ℯ𝒻𝒻, used for all affinity and anti-
affinity calculations (such as the count 𝑘. in Eq. 5 and Eq. 
9), is the union of these two sets, ensuring that subsequent 
scheduling requests within a burst are aware of pending 
placements before they are persisted in etcd: 
 
𝒫ℯ𝒻𝒻= 𝒫𝒶𝓅𝒾∪𝒫ℓℴ𝒸𝒶ℓ 
(12) 
 
This consistency model ensures that for any dynamic scoring 
function 𝑓(𝑛, 𝒫), the evaluation is performed against the 
most current state approximation: 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑛) = 𝑓T𝑛, 𝒫ℯ𝒻𝒻U. 
 
F. MULTI-OBJECTIVE SCALARIZATION 
The scheduling problem is modeled as a Multi-Objective 
Optimization (MOO) task, where the goal is to identify a 
node n that maximizes a vector of objective functions 
Φ(𝑛) = [𝜙7(𝑛), 𝜙8(𝑛), … , 𝜙9(𝑛)]. 
To resolve conflicts between objectives (e.g., spread vs. 
affinity) in real-time, the system employs a linear 
scalarization strategy. We define a dynamic weight vector 𝑾 
where each element 𝑤- is the product of the base weight, 
confidence, and strength: 
 
𝑤$ = 𝛽⋅𝐶$ ⋅𝑊$ 
(13) 
 
The scalarized global objective function 𝐹(𝑛), which 
corresponds to the code's implementation of the additive 
scoring loop, is the dot product of the weight and objective 
vectors: 
𝐹(𝑛) = 𝑾⋅Φ(𝑛) = & 𝑤$𝜙$(𝑛)
|ℐ|
$HI
 
(14) 
 
Finally, to ensure strict determinism guaranteeing that the 
scheduler makes identical decisions for identical state inputs 
regardless of asynchronous race conditions, the system 
imposes a Lexicographical Total Ordering on the set of 
optimal candidates. Let 𝒩ℴ𝓅𝓉 be the set of nodes achieving 
the maximum score. 
The selected node 𝑛∗ is defined mathematically as the 
minimum element under lexicographical order (≺<06) among 
the highest-scoring nodes: 
 
𝑛∗= min
≺!"#{ 𝑛∈𝒩∣𝑆)$."1(𝑛) = max
/∈𝒩𝑆)$."1 (𝑚)} 
 
(15) 
This formalization proves that the system avoids random tie-
breaking, a critical property for reproducibility in cluster 
orchestration. 
TABLE III 
FORMULA SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Definition 
𝒩 
The set of candidate nodes filtered by the Kubernetes scheduler. 
ℐ 
The set of scheduling intents extracted from the allocation hint. 
𝜇(𝑛, 𝑖) 
The utility function for a specific intent 𝑖 on node 𝑛. 
𝐶! 
Confidence score [0,1] provided by the LLM for intent 𝑖. 
𝑊! 
Strength multiplier {0.5, 1.0, 1.5} derived from linguistic modifiers. 
𝛽 
Base weight calculated as 𝛽= 100/|ℐ|. 
𝑘" 
Count of relevant pods (same deployment) currently on node 𝑛. 
𝒫ℯ𝒻𝒻 
The effective set of pods including API state and local cache. 
𝑃%&! 
The confirmed API state 
𝑃'()%' 
The local placement cache (TTL=10s) 
𝑆"(*+ 
The normalized score scaled to [0,100] relative to the best node. 
Φ(𝑛) 
The vector of all evaluation logic results for node 𝑛. 
≺',- 
Lexicographical order (alphabetical sort) used for tie-breaking. 
 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
V. SYSTEM EVALUATION  
To validate the efficacy and performance of the proposed 
semantic, intent-driven scheduling paradigm, a series of 
quantitative experiments were conducted using the 
prototype testbed. The evaluation focuses on two critical 
aspects of the system: firstly, on the accuracy with which 
the Intent Analyzer translates natural language allocation 
hint annotations into structured, actionable intents and their 
associated metadata; and secondly, on the quality and 
efficiency of the resulting pod placements compared to the 
default Kubernetes scheduler configured with traditional 
affinity and anti-affinity rules, i.e., using standard 
directives 
like 
nodeSelector, 
podAffinity, 
and 
podAntiAffinity to achieve a similar outcome. These 
experiments aim to provide empirical evidence supporting 
the hypothesis that an LLM-based approach can effectively 
bridge the gap between high-level user requirements and 
low-level scheduling decisions, while also identifying the 
performance characteristics and limitations of the prototype 
implementation. 
A. INTENT RECOGNITION ACCURACY 
The first experiment tests the core of the semantic claim, 
i.e., how accurately does the LLM translate natural 
language into structured intents? The hypothesis is as 
follows: the LLM-based Intent Analyzer can accurately 
and consistently parse unstructured allocation hint text 
into the correct, structured Intent objects and their 
associated metadata. 
To validate the semantic parsing performance of the 
Intent Analyzer, a benchmark ground-truth evaluation 
dataset was systematically constructed. The dataset v1, 
used to evaluate the LLM, can be found on the Model Hub 
[37] (file: schedule-intent-evaluation-v1.json). This dataset 
is foundational to this experiment, as it provides the means 
to quantify the accuracy, precision, and recall of the 
system’s core function: translating unstructured, natural-
language of allocation hint text into structured, machine-
readable JSON objects. 
The 314-prompt evaluation dataset was created using a 
structured four-category methodology. This approach 
ensures comprehensive test coverage across all 25 Intent 
types, while also testing the model’s robustness against 
complex, nuanced, and invalid inputs. Each of the prompts 
is paired with a manually authored JSON object 
representing the expected ground truth. The dataset is 
segmented into four distinct categories, each designed to 
test a specific aspect of the analyzer’s performance: 
• Categorical & Paraphrasing: Tests in this category 
establish baseline accuracy for all 25 Intent types. For 
each individual intent, multiple prompts were authored 
using different paraphrasing and natural language 
variations. This component tests the model’s semantic 
equivalence detection (e.g., recognizing that “needs a 
GPU”, “I want an NVIDIA card”, and “this is a CUDA 
job” all map to the prefer_gpu intent). 
• Combinatorial (Complex): This category assesses the 
LLM’s ability to parse complex prompts containing 
multiple, distinct intents. Prompts were authored to 
combine two or more directives, often mixing resource 
requirements with topology constraints (e.g., “High-
memory pod (64GB), please spread across zones”). This 
evaluates the model’s parsing completeness and its 
ability to handle non-trivial, realistic scheduling 
requests. 
• Strength & Nuance: Those tests focus on the model’s 
interpretation of qualitative language. Prompts were 
authored to include specific qualifier words indicative 
of scheduling priority (e.g., “must run”, “critical”, 
“strongly prefer” vs. “if possible”, “maybe”, “nice to 
have”). This allows for a quantitative evaluation of the 
generated strength and confidence scores, which are 
critical for effective, weighted scheduling decisions. 
• Negative & Irrelevant (Noise): This category 
measures the model’s specificity and its resilience to 
false positives. It consists of prompts containing no 
valid scheduling intents, including empty strings, 
irrelevant technical metadata (“pod image: nginx”), 
ambiguous statements (“this is a test pod”), or random 
gibberish. This validates the model’s ability to correctly 
identify and reject non-actionable input. 
The resulting 314-prompt evaluation dataset provides a 
balanced mix of simple coverage, complex combinations, 
and realistic noise, enabling a robust evaluation of the 
system’s precision, recall, and overall effectiveness. The 
test dataset and evaluation results were also utilized to 
incrementally refine the prompt template for LLM models, 
intent descriptions, and to select the best performing model. 
Notable lessons learned are summarized below: 
• Iterative refinement is an essential approach, and the 
initial prompt - model combination required several 
iterations to achieve satisfactory results. Systematic 
evaluation against a ground-truth dataset - followed by 
failure analysis and targeted prompt adjustments - 
proved crucial for improving performance. Multiple 
iterations were necessary to reach the final results. 
• The 
research 
initially 
experimented 
with 
the 
amazon.nova-micro-v1:0 model (128K token context 
window), but this model proved too small to capture the 
nuances required for detailed metadata extraction and 
strength interpretation. Subsequently, larger models 
such as Amazon Nova Lite / Pro (300K token context 
window), Amazon Nova Premium (1M token context 
window) were employed - the Pro model providing an 
effective balance between model size and cost. Large 
models especially excel at metadata identification and 
subsequent extraction into correct format. 
• The most significant improvements came from making 
the prompt instructions highly specific and rule-based, 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
i.e., by providing explicit guidance within the prompt. 
Adding explicit rules for data types (e.g., float, JSON 
list), precise naming conventions, handling of defaults, 
and especially negative constraints (e.g., “DO NOT 
summarize 
lists”, 
“DO 
NOT 
use 
wildcards”) 
dramatically improved metadata accuracy. However, 
overly strict prompt instructions (e.g., requiring perfect 
metadata extraction or omitting intent) led to an 
increase in missed metadata values when the model was 
uncertain. Modifying the prompt to allow reasonable 
defaults (e.g., 1.0 for counts, [] for lists) when 
extraction 
failed 
improved 
robustness 
without 
significantly compromising accuracy. 
• Asking the model for nuanced strength interpretation, 
i.e., float values within ranges (e.g., 0.5-2.0), performed 
poorly. Simplifying the scale to three distinct values 
(0.5, 1.0, 1.5) and explicitly linking them to specific 
keywords in the prompt instructions led to much higher 
accuracy. 
• Defining intent descriptions to serve as in-prompt 
guidance proved highly beneficial. Adding clear 
statements such as “MUST be a JSON list of strings” or 
“MUST be a float” directly within the descriptions 
reinforced the expected output format for each intent’s 
metadata. Including concrete examples within these 
descriptions (e.g., ['us-east-1a', 'us-east-1b'], 128.0 for 
128 GB) further clarified the target format and 
improved consistency across outputs. 
The evaluation systematically compared the performance 
of eleven LLMs in parsing natural language scheduling 
hints into structured intents and metadata. The selection of 
the 11 LLMs for evaluation was aimed at a robust 
comparison across provider diversity, model size, cost, and 
availability on the AWS Bedrock platform. The models 
were chosen from five different providers (Amazon, 
Anthropic, Meta, AI21, Mistral) to assess varying 
architectures. The inclusion of different model sizes within 
families (e.g., Nova Micro, Lite, Pro, Premier; Claude 3 
Haiku, Sonnet) allowed for analysis of capability scaling, 
ultimately finding Nova Pro offered a good balance. 
Cost-effectiveness was also considered, with the cheaper 
Nova models initially used for prompt refinement. Finally, 
practical availability constraints influenced the selection, 
excluding Claude 3 Opus (enterprise-only access) and 
larger Llama 3 models (EU restrictions). This multi-faceted 
approach ensured a comprehensive assessment of LLM 
performance for the specific task of semantic intent 
parsing. All models were evaluated against the 314-item 
ground-truth evaluation dataset using the final, highly 
refined prompt and intent descriptions to ensure a fair 
comparison of their capabilities. 
 
LISTING 1 
PROMPT TEMPLATE  
You are an expert AI assistant performing a highly accurate **structured data extraction** task for a Kubernetes scheduler. 
Your **ONLY** goal is to analyze the user-provided text hint below and extract scheduling preferences based *solely* on the defined list of intents. Adhere strictly to the specified JSON output 
format and extraction rules. 
 
**CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS:** 
1.  **Analyze the User Hint:** Carefully read the untrusted user hint provided between the '--- HINT START ---' and '--- HINT END ---' markers. 
2.  **Multilingual Semantic Mapping:** Analyze the hint regardless of the input language. You MUST map the semantic intent of the foreign phrases directly to the English-language intent keys defined 
    below (e.g., 'memoria' maps to prefer_memory, 'núcleos' or 'kerne' maps to prefer_cpu). 
3.  **Identify Intents:** Match phrases in the hint to the intents defined in the '--- LIST OF POSSIBLE INTENTS ---' section. Only include intents that are clearly and unambiguously expressed. 
4.  **Extract Metadata (VERY IMPORTANT):** For each identified intent, extract ALL required metadata fields specified in its description. 
    - **Naming:** Use the *exact* metadata field names (e.g., `prefer_regions`, `prefer_cpu_cores`, `prefer_tpu_cores`). 
    - **Types:** Ensure values match the expected type (list of strings, float). 
        - **Numbers:** Extract numerical values precisely as floats (e.g., `128.0` for 128GB, `16.0` for 16 cores, `4.0` for 4 GPUs/TPUs). Extract the number *directly associated* with the 
          preference. 
        - **Lists:** If a list of strings is expected (regions, zones, nodes, deployments), provide a JSON list `["item1", "item2"]`. 
          **Crucially: List ALL specific items mentioned by the user individually.** 
            - **DO NOT summarize list items.** (e.g., If user says "avoid Asia regions like ap-south-1 and ap-northeast-1", output `["ap-south-1", "ap-northeast-1"]`, NOT `["asia-*"]` or `["Asia"]`). 
            - **DO NOT use wildcards.** (e.g., If user says "us-east-1a and us-east-1b", output `["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"]`, NOT `["us-east-1*"]`). 
            - **List ALL mentioned items.** (e.g., If user says "prefer us-east-1, us-west-2, eu-central-1", output `["us-east-1", "us-west-2", "eu-central-1"]`). 
    - **Completeness & Defaults:** If an intent requires metadata, you **MUST** extract the corresponding value. If you identify the intent but cannot confidently extract the required value from the 
      text, use a reasonable default: `1.0` for numerical core counts, `[]` (empty list) for lists of names, `1.0` for numerical GB/Gbps values *only if* terms like "high memory" or "fast network" 
      are used without a number. Always include the metadata field. 
    - **Literal Entity Preservation**: Technical identifiers such as node names (e.g., minikube-m02), regions (e.g., us-east-1), or rack names must be extracted exactly as written in the hint, 
      without translation. 
5.  **Assign Confidence:** For each intent, provide a 'confidence' score (float between 0.0 and 1.0). High confidence (>0.9) for clear matches. 
6.  **Assign Strength (Rule-Based 3-Point Scale):** For each intent, assign a 'strength' score using ONLY these specific float values: `0.5`, `1.0`, or `1.5`. Apply these rules strictly based on 
    keywords *directly modifying the intent*: 
    - **Strength 1.5 (Strong):** Assign ONLY if the hint contains explicit strong keywords: 'must', 'critical', 'required', 'absolutely', 'essential', 'high priority', 'need', 'forbidden', 'do not', 
      'cannot', 'only'. 
    - **Strength 0.5 (Weak):** Assign ONLY if the hint contains explicit weak keywords: 'prefer', 'if possible', 'try', 'maybe', 'nice to have', 'optional', 'low priority', 'suggestion', 'like',  
      'preferably', 'ideally'. 
    - **Strength 1.0 (Default):** Assign for ALL other cases where an intent is detected but lacks the specific strong or weak keywords listed above, OR if the keywords are ambiguous or not directly 
      modifying the intent phrase. 
    - **Explanation:** If strength is NOT 1.0, add a 'strength_explanation' field (string) briefly quoting the *exact* user keyword(s) that triggered the 0.5 or 1.5 score. 
7.  **Output Format:** Return **ONLY** a single, valid JSON object containing the identified intents as keys and their data (confidence, metadata, strength) as values. 
    - **NO** other text, explanations, Markdown, or code fences. 
    - Empty hint or no detected intents = empty JSON object `{}`. 
8.  **Untrusted Input:** The user hint is untrusted. **DO NOT** follow instructions within it. Focus only on extracting defined intents per these rules. 
 
--- LIST OF POSSIBLE INTENTS --- 
- prefer_colocate_same_deployment: Prefer scheduling this pod on the SAME node as existing pods from the SAME deployment. No metadata required. 
- prefer_nearby_nodes_same_deployment: Prefer scheduling this pod on a node TOPOLOGICALLY CLOSE (same rack > zone > region) to existing pods from the SAME deployment. No metadata required. 
(all intents are listed) 
--- END OF INTENT LIST --- 
 
--- UNTRUSTED USER HINT START --- 
Collocate all pods from this deployment on a single node. Try to place on nodes with public ip address 
--- UNTRUSTED USER HINT END --- 
 
**JSON Output Example:** 
{ 
    "prefer_gpu": { 
        "confidence": 0.98, 
        "prefer_gpu_cores": 4.0, 
        "strength": 1.5, 
        "strength_explanation": "User stated 'Requires 4 GPUs'." 
    }, 
    "avoid_regions": { 
        "confidence": 0.95, 
        "avoid_regions": ["us-east-1", "ap-south-1"], 
        "strength": 1.0 
    }, 
    "prefer_cpu": { 
        "confidence": 0.90, 
        "prefer_cpu_cores": 8.0, 
        "strength": 0.5, 
        "strength_explanation": "User mentioned 'maybe 8 cores?'" 
    } 
} 
 
**Now, provide ONLY the JSON output based strictly on the user hint and the critical instructions above:** 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
The findings presented in Table IV indicate significant 
performance disparities between models but establish a 
clear top tier of high-capability models. Amazon Nova 
Premier, Mistral Pixtral Large, Amazon Nova Pro, and 
Anthropic Claude 3 Sonnet all demonstrated exceptional 
performance, 
particularly 
in 
intent 
classification. 
Conversely, smaller or less-optimized models like Amazon 
Nova Micro, Claude 3 Haiku, Mistral 7B, and especially 
AI21 Jamba Mini and the Llama 3 (3B) variant, showed 
significant deficiencies, particularly in intent detection 
recall. 
The original intention of using Amazon Nova models in 
the early research was to refine the prompt template and 
intent descriptions and to determine the required model size 
while saving on cost, as Nova models are substantially 
cheaper per token. However, during the research, it was 
found that Amazon Nova models could stand on their own. 
As shown in Table IV, the performance of models like 
Amazon Nova Pro and Amazon Nova Premier was 
demonstrated to be comparable to other top-tier models, 
such as Anthropic Claude 3 Sonnet and Mistral Pixtral 
Large. 
Additionally, to establish a non-AI baseline, a Regular 
Expressions (Regex) Engine was implemented with a set of 
hardcoded sentence and keywords matching expressions, 
and evaluated against the same dataset. As shown in Table 
IV, the Regex Engine offers virtually instantaneous 
performance, with average and P95 latencies under a 
millisecond. Nevertheless, its ability to accurately parse the 
semantic nuances of the natural language hints proved 
significantly inferior to the top-tier LLMs. The Regex 
Engine achieved a Subset Accuracy of only 29.62%, 
indicating it correctly identified the full set of intents in less 
than a third of cases, compared to over 95% for models like 
Nova Premier and Mistral Pixtral Large. Its Macro F1-score 
(0.38) and Recall (0.30) were drastically lower than the best 
LLMs (0.98 and 0.98, respectively), highlighted by an 
extremely high number of False Negatives (240 missed 
intents). While Metadata Value Accuracy was somewhat 
better (78.67%), it still lagged behind the top LLMs and 
struggled 
significantly 
with 
list 
extraction 
(e.g., 
avoid_zones 0% accuracy). This demonstrates that while 
regular expressions-based logic is very fast, it is too brittle 
and lacks the semantic understanding required to reliably 
interpret the varied phrasing, complex combinations, 
strength indicators, and paraphrasing inherent in natural 
language scheduling requests, justifying the use of more 
sophisticated LLMs despite their higher latency. 
Regarding intent classification, the ability to identify the 
correct set of user directives, the top-tier models were 
outstanding. Amazon Nova Premier achieved the highest 
Subset Accuracy at 97.45%, closely followed by Mistral 
Pixtral Large (95.86%), Amazon Nova Pro (93.63%), and 
Anthropic Claude 3 Sonnet (93.63%). 
These models all achieved Macro F1-scores of 0.95 or 
higher, demonstrating near-perfect precision and recall 
with minimal errors (Aggregated False Positives 10-17, 
False Negatives 9-18). In stark contrast, smaller models 
like Nova Micro, Claude 3 Haiku, and Mistral 7B showed 
significant deficiencies, with Subset Accuracies between 
68-78% and much higher False Negative counts (64-103). 
The Llama 3 (3B) and Jamba Mini models performed very 
poorly, failing to classify intents correctly in the vast 
majority of cases. 
In metadata value extraction, which assesses the accuracy 
of parsing quantities and entities, performance was strong 
among the top models. Claude 3 Sonnet achieved the 
highest accuracy at 95.22%, closely followed by Nova 
Micro (94.57%), Nova Pro (94.40%), and Mistral Pixtral 
Large (93.75%). This indicates that when models (even 
smaller ones like Micro) correctly identify an intent, the 
refined prompt is very effective at guiding data extraction. 
Notably, all high-performing models achieved perfect or 
near-perfect 
Metadata 
Completeness, 
successfully 
providing all required fields for the intents they detected. 
Still persistent minor weaknesses were observed across all 
models, particularly in accurately extracting complex lists 
without simplification (e.g., substituting specific regions 
with generic terms like 'Asia' or 'Europe') and in correctly 
applying default numerical values (often defaulting to 1.0) 
for prefer_network_speed and prefer_ephemeral_storage 
when only qualitative terms were used. 
The system's multilingual robustness was validated using 
Spanish (47 hints) and German (62 hints), yielding 
accuracies of 93.62% and 90.32%, respectively, leveraging 
the native capabilities of Amazon Nova Pro. The evaluation 
datasets are available in [37] (files: schedule-intent-
evaluation-v1es.json 
and 
schedule-intent-evaluation-
v1ge.json). 
B. SCHEDULING EFFICIENCY AND QUALITY  
With optimized prompt and selected model Amazon Nova 
Pro (pro-v1:0), the second experiment focused on 
evaluating the quality of placements, i.e., how the created 
solution compares with the default Kubernetes scheduler? 
The hypothesis was formulated as follows: the intent-
driven 
Score 
Extender 
Service-based 
scheduler 
produces pod placements that are quantifiably superior 
in fulfilling user intent compared to the default 
scheduler. 
In the Minikube testbed, the control-plane node runs 
within the kube-system namespace, and all core Kubernetes 
components, including the kube-apiserver, kube-scheduler, 
etcd, and kube-controller-manager, are deployed as 
individual pods (Figure 4). This design provides several 
practical advantages for testing and debugging. Since each 
system component is containerized and placed within 
unique namespaces, it is straightforward to list and inspect 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
errors, monitor resource usage, and collect detailed 
scheduling logs.  
Administrators can access component-specific logs via 
standard Kubernetes tools such as kubectl logs, enabling 
fine-grained visibility into the scheduler’s decision-making 
process and making it easier to trace the impact of custom 
scheduler extenders, intent analysis, and topology-aware 
placement policies. This setup provides a fully observable 
and debuggable control-plane environment without 
affecting the worker nodes running user workloads. In 
addition, 
it 
proved 
particularly 
convenient 
for 
implementing low-level modifications required by this 
investigation, as well as for tracking the outcome, i.e., the 
resulting allocations for further evaluation. 
Notably, matching the labels, i.e., the metadata.labels and 
selector.matchLabels fields (as specified in Table V) 
ensures the Deployment controller can correctly identify, 
count, and manage the Pods it is responsible for, as labels 
are the link between the controller and the objects it 
controls. 
Table V captures both the baseline Kubernetes manifests 
and manifests with allocation hints. The experiment 
utilized six distinct scenarios comparing the prototype's 
decisions against baseline Kubernetes configurations. The 
results for these scenarios are detailed in Table V and 
summarized below. The relevant configuration sections in 
the deployment manifests were additionally bolded. 
• Scenario A - Topology Spreading: This test evaluated 
a high-availability policy using the hint “spread these 
pods evenly across all available zones for high 
availability”. Both the baseline scheduler (using 
topologySpreadConstraints) and the intent-driven 
scheduler achieved a perfect 3:3 split of the six replicas 
across the two simulated zones, successfully fulfilling 
the objective. 
• Scenario B - Resource Affinity: This scenario tested 
resource preferences with a “critical ML training job, it 
must run on nodes with GPUs” hint. Both the baseline 
(using nodeAffinity) and the intent-driven scheduler 
successfully placed all 6 out of 6 pods (100%) on the 
minikube-m02 node, which was labeled as having a 
GPU. This demonstrated that the prototype correctly 
interpreted the “must run” hint as a strong preference 
and that its scoring logic functioned as intended. 
• Scenario C - Complex Co-location and Anti-Affinity: 
This scenario evaluated expressiveness with a mixed 
intent: “prefer to be in the same region as the 'database' 
and 'cache' deployments, but avoid being on the same 
node as the 'logging-agent' pods”. The baseline 
scheduler, 
using 
complex 
podAffinity 
and 
podAntiAffinity rules, successfully placed all 6 pods 
correctly. It avoided the minikube-m02 node (running 
the logging-agent) and distributed the pods across 
minikube-m03, m06, m07, m08, and m09. The intent-
driven scheduler also placed all 6 pods correctly, 
successfully avoiding minikube-m02. Furthermore, it 
fulfilled both objectives by placing all pods on 
minikube-m03, satisfying the anti-affinity rule while 
also adhering to the preference to be near the 'cache' 
deployment. 
• Scenario D - Rapid Burst Colocation: This test 
validated the recent placements cache’s effectiveness 
during a high-velocity creation of 20 replicas with the 
hint “Collocate all pods from this deployment on a 
single node”. Both the baseline (using a hard 
podAffinity rule) and the intent-based scheduler 
successfully achieved the ideal outcome, placing all 20 
pods onto a single distinct node. 
• Scenario E - Quantitative Resource Preference: This 
scenario tested the full pipeline: parsing quantitative 
metadata from the hint “at least 100 Gbps network 
speed” 
and 
executing 
the 
resulting 
placement 
preference. The baseline scheduler, configured with an 
equivalent soft nodeAffinity preference, placed only 1 of 
6 pods (16.7%) on the correct high-speed node. This 
failure occurred because the default Kubernetes 
scheduler's other plugins, such as those for topology 
spreading, outweighed the soft preference. In contrast, 
the intent-driven scheduler successfully parsed the 
numerical requirement and placed all 6 of 6 pods 
(100%) on the correct node labeled with 100 Gbps 
network speed. This result validates the system’s ability 
to 
interpret 
specific 
numerical 
metadata 
and 
demonstrates that its high extender weight effectively 
prioritizes the user’s intent over other default scoring 
logic. 
• Scenario F - Conflicting Intent Resolution: This test 
evaluated the system’s behavior when given logically 
contradictory hints (“collocate all pods on a single 
node” and “you must also spread these pods across all 
zones”). 
As 
expected, 
the 
baseline 
scheduler, 
configured 
with 
contradictory 
hard 
constraints 
(podAffinity and topologySpreadConstraints), failed to 
schedule the pod, which remained in a Pending state. 
The intent-driven scheduler, however, processed the 
contradictory soft preferences. Its additive scoring logic 
resolved the conflict to find a best-fit solution, allowing 
the pod to be scheduled. This outcome highlights the 
prototype’s 
ability 
to 
resolve 
conflicting 
soft 
preferences, which is a known behavior of the additive 
scoring model. 
The strength of this experimental design lies in their 
strategic coverage. The set of six scenarios effectively 
validates the prototype from multiple critical perspectives: 
• Core Effectiveness: Scenarios A, B, and E test the 
scheduler’s primary function, i.e., correctly placing 
pods based on common topology and resource 
requirements. Scenario E, in particular, validates the 
full pipeline from quantitative metadata parsing to 
placement.
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
TABLE IV 
COMPARISON OF LLM OUTPUTS AND EVALUATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metric 
Model 
(the context window size) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes 
Regex Engine 
(non-AI baseline) 
Amazon Nova Micro (micro-v1:0) 
(128K Tokens) 
Amazon Nova Lite (lite-v1:0) 
(300K Tokens) 
Amazon Nova Pro (pro-v1:0) 
(300K Tokens) 
Amazon Nova Premier (premier-v1:0)1 
(1M Tokens) 
Claude 3 Sonnet (20240229-v1:0)2 
(200K Tokens) 
Claude 3 Haiku (20240307-v1:0) 
(200K Tokens) 
Meta Llama 3 (3-2-3b-instruct-v1:0)3 
(128K Tokens) 
AI21 Jamba Mini (1-5-mini-v1:0)  
(256K Tokens) 
AI21 Jamba Large (1-5-large-v1:0)  
(256K Tokens) 
Mistral Pixtral Large (2502-v1:0) 
(32K Tokens) 
Mixtral Instruct (7b-instruct-v0:2) 
(32K Tokens) 
Intent Classification 
(Detecting which intents are present) 
Subset 
Accuracy 
29.62% 
78.03% 
92.04% 
93.63% 
97.45% 
93.63% 
75.80% 
22.61% 
18.79% 
90.45% 
95.86% 
68.79% 
% of hints with perfect intent 
set match. 
Macro Avg. F1-
Score 
0.38 
0.84 
0.93 
0.95 
0.98 
0.96 
0.85 
0.30 
0.26 
0.93 
0.97 
0.75 
Average F1 across all intents 
(balanced precision/recall). 
Macro Avg. 
Precision 
0.64 
0.91 
0.94 
0.95 
0.98 
0.96 
0.91 
0.58 
0.80 
0.94 
0.97 
0.88 
Average precision across all 
intents. 
Macro Avg. 
Recall 
0.30 
0.82 
0.94 
0.95 
0.98 
0.97 
0.82 
0.34 
0.16 
0.94 
0.97 
0.69 
Average recall across all 
intents. 
Aggregated 
True Positives 
116 
292 
337 
339 
351 
345 
291 
150 
70 
338 
346 
253 
Correctly detected intents 
total. 
Aggregated 
False Positives 
10 
35 
23 
17 
12 
11 
26 
414 
4 
18 
10 
40 
Incorrectly detected intents 
total. 
Aggregated 
False Negatives 
240 
64 
20 
18 
9 
11 
65 
206 
286 
18 
10 
103 
Missed intents total. 
Metadata 
Validation 
(Extracting values 
like numbers, lists) 
Metadata 
Accuracy 
78.67% 
94.57% 
89.60% 
94.40% 
91.89% 
95.22% 
93.36% 
66.91% 
84.21% 
91.53% 
93.75% 
84.02% 
% of correctly extracted 
metadata fields. 
Strength Expl. 
Accuracy 
44.83% 
43.49% 
35.91% 
30.38% 
25.07% 
70.14% 
68.04% 
62.00% 
28.57% 
68.34% 
58.09% 
20.16% 
% of non-default strength 
scores with explanation. 
Correct 
Metadata Fields 
59 / 
75 
209 / 
221 
224 / 
250 
236 / 
250 
238 / 
259 
239 / 
251 
197 / 
211 
91 / 
136 
48 / 
57 
227 / 
248 
240 / 
256 
163 / 
194 
Count of correct fields vs. 
total expected fields. 
Strength and 
Confidence 
(Interpretation) 
Overall 
Strength 
Accuracy 
73.28% 
52.40% 
67.95% 
67.85% 
71.79% 
64.64% 
63.92% 
41.33% 
62.86% 
55.92% 
71.79% 
43.48% 
% of correctly assigned 
strength scores (0.5, 1.0 or 
1.5). 
Overall 
Confidence 
MAE 
0.0444 
0.0528 
0.0498 
0.0480 
0.0412 
0.0761 
0.0363 
0.0846 
0.0329 
0.0761 
0.0522 
0.0497 
Mean Absolute Error vs. 
ground truth (confidence).  
Latency (seconds) 
(Response time) 
Avg. Response 
Time 
0.0000s 
0.4475s 
0.5802s 
0.7931s 
1.0847s 
2.0196s 
1.1668s 
1.8046s 
1.4853s 
2.0582s 
2.8104s 
0.9323s 
Average request time. 
Max Response 
Time 
0.0014s 
1.4120s 
2.1121s 
2.0866s 
2.5670s 
6.8001s 
3.0732s 
7.6656s 
5.5956s 
6.3754s 
6.8237s 
2.8802s 
Maximum (worst-case) 
latency. 
P95 Response 
Time 
0.0001s 
0.6942s 
0.8732s 
1.2442s 
1.8416s 
2.9403s 
1.9125s 
2.7433s 
3.1769s 
3.6644s 
5.3434s 
1.7795s 
Tail latency, the slowest 5% 
of requests. 
1 Amazon Nova Premier does not support invocation with on-demand throughput; instead, the cross-region inference profile us.amazon.nova-premier-v1:0 is used. 
2 At the time of writing, Claude 3 Opus was available on AWS Bedrock only to enterprise customers due to high demand. Thus, the research uses Sonnet and Haiku models. 
3 At the time of evaluation, larger Llama 3 models, such as the 11B and 90B variants, were not available on the AWS Bedrock platform within the European Union [45] 
regions due to concerns related to data privacy regulations, including the GDPR and the EU AI Act. Consequently, this research employs the smaller 3B model instead. 
• Expressiveness Claim: Scenario C directly supports 
the paper’s main hypothesis by testing a complex, 
mixed-intent request (affinity and anti-affinity) that is 
notoriously cumbersome to express using traditional 
Kubernetes rules. 
• Technical Robustness: Scenario D is a crucial stress 
test. It validates a specific architectural component (the 
recent placements cache) that was explicitly designed to 
handle a real-world performance challenge (burst 
scaling), which is a non-obvious but critical detail. 
• System Limitations: Scenario F demonstrates the 
system’s boundaries. By explicitly testing a known 
limitation (the additive scorer’s handling of conflicting 
intents), the evaluation moves beyond a simple proof-
of-concept and provides a rigorous assessment of the 
prototype’s current capabilities. 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
This combination of scenarios provides the necessary 
evidence to validate the scheduler’s effectiveness and 
demonstrates a view of the system’s limitations and future 
work. 
 
FIGURE 4. Example output of kubectl get pods command used to list all 
pods across namespaces in the Minikube testbed. Similar listings were 
captured during evaluation to validate the correctness and quality of the 
resulting pod allocations. 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
A core premise of this work is the reduction of cognitive 
overhead, which became immediately apparent during the 
configuration of the baseline experiments (as presented in 
Section IV.B). For instance, achieving the baseline 
behaviors in experimental Scenarios A and C required 
complex, multi-level YAML structures. These baselines 
relied on Kubernetes’ default directives, such as 
topologySpreadConstraints 
and 
a 
combination 
of 
podAffinity 
and 
podAntiAffinity, 
respectively. 
Such 
configurations are verbose, difficult to author correctly, and 
prone to error. In contrast, the prototype required only a 
single allocation-hint annotation (e.g., “spread across 
zones”), demonstrating a significant and practical 
simplification in expressing user intent. 
The development and evaluation of the semantic 
scheduling prototype revealed several key insights into 
integrating LLMs within latency-sensitive infrastructure 
systems. First, while LLMs demonstrated strong capability 
in translating natural-language hints into structured 
scheduling directives, their decoding reliability remains a 
central challenge. Even small misinterpretations of intents 
or metadata can lead to significant scheduling deviations. 
The need for deterministic, verifiable parsing underscores 
that LLMs should paired with strict schema validation, 
normalization layers, and human-readable audit trails to 
ensure operational safety in production environments. 
In addition to these operational challenges, ethical and 
security issues must also be addressed. Algorithmic bias in 
LLM interpretations could result in unfair resource 
allocation. Because user hints are untrusted, strong 
protections against prompt injection attacks are required to 
safeguard cluster stability. Moreover, the risk of intentional 
resource exhaustion through crafted semantic requests 
underscores the need for robust admission controls. 
The investigation has demonstrated that effective prompt 
design and schema constraints are as critical as model 
selection. Incremental improvements in prompt phrasing, 
output examples, and metadata formatting directly reduced 
false positives and extraction errors. This experience 
reinforced that LLM integration is as much an engineering 
discipline as a modeling challenge; robustness depends on 
careful pipeline design, not model capability alone. 
The production deployment of the Score Extender 
involves operational challenges, specifically the complex 
configuration of kube-scheduler manifest files required to 
integrate 
custom 
extenders. 
Furthermore, 
because 
Kubernetes Control Plane nodes are typically isolated 
within secure namespaces, ensuring the implemented 
webhook endpoints are reachable from the control-plane 
node requires network policy management to maintain 
cluster 
security 
without 
obstructing 
scheduling 
communication. 
The project also highlighted the importance of 
architectural separation between intent analysis and 
scheduling execution. The prototype exposed fundamental 
differences between research feasibility and production 
readiness: (i) embedding an LLM call within the 
synchronous /prioritize path introduced unacceptable 
latency for real-world use, and (ii) the single-threaded 
Flask server, static scoring logic, and lack of fault tolerance 
are acceptable for evaluation but unsuitable for real 
workloads. Transitioning to a scalable, asynchronous 
service 
architecture 
and 
incorporating 
caching, 
concurrency, and adaptive fallback mechanisms will be 
essential for deployment in real clusters. The below list 
details the most crucial limitations in the current design: 
• A Single-threaded Python Flask Server: While the 
prototype performed well during controlled evaluations, 
its Python Flask-based implementation is inherently 
single-threaded, making it unsuitable for production-
scale workloads. Under concurrent scheduling requests, 
this architecture would quickly become a bottleneck, as 
each request must wait for the current one to complete 
before being processed. This serialization severely 
limits throughput and scalability, particularly in high-
load cluster environments where multiple scheduling 
operations occur in parallel. A production-ready 
deployment would require migrating to a multi-
threaded or asynchronous framework like FastAPI or 
aiohttp, and also to set up a load balancer to provide 
resilience. 
• Intent Classification Errors: The scheduler’s behavior 
depends critically on the correct identification of a 
presence of an intent. While top-tier models such as 
Amazon Nova Premier and Mistral Pixtral Large 
achieved high subset accuracy (97.45% and 95.86%, 
respectively), their performance is not flawless. The 9-
18 aggregated false negatives represent cases where a 
user’s hint (e.g., spread_zones) was completely missed, 
leading to violations of the intended scheduling policy.  
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
TABLE V 
EVALUATION SCENARIOS A-F 
Baseline Kubernetes Manifest 
Kubernetes Manifest with Allocation Hint 
Objective / Metric / Results 
Scenario A - Topology 
Spreading 
 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-a-baseline} 
spec: 
  replicas: 6 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: {labels: {app: web}} 
    spec: 
      topologySpreadConstraints: 
        - maxSkew: 1 
          topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone 
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule 
          labelSelector: 
            matchLabels: 
              app: web 
      containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}] 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-a-hint} 
spec: 
 replicas: 6 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         spread these pods evenly across all available  
         zones for high availability 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
Objective: To evaluate the scheduler's ability to fulfill a high-
availability policy. 
 
Metric: The standard deviation of the pod count per zone. A lower 
value signifies a more even and superior distribution. 
 
Result: Both, the baseline and intent-driven schedulers, achieved a 
perfect 3:3 split across the two zones, successfully fulfilling the 
spreading objective. 
Scenario B - Resource Affinity1 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-b-baseline} 
spec: 
  replicas: 6 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: {labels: {app: web}} 
    spec: 
      affinity: 
        nodeAffinity: 
          preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - weight: 100 
              preference: 
                matchExpressions: 
                  - key: hardware 
                    operator: In 
                    values: 
                      - gpu 
      containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}] 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-b-hint} 
spec: 
 replicas: 6 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         this is a critical ML training job, it must run 
         on nodes with GPUs 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
Objective: To test the system's handling of resource preferences, 
which aligns with the prototype's implementation of the soft-
affinity /prioritize verb. 
 
Metric: The percentage of pods successfully placed on nodes 
labeled as having GPUs. 
 
Result: Both, the baseline and intent-driven schedulers, placed 6 out 
of 6 pods (100%) on the minikube-m02 node. This demonstrates 
that it correctly interpreted the "must run" hint as a strong 
preference and its scoring logic. 
Scenario C - Complex Co-location and Anti-
Affinity2 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-c-baseline} 
spec: 
  replicas: 6 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: {labels: {app: web}} 
    spec: 
      affinity: 
        podAffinity: 
          preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - weight: 100 
              podAffinityTerm: 
                labelSelector: 
                  matchExpressions: 
                    - key: app 
                      operator: In 
                      values: 
                        - database 
                        - cache 
                topologyKey: "topology.kubernetes.io/region" 
        podAntiAffinity: 
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - labelSelector: 
                matchLabels: 
                  app: logging-agent 
              topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"      
containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-c-hint} 
spec: 
 replicas: 6 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         prefer to be in the same region as the  
         'database' and 'cache' deployments, but avoid  
         being on the same node as the 'logging-agent'  
         pods. 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
Objective: To evaluate the system's expressiveness and its ability to 
handle multiple, mixed intents, which is expected to be a strength 
of the natural language approach. 
 
Metric: Evaluate of whether the placement decisions successfully 
adhered to both the region affinity and node anti-affinity objectives. 
 
Result (baseline): The baseline scheduler placed all 6 pods correctly, 
avoiding the logging-agent node (minikube-m02) and distributing 
them across minikube-m03, m06, m07, m08, and m09. 
 
Result (intent-driven): The intent-driven scheduler also placed all 6 
pods correctly, avoiding minikube-m02. It successfully fulfilled 
both objectives by placing all pods on minikube-m03 (near the 
cache deployment). 
Scenario D - Rapid Burst 
Colocation 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-d-baseline} 
spec: 
  replicas: 20 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: {labels: {app: web}} 
    spec: 
      affinity: 
        podAffinity: 
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - labelSelector: 
                matchLabels: 
                  app: web 
              topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname" 
      containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}] 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-d-hint} 
spec: 
 replicas: 20 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         Collocate all pods from this deployment on a  
         single node. 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}] 
Objective: To test the effectiveness of the recent placements cache 
in ensuring colocation logic works correctly during high-velocity 
pod creation bursts, compensating for main cache update latency. 
 
Metric: The total number of distinct nodes used to place all replicas 
of the deployment. An ideal outcome is a single node. 
 
Result: Both the baseline and intent-based schedulers successfully 
achieved the ideal outcome of a single distinct node, placing all 20 
pods onto the same node. 
Scenario E - Quantitative Resource 
Preference3 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-e-baseline} 
spec: 
  replicas: 6 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: {labels: {app: web}} 
    spec: 
      affinity: 
        nodeAffinity: 
          preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - weight: 100 
              preference: 
                matchExpressions: 
                  - key: network-gbps 
                    operator: Gt 
                    values: 
                      - "99"  # (>100 Gbps) 
      containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: {name: test-scenario-e-hint} 
spec: 
 replicas: 6 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         This is a high-bandwidth job, please place on 
         nodes with at least 100Gbps network speed. 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
Objective: To evaluate the full pipeline, from the LLM's ability to 
parse specific numerical metadata (e.g., prefer_network_speed) to 
the scoring logic's ability to use that value correctly. 
 
Metric: The count of pods successfully placed on nodes that are 
labeled in the testbed as having network speed of 100Gbps or more. 
 
Result (baseline): The baseline scheduler placed only 1 of 6 pods 
on the preferred node. This demonstrates that the default 
Kubernetes scheduler's other plugins (like topology spreading) 
outweighed the soft nodeAffinity preference. 
 
(Notably, a version of deployment manifest with  
requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution 
works as expected.) 
 
Result (intent-based): The intent-driven scheduler placed 6 of 6 
pods on the correct node with network Gbps set to 100. 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
1 
Scenario F - Conflicting Intent Resolution 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: 
  name: test-scenario-f-baseline 
spec: 
  replicas: 2 
  selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
  template: 
    metadata: 
      labels: {app: web} 
    spec: 
      affinity: 
        podAffinity: 
          # Hard constraint for colocation (from Scenario D) 
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: 
            - labelSelector: 
                matchLabels: 
                  app: web 
              topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname" 
      topologySpreadConstraints: 
        # Hard constraint for spreading (from Scenario A) 
        - maxSkew: 1 
          topologyKey: topology.kubernetes.io/zone 
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule 
          labelSelector: 
            matchLabels: 
              app: web 
      containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}] 
apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: Deployment 
metadata: 
 name: test-scenario-f-hint 
spec: 
 replicas: 2 
 selector: {matchLabels: {app: web}} 
 template: 
   metadata: 
     labels: {app: web} 
     annotations: 
       allocation_hint: | 
         For high performance, collocate all pods on a  
         single node. For high availability, you must  
         also spread these pods across all zones. 
   spec: 
     containers: [{name: nginx, image: nginx}]  
Objective: To test the behavior of the current simple additive 
scoring model when faced with directly conflicting user intents. 
 
Metric: The baseline deployment manifest is configured with two 
contradictory hard constraints. The final placement distribution is 
observed to determine how the system prioritizes and resolves the 
trade-off between the colocation and spreading directives. 
 
Result (baseline): The manifest utilizes requiredDuringScheduling 
IgnoredDuringExecution for both colocation and spreading. Once 
the first pod is assigned to minikube-m02, the second pod faces an 
irreconcilable conflict, i.e., it must be on minikube-m02 to satisfy 
colocation but is forbidden from that zone/node to satisfy spreading. 
This results in the second pod remaining in a Pending state and this 
is the expected outcome. 
 
Result (intent-based): The test-scenario deployments manifest 
provides contradictory soft preferences; however, the prototype's 
additive scoring logic is designed to resolve such conflicts by 
summing the weighted scores. It finds a best-fit solution and 
schedules the pod. This is a known limitation of the prototype, 
which a future cost-function-based optimizer would address. 
1 The GPU count in Kubernetes is specified as an extended resource nvidia.com/gpu as a standard. The nodeAffinity mechanism (both preferredDuringScheduling... and 
requiredDuringScheduling...) only works with node labels, and not with node resources. Therefore, in order to simulate soft-affinity, a custom hardware=gpu label has been applied to 
the node minikube-m02. 
2 Scenario C included the deployment of pods from the database (on minikube-m05), cache (on minikube-m03), and logging-agent (on minikube-m02) deployments. 
3 Scenario E involved setting the network bandwidth to 10 Gbps on all Minikube nodes, except for node minikube-m09, where it was set to 100 Gbps to meet the test scenario 
requirements. 
Conversely, the 10-17 aggregated false positives 
correspond to hallucinated intents, where the model 
inferred preferences not expressed by the user. Such 
misclassifications can result in unpredictable or 
suboptimal scheduling outcomes, as the system might 
apply unintended placement preferences or ignore 
critical user directives. 
• Metadata Extraction Errors: Even when an intent is 
correctly identified, its associated metadata can be 
misinterpreted or extracted incorrectly. As shown in 
Table IV, the best-performing models on this metric, 
i.e., Claude 3 Sonnet (95.22%) and Amazon Nova Pro 
(94.40%), still exhibit nontrivial error rates. This 
limitation, 
observed 
repeatedly 
during 
prompt 
refinement, becomes particularly pronounced with 
complex list extractions. For instance, a hint such as 
“avoid us-east-1a and us-east-1b” might be erroneously 
parsed as ['us-east-1'], preventing the scheduler from 
excluding the specified zones. Similarly, an implicit 
hint like “high memory” may be incorrectly assigned a 
default numeric value (e.g., 1.0), rendering the resulting 
prefer_memory_gb intent ineffective. Such metadata 
errors can silently degrade scheduling accuracy, as the 
scoring logic depends on precise, structured values. 
• Unreliable Strength Interpretation: The most 
significant decoding weakness, as highlighted in Table 
IV, is unreliable strength interpretation. The Overall 
Strength Accuracy metric measuring how well models 
map linguistic modifiers like “must” (strength = 1.5) or 
“prefer” (strength = 0.5) proved the most challenging. 
Even the best-performing models, Nova Premier and 
Mistral Pixtral Large, achieved only 71.79% accuracy, 
while the chosen Nova Pro model reached 67.85%. 
Consequently, in roughly one-third of cases, the model 
misinterprets the user’s intended priority. A “critical” 
directive (strength 1.5) misclassified as a standard 
preference (strength 1.0) would cause the scheduler to 
treat it as a weak suggestion, allowing less important 
factors to dominate the decision. This systematic 
degradation of the intent strength undermines user 
expectations and highlights the need for explicit 
strength calibration or post-processing normalization in 
future iterations. 
Overall, these lessons demonstrate that while LLM-
driven intent recognition holds strong promise for 
advancing declarative scheduling, reliability, observability, 
and performance isolation must remain first-class design 
goals. Future iterations should focus on modularizing these 
components, enabling general-purpose, platform-agnostic 
scheduling augmentation built on stable, interpretable NLP 
foundations. The future works should cover the following: 
• Intent Analysis Prior to Scoring: Although the 
prototype demonstrates the feasibility of translating 
natural-language hints into scheduling directives, its 
architecture introduces a significant performance 
bottleneck. The current design performs a synchronous 
LLM call within the /prioritize handler, adding P95 
latencies ranging from 0.87s to 5.34s, depending on the 
model. In production, this delay would be unacceptable 
during scheduling. A production-ready solution should 
move the LLM call outside the scheduling loop, likely 
most 
effectively 
to 
be 
implemented 
via 
a 
MutatingAdmissionWebhook that analyzes intents at 
pod creation, stores the structured JSON output in an 
annotation, and allows the scheduler extender to read it 
locally during /prioritize. This would remove the 
synchronous dependency, eliminating latency and 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
making semantic scheduling viable for high-throughput 
clusters. 
• Expanding Evaluation Dataset with Compound 
Multi-Objective Prompts: The current 314-prompt 
evaluation dataset primarily covers cases translating 
into one or two intent objects. Future work should 
extend this dataset to include multi-level and conflicting 
scheduling intents, reflecting real-world scenarios 
where objectives such as co-location and fault tolerance 
interact. Incorporating such complex and contradictory 
prompts will better test the LLM’s reasoning and 
consistency, highlighting the need for larger, context-
aware models capable of resolving competing directives 
and handling richer semantic structures. This work has 
already commenced with the creation of the v2 dataset, 
available on the Model Hub [37] (file: schedule-intent-
evaluation-v2.json), 
which 
introduces 
two 
new 
categories: Multi-Objective Optimization (focused on 
encoding multiple Intents) and Contradictory Prompt 
(providing opposing hints). 
• Pareto Frontier Optimization: A key direction for 
future work is the integration of Pareto-based scoring 
into the scheduling framework. This approach would 
allow multiple, potentially conflicting objectives to be 
evaluated 
simultaneously, 
while 
preserving 
the 
dominance of higher-priority intents. Implementing a 
tiered logic scheme, where lower-strength objectives 
act as tie-breakers only when no higher-strength 
objective dominates, could improve decision-making in 
complex scheduling scenarios. Future iterations will 
explore the design and evaluation of this method. 
• Evaluation in a Parallel Execution Environment: A 
notable limitation of the current prototype is its 
execution environment. While the Minikube testbed 
simulates a multi-node cluster, the core scoring logic 
within the Extender Service operates sequentially due 
to Flask's single-threaded nature. This means that even 
if multiple pod scheduling requests arrive concurrently 
at the extender, they are processed one after another. 
This sequential processing does not accurately reflect a 
production scenario where a busy scheduler extender 
handles numerous /prioritize requests in parallel. Future 
work should involve reimplementing the extender logic 
using a multi-threaded server capable of parallel request 
handling. Evaluating the system under such concurrent 
load is crucial, as it will likely necessitate the 
introduction of sophisticated locking mechanisms. 
Specifically, concurrent scoring of pods belonging to 
the same deployment (e.g., during a scale-up) could lead 
to race conditions when updating or querying the recent 
placements cache or when calculating dynamic scores 
for 
spread_ 
and 
colocate_ 
intents. 
Therefore, 
implementing appropriate concurrency controls will be 
essential for ensuring the correctness and scalability of 
the intent-based scoring logic in a realistic, high-
throughput environment. 
• General-Purpose Scheduling Grammar: A key 
direction for future research is to decouple the core 
scheduling logic from its current tight integration with 
Kubernetes. In the prototype, Intent definitions and 
scoring logic depend on Kubernetes-specific topology 
labels (e.g., zone, rack) and its scheduler extender API. 
To generalize this concept, a universal scheduling 
grammar 
should 
be 
introduced 
- 
an 
abstract 
intermediary 
format 
for 
defining 
soft-affinity 
scheduling preferences. The LLM would translate 
natural-language hints into this grammar, while 
platform-specific adapters would convert it into 
concrete directives for systems such as Kubernetes, 
Mesos, or SLURM. This approach would decouple 
NLP-based intent recognition from any single platform, 
enabling a general-purpose framework for semantic 
workload orchestration across diverse environments. 
In summary, this work successfully validates the core 
premise that LLMs can bridge the semantic gap in cluster 
scheduling, demonstrating high accuracy in translating 
human intent into structured scheduling policies. The 
prototype proves the concept of semantic soft affinity, 
shifting the bottleneck from human configuration error to 
the engineering challenges of integration, specifically 
regarding synchronous latency and reliable metadata 
decoding. This research thus confirms the viability of 
intent-driven orchestration while clearly outlining the 
architectural and reliability engineering required to 
transition such a system from a novel prototype to a 
production-grade infrastructure component. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to Standard 
Chartered Bank for its material support, which contributed 
significantly to the research and investigation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wang, Wei, Baochun Li, and Ben Liang. "Dominant resource fairness 
in cloud computing systems with heterogeneous servers." In IEEE 
INFOCOM 2014-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 
pp. 583-591. IEEE, 2014. 
[2] Gog, Ionel, Malte Schwarzkopf, Adam Gleave, Robert NM Watson, 
and Steven Hand. "Firmament: Fast, centralized cluster scheduling at 
scale." In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and 
Implementation (OSDI 16), pp. 99-115. 2016. 
[3] Hindman, Benjamin, Andy Konwinski, Matei Zaharia, Ali Ghodsi, 
Anthony D. Joseph, Randy Katz, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. 
"Mesos: A platform for {Fine-Grained} resource sharing in the data 
center." In 8th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and 
Implementation (NSDI 11), pp. 1-14. 2011. 
[4] Isard, Michael, Vijayan Prabhakaran, Jon Currey, Udi Wieder, Kunal 
Talwar, and Andrew Goldberg. "Quincy: fair scheduling for 
distributed computing clusters." In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 
22nd symposium on Operating systems principles, pp. 261-276. 2009. 
[5] Mao, Hongzi, Mohammad Alizadeh, Ishai Menache, and Srikanth 
Kandula. "Resource management with deep reinforcement learning." 
In Proceedings of the 15th ACM workshop on hot topics in networks, 
pp. 50-56. 2016. 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
[6] Mao, Hongzi, Malte Schwarzkopf, Shaileshh Bojja Venkatakrishnan, 
Zili Meng, and Mohammad Alizadeh. "Learning scheduling 
algorithms for data processing clusters." In Proceedings of the ACM 
special interest group on data communication, pp. 270-288. 2019. 
[7] Zeydan, Engin, and Yekta Turk. "Recent advances in intent-based 
networking: A survey." In 2020 IEEE 91st vehicular technology 
conference (VTC2020-Spring), pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2020. 
[8] Vavilapalli, Vinod Kumar, Arun C. Murthy, Chris Douglas, Sharad 
Agarwal, Mahadev Konar, Robert Evans, Thomas Graves, Jason 
Lowe, Hitesh Shah, Siddharth Seth, Bikas Saha, Carlo Curino, Owen 
O'Malley, Sanjay Radia, Benjamin Reed, and Eric Baldeschwieler. 
"Apache 
hadoop 
yarn: 
Yet 
another 
resource 
negotiator." 
In Proceedings of the 4th annual Symposium on Cloud Computing, pp. 
1 
[9] Verma, Abhishek, Luis Pedrosa, Madhukar Korupolu, David 
Oppenheimer, Eric Tune, and John Wilkes. "Large-scale cluster 
management at Google with Borg." In Proceedings of the tenth 
european conference on computer systems, pp. 1-17. 2015. 
[10] Wang, Xingyao, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, 
Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan et al. "Opendevin: An open platform for 
ai software developers as generalist agents." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2407.16741 3 (2024). 
[11] Jaillet, Patrick, Jiashuo Jiang, Konstantina Mellou, Marco Molinaro, 
Chara Podimata, and Zijie Zhou. "Online Scheduling for LLM 
Inference 
with 
KV 
Cache 
Constraints." arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:2502.07115 (2025). 
[12] Androutsopoulos, Ion, Graeme D. Ritchie, and Peter Thanisch. 
"Natural language interfaces to databases - an introduction." Natural 
language engineering 1, no. 1 (1995): 29-81. 
[13] Silvander, Johan, Krzysztof Wnuk, and Mikael Svahnberg. 
"Systematic literature review on intent‐driven systems." IET 
Software 14, no. 4 (2020): 345-357. 
[14] Clemm, Alexander, Laurent Ciavaglia, L. Zambenedetti Granville, 
Jeff Tantsura. Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). "RFC 9315: 
Intent-based networking-concepts and definitions." October 2022. 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9315 
[15] Pan Xuan, Xu Sihan, Cai Xiangrui, Wen Yanlong, Yuan Xiaojie. 
"Survey on Deep Learning Based Natural Language Interface to 
Database." Journal of Computer Research and Development, 2021, 
58(9): 1925-1950. 
[16] Tageldien, Marwa, Bassant Selim, and Lokman Sboui. "Large 
Language Models in Intent-Based Networking: a Comprehensive 
Survey Across the Intent Lifecycle." In 2025 International 
Telecommunications Conference (ITC-Egypt), pp. 810-817. IEEE, 
2025. 
[17] Wang, Bailin, Zi Wang, Xuezhi Wang, Yuan Cao, Rif A Saurous, and 
Yoon Kim. "Grammar prompting for domain-specific language 
generation with large language models." Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 36 (2023): 65030-65055. 
[18] Brodimas, Dimitrios, Kostis Trantzas, Besiana Agko, Georgios 
Christos Tziavas, Christos Tranoris, Spyros Denazis, and Alexios 
Birbas. "Towards intent-based network management for the 6g system 
adopting multimodal generative ai." In 2024 Joint European 
Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit 
(EuCNC/6G Summit), pp. 848-853. IEEE, 2024. 
[19] Chowdhary, Ankur, Abdulhakim Sabur, Neha Vadnere, and Dijiang 
Huang. "Intent-driven security policy management for software-
defined systems." IEEE Transactions on Network and Service 
Management 19, no. 4 (2022): 5208-5223. 
[20] Martini, Barbara, Molka Gharbaoui, and Piero Castoldi. "Intent-based 
network slicing for SDN vertical services with assurance: Context, 
design and preliminary experiments." Future Generation Computer 
Systems 142 (2023): 101-116. 
[21] Pang, Lei, Chungang Yang, Danyang Chen, Yanbo Song, and Mohsen 
Guizani. "A survey on intent-driven networks." IEEE Access 8 
(2020): 22862-22873. 
[22] Singh, Abhishek. "Intent-Based Networking in Multi-Cloud 
Environments." Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
Technology. SRC/JEAST-411. DOI: doi. org/10.47363/JEAST/2025 
(7) 288 (2025): 2-7. 
[23] Saha, Barun Kumar, Luca Haab, and Łukasz Podleski. "Intent-based 
industrial network management using natural language instructions." 
In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Computing 
and Communication Technologies (CONECCT), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2022. 
[24] Mcnamara, Joseph, Daniel Camps-Mur, Meysam Goodarzi, Hilary 
Frank, Lorena Chinchilla-Romero, Ferrán Cañellas, Adriana 
Fernández-Fernández, and Shuangyi Yan. "Nlp powered intent based 
network management for private 5g networks." IEEE Access 11 
(2023): 36642-36657. 
[25] Deng, Naihao, Yulong Chen, and Yue Zhang. "Recent advances in 
text-to-SQL: A survey of what we have and what we expect." arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2208.10099 (2022). 
[26] Glass, Michael, Mustafa Eyceoz, Dharmashankar Subramanian, 
Gaetano Rossiello, Long Vu, and Alfio Gliozzo. "Extractive schema 
linking for text-to-sql." arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17174 (2025). 
[27] Hwang, Wonseok, Jinyeong Yim, Seunghyun Park, and Minjoon Seo. 
"A comprehensive exploration on wikisql with table-aware word 
contextualization." arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01069 (2019). 
[28] Li, Boyan, Jiayi Zhang, Ju Fan, Yanwei Xu, Chong Chen, Nan Tang, 
and Yuyu Luo. "Alpha-sql: Zero-shot text-to-sql using monte carlo 
tree search." arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17248 (2025). 
[29] Xu, Xiaojun, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. "Sqlnet: Generating 
structured queries from natural language without reinforcement 
learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04436 (2017). 
[30] Zhong, Victor, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. "Seq2sql: 
Generating structured queries from natural language using 
reinforcement learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00103 (2017). 
[31] Beloglazov, Anton, and Rajkumar Buyya. "Energy efficient resource 
management in virtualized cloud data centers." In 2010 10th 
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Cluster, Cloud and Grid 
Computing, pp. 826-831. IEEE, 2010. 
[32] Chen, Jing, Tiantian Du, and Gongyi Xiao. "A multi-objective 
optimization for resource allocation of emergent demands in cloud 
computing." Journal of Cloud Computing 10, no. 1 (2021): 20. 
[33] Khallouli, Wael, and Jingwei Huang. "Cluster resource scheduling in 
cloud computing: literature review and research challenges." The 
Journal of supercomputing 78, no. 5 (2022): 6898-6943. 
[34] Sissodia, Rajeshwari, Man Mohan Singh Rauthan, and Kanchan 
Naithani. "A survey on multi-objective tasks and workflow scheduling 
algorithms in cloud computing." International Journal of Cloud 
Applications and Computing (IJCAC) 12, no. 1 (2022): 1-16. 
[35] "Kube-Scheduler Configuration V1." Kubernetes.io. September 4, 
2025. https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/config-api/kube-scheduler-
config.v1/. 
[36] Poon, Hoifung, and Pedro Domingos. "Unsupervised semantic 
parsing." In Proceedings of the 2009 conference on empirical methods 
in natural language processing, pp. 1-10. 2009. 
[37] Sliwko, Leszek. "Poc-Schedule-Intent-Evaluation." Huggingface.co. 
February 
3, 
2026. 
https://huggingface.co/datasets/lsliwko/poc-
schedule-intent-evaluation. 
[38] Alam, Mansaf, Kashish Ara Shakil, and Shuchi Sethi. "Analysis and 
clustering of workload in google cluster trace based on resource 
usage." In 2016 IEEE Intl conference on computational science and 
engineering (CSE) and IEEE Intl conference on embedded and 
ubiquitous computing (EUC) and 15th Intl symposium on distributed 
computing and applications for business engineering (DCABES), pp. 
740-747. IEEE, 2016. 
[39] Ye, Zhisheng, Wei Gao, Qinghao Hu, Peng Sun, Xiaolin Wang, 
Yingwei Luo, Tianwei Zhang, and Yonggang Wen. "Deep learning 
workload scheduling in gpu datacenters: A survey." ACM Computing 
Surveys 56, no. 6 (2024): 1-38. 
[40] Sliwko, Leszek. "Cluster Workload Allocation: A Predictive 
Approach 
Leveraging 
Machine 
Learning 
Efficiency." IEEE 
Access (2024).  
[41] Veremyev, Alexander, Alexander Semenov, Eduardo L. Pasiliao, and 
Vladimir Boginski. "Graph-based exploration and clustering analysis 
of semantic spaces." Applied Network Science 4, no. 1 (2019): 104. 
[42] Mishra, Asit K., Joseph L. Hellerstein, Walfredo Cirne, and Chita R. 
Das. "Towards characterizing cloud backend workloads: insights from 
google 
compute 
clusters." ACM 
SIGMETRICS 
Performance 
Evaluation Review 37, no. 4 (2010): 34-41. 
This is the accepted version of the paper published in IEEE Access. 
The final version is available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3665989 
 
[43] Zhou, Guangyao, Wenhong Tian, Rajkumar Buyya, Ruini Xue, and 
Liang Song. "Deep reinforcement learning-based methods for 
resource scheduling in cloud computing: A review and future 
directions." Artificial Intelligence Review 57, no. 5 (2024): 124. 
[44] Sanjalawe, Yousef, Salam Al-E’mari, Salam Fraihat, and Sharif 
Makhadmeh. "AI-driven job scheduling in cloud computing: a 
comprehensive review." Artificial Intelligence Review 58, no. 7 
(2025): 197. 
[45] "Llama 4 Acceptable Use Policy." Meta.com. April 5, 2025. 
https://github.com/meta-llama/llama-models/blob/main/models/llama 
4/USE_POLICY.md. 
 
LESZEK SLIWKO was awarded a PhD in 
Parallel and Distributed Computing from the 
University of Westminster (London, UK) in 2019 
for his work on developing a novel AI-driven load 
balancer for cloud systems. He has presented at 
international events such as IEEE conferences, 
Machine Intelligence Research Lab lectures, and 
popular seminars like Scala in the City, JVM 
Roundabout, and Scala Central. His talks are 
available at https://www.youtube.com/@lsliwko. 
He is keen on experimenting with the latest 
technologies, particularly those related to High-Performance Computing 
and Machine Learning. Leszek has been an IEEE Professional member since 
2019. A brief description of his selected projects can be found at 
https://meta-analyzer.com/projects/. 
 
JOLANTA MIZERA-PIETRASZKO received the M.Sc. degree in 
computer science from the University of 
Economics and Ph.D. degree in computer science 
from Wrocław University of Science and 
Technology, Poland, in 2014. She is with Opole 
University of Technology, Poland. Her research 
interests focus on multilingual natural language 
processing, medical informatics (she has been 
Head of Medical Informatics Research Group), 
computational linguistics, data and text mining, 
web systems, information retrieval, automated 
translation, cybersecurity in military systems. She serves on ACM Europe 
Technology Policy Committee in Differential AI and Data Science. She 
authored and co-authored more than 100 papers in conference proceedings 
and journals including an innovative MT model published by Patent Office 
of the Republic of Poland. She has chaired and served on TPC of around 80 
international conferences. She serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Access, 
Featured Reviewer for ACM Computing Reviews, Editorial Advisory 
Board member for Recent Advances in Computer Science and 
Communications and a Guest Editor for some ISI journals like Big Data 
Research, Computing Journal, and the Journal of Universal Computer 
Science. She is an Expert for European Commission in evaluation of 
research projects on AI under HORIZON and some national Polish research 
agencies. She is an ACM Professional Member, British Computer Society, 
Information Retrieval Specialist Group and IEEE ComSoc Member. 
 
