Title: Social Media as a Sensor: Analyzing Twitter Data for Breast Cancer Medication Effects Using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00821v1
--------------------------------------------------

Social Media as a Sensor: Analyzing Twitter
Data for Breast Cancer Medication Effects
Using Natural Language Processing
Seibi Kobara†1[0000−0001−8134−7652], Alireza Rafiei†1[0000−0001−9747−4023],
Masoud Nateghi1[0009−0002−4263−2092], Selen Bozkurt1[0000−0003−1234−2158],
Rishikesan Kamaleswaran1[0000−0001−8366−4811], and Abeed
Sarker1[0000−0001−7358−544X]
†: Equally contributed to this paper
Emory University, 201 Dowman Dr, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Abstract. Breast cancer is a significant public health concern and is the
leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women. Despite advances
in breast cancer treatments, medication non-adherence remains a major
problem. As electronic health records do not typically capture patient-
reported outcomes that may reveal information about medication-related
experiences, social media presents an attractive resource for enhancing
our understanding of the patients’ treatment experiences. In this paper,
we developed natural language processing (NLP) based methodologies
to study information posted by an automatically curated breast cancer
cohort from social media. We employed a transformer-based classifier to
identify breast cancer patients/survivors on X (Twitter) based on their
self-reported information, and we collected longitudinal data from their
profiles. We then designed a multi-layer rule-based model to develop a
breast cancer therapy-associated side effect lexicon and detect patterns
of medication usage and associated side effects among breast cancer pa-
tients. 1,454,637 posts were available from 583,962 unique users, of which
62,042 were detected as breast cancer members using our transformer-
based model. 198 cohort members mentioned breast cancer medications
with tamoxifen as the most common. Our side effect lexicon identified
well-known side effects of hormone and chemotherapy. Furthermore, it
discovered a subject feeling towards cancer and medications, which may
suggest a pre-clinical phase of side effects or emotional distress. This anal-
ysis highlighted not only the utility of NLP techniques in unstructured
social media data to identify self-reported breast cancer posts, medica-
tion usage patterns, and treatment side effects but also the richness of
social data on such clinical questions.
Keywords: Breast cancer · natural language processing · social media.
1
Introduction
Breast cancer, the most prevalent cancer among women, represents a significant
public health concern. Accounting for about 30% of all new female cancer cases
arXiv:2403.00821v1  [cs.CL]  26 Feb 2024
2
S. Kobara et al.
annually, it stands as the second leading cause of cancer death in women, fol-
lowing lung cancer [3,8]. Despite the grim statistics, there has been a consistent
decrease in breast cancer mortality rates since 1989, with an overall decline of
43% through 2020 [4]. This notable progress is attributed to earlier diagnosis,
increased awareness, and advancements in treatments [2,9,14]. However, the pace
of this decline has shown signs of slowing in recent years [4], emphasizing the
need for continued research and innovation in breast cancer care.
Despite the advances in breast cancer treatments, including endocrine ther-
apy, which have led to declining death rates, as many as half to two-thirds of these
breast cancer patients discontinue endocrine treatment within the first three
years, increasing the risk of recurrence, hospitalization, and even death [17,7].
Treatment non-adherence and discontinuation are often due to medication-related
physical and mental side effects. Treatment-related side effects, or other subtle
factors leading to non-adherence, are not detectable by laboratory diagnostic
tests, but can be gathered through patient communications. Information gleaned
from patient communications (i.e., patient-reported outcomes (PROs)) are some-
times captured as free text in clinical narratives or through patient surveys. Both
mechanisms of documenting information are labor-intensive and subject to bi-
ases. Furthermore, electronic health records (EHRs) have been found to under-
document PROs (e.g., only 8% of a sample were found to contain PROs in a
study) [7]. Thus, studies based solely on EHRs or other traditional instruments
can only capture limited and instrument-specific clinical information, often re-
lating to cancer control endpoints.
PROs or patient experiences are crucial in understanding the overall impact
of breast cancer therapies and guiding future treatment strategies. One potential
source of such information is social media, where patients are known to discuss
their experiences with their peers. The potential of social media, specifically X
(formerly known as Twitter), in this context is particularly compelling, because
of its vast and diverse user base, and its ability to serve as a real-time global
sensor for public sentiment and personal experiences. By tapping into the rich,
unstructured data of social media, the trends and patient experiences that might
remain hidden in clinical settings can be uncovered, tailoring for more patient-
centered healthcare practices. However, obtaining information from real breast
cancer survivors requires the establishment of a social media based cohort, and
then analyzing data posted by this cohort. Natural language processing (NLP)
and machine learning methods provide potential solutions. Applying NLP tech-
niques to data from X may offer insights into self-reported posts, medication
use, and medication-related side effects across breast cancer patients with var-
ious demographics, potentially surpassing the depth and breadth of traditional
cohort studies. As such, the current study has been designed to:
– Identify self-disclosures of breast cancer from social media, build a cohort,
and collect longitudinal data.
– Conduct NLP-driven analyses to detect and uncover patterns of medication
usage among breast cancer patients and medication-associated side effects.
Breast cancer medication side effect discovery using NLP
3
– Generate detailed statistics associated with the distribution of side effects
observed across breast cancer-approved medications and identify potentially
unknown medication-side effect associations.
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Dataset
We collected a large number of breast cancer-related posts (n = 1,454,637) from
X. This dataset was compiled using four specific keywords: ‘cancer’, ‘breast-
cancer’ (as a single term), ‘tamoxifen’, and ‘survivor’, along with their hashtag
equivalents (e.g., ‘#breastcancer’). An analysis of data collected using specific
keywords revealed that although there were numerous health-related posts from
genuine breast cancer patients, they were accompanied and often obscured by
a significant amount of content posted by people who were not breast cancer
patients/survivors (e.g., people sharing awareness about breast cancer). Four
annotators in a study conducted by Al-Garadi et al. [1] processed and labeled
a subset of 5,019 unique posts of this dataset into two classes: a) self, a family
member, or friend-report of breast cancer (S), and b) not relevant posts (NR).
The intuition behind this annotation was that if subscribers on X self-disclosed
breast cancer statuses, those disclosures could be leveraged to create a social
media based breast cancer cohort. We have used this annotated data with the
same train-test split for the supervised model development to extract the rele-
vant posts from the full dataset for breast cancer medication and associated side
effects analysis.
2.2
Self-reported breast cancer post, medication, and side effect
discovery
We adopt three distinct approaches to tackling the supervised classification of so-
cial media posts. Firstly, we extracted various feature sets from the text and con-
structed eight different classical machine learning classifiers. For this aim, we ex-
plored the combination of a broad spectrum of features, including n-grams (rang-
ing from 1 to 3), word clusters [11], word-to-vector representations, text length,
term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF), latent Dirichlet alloca-
tion (LDA) (i.e., extracted features based on latent topics of a post), sentiment
score, and bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT) em-
beddings, as the input features for developing different machine learning models.
These models were then optimized through a grid search method, involving an
extensive range of parameters and 5-fold cross-validation on the training dataset.
Additionally, we developed a two-layer BLSTM model (parameters: unit = 100,
dropout = 0.2, recurrent dropout = 0.2), followed by a dense layer (parameters:
unit = 100, dropout = 0.2). We also fine-tuned the pre-trained transformer-based
architectures and weights of the BERT and BERT large models on the available
training dataset.
4
S. Kobara et al.
We created two lexicons manually from the annotated text to represent med-
ication expressions and their associated side effects. For this aim, the lexicons
were built upon the available National Cancer Institute medication library1 and
side effects2 as well as COVID-19 symptoms [12] lexicons. We specifically ex-
plored medications that have been approved by the Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) for breast cancer treatment to capture the associated side effects.
The posts were collapsed by unique usernames as we observed that the time
span of the available posts was one month, by which we assumed that breast can-
cer medication prescription patterns and side effects are constant in this particu-
lar time span. Then, multiple independent annotators manually annotated these
collapsed posts, and the newly found medications and side effects were added to
the lexicons. To assess and monitor the performance of the rule-based models
over the enrichment of the lexicons, we considered random annotated usernames
as the gold standard set. Figure 1 illustrates the designed workflow for the multi-
layer rule-based model development to extract breast cancer medications and
their associated side effects. The multi-layer rule-based model is composed of
two distinct models, each tasked with identifying medications and side effects
separately, employing the concept of inexact matching. Notably, Levenshtein
string similarity was used for recognition, accommodating near-misspellings and
paraphrased expressions. The models utilized a rolling sliding window, ranging
from 1 to 9, with a stride of one, to capture both single-word and multi-word
entities. Of note, the model was engineered to prevent the redundant detection
of the same words using different window sizes. They also incorporated a feature
for negation detection using a list of negation triggers. If a negation is detected,
it is flagged accordingly in the final result. Our approach was particularly fo-
cused on precision (at the expense of recall) based on the fact that there is no
shortage of data from a social media based cohort, and, consequently, avoiding
false positives is more important than avoiding false negatives.
2.3
Descriptive analysis of medications and side effects
We first defined a breast cancer cohort using the best-performing classifier and
applied our rule-based models to identify mentions of breast cancer medica-
tions and side effects. To describe the distribution of side effects, we classified
breast cancer-approved medications using biological mechanism-based functional
classification, specifically hormone therapy, chemotherapy, immune checkpoint
inhibitors, and kinase inhibitors. Recognizing that a single medication could
be mentioned multiple times in aggregated posts based on unique members in
the cohort, we considered only unique occurrences of medications or side ef-
fects per sample. As cancer treatment regimen in general may consist of several
medications, several functional classifications of medication appeared for each
1 https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/breast. [Accessed 02-
19-2024]
2 https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects. [Accessed 02-
19-2024]
Breast cancer medication side effect discovery using NLP
5
Fig. 1. Flow diagram of the methods for medication and their associated side effects
discovery from the social media cohort data. Abbreviations: RBM, rule-based model.
cohort member. Therefore, we first identified the patterns of medications and
then tested the association between these medication patterns and side effects
using the Kruskal-Wallis test. Multiple tests across side effects were adjusted
using Benjamini Hochberg correction. Pair-wise comparisons across medication
patterns were performed using a Dunn’s test.
The scripts used in this study were implemented using Python (version: 3.8.8)
and R (version: 4.3.2). The level of significance was set to 0.05.
3
Results
3.1
Self-reported breast cancer post, medication, and side effect
discovery
Of the developed supervised classifier, the transformer-based BERT-large lan-
guage model achieved the highest performance with an accuracy of 0.93 and an
F1 score of 0.89 on the test data. As such, we used this model as the supervised
classifier in the proposed workflow. The model was trained with a maximum
sequence length of 100 and batch size of 16 during 40 epochs. During the rule-
based model development, the manual annotation was done by three independent
annotators, and the pair-wise inter-annotator agreements were calculated using
the Cohen’s Kappa measure [15]. In the initial annotation round, the average
agreement was 0.78. This average increased to 1.0 in the second round, following
discussions among the annotators. The multi-layer rule-base model successfully
identified breast cancer-approved medications and associated side effects with
an F1 score of 0.64, precision of 0.64, and recall of 0.64.
3.2
Descriptive analysis of medications and side effects
We detected multiple medication mentions in the discovered breast cancer posts
collapsed by unique usernames. Among the final cohort (n = 62,042), at least
198 members expressed a minimum of one breast cancer-approved medication.
6
S. Kobara et al.
Many cohort members mentioned taking medications without specifying their
names, and we excluded all such cases. 109 (55.1%) mentioned tamoxifen, and
hormone therapy was the most expressed medication category in the posts. Fig-
ure 2 presents the full distribution of medication mentions. 31 side effects were
identified, and the most commonly expressed side effect was body ache & pain
(34 [17.2%]) (Figure 3). In the discovered breast cancer cohort, seven patterns of
medication patterns were identified including hormone therapy, chemotherapy,
a combination of hormone therapy and chemotherapy, a combination of hor-
mone therapy and kinase inhibitor, immune checkpoint inhibitor, a combination
of hormone therapy, kinase inhibitor, and immune checkpoint inhibitor, and a
combination of hormone therapy and immune checkpoint inhibitor. A Kruskal-
Wallis test showed that 17 out of 31 side effects were significantly associated with
the medication patterns (adjusted p-value <0.05), of which known side effects of
hormone or chemotherapy include pyrexia, body ache, anxiety, nerve problems,
and hair loss. In addition, our novel breast cancer-associated side effect lexicon
discovered generalized side effect or negative emotion, not elsewhere classified
(NEC), which represents a subjective feeling towards cancer and medications,
such as ‘worst feeling’ or ‘feeling of dreadful side effect’ (Figure 4). The preva-
lence of generalized side effect or negative emotion, NEC in a combination of
hormone therapy and chemotherapy was significantly higher than the prevalence
in hormone therapy (adjusted p-value <0.05).
109
34
12
10
10
9
8
7
5
5
0
20
40
Tamoxifen
Letrozole
Herceptin
Arimidex
Keytruda
Anastrozole
Faslodex
Ibrance
Femara
Xeloda
Proportion (%) of medications expressed in breast cancer posts
Fig. 2. Top 10 most expressed breast cancer approved medications in our social media
cohort. The label on top of the bar charts represents the number of cohort members
who expressed medications.
Breast cancer medication side effect discovery using NLP
7
34
24
19
16
12
11
8
8
7
6
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
5
10
15
Body ache & Pain
Anxiety, stress & general mental health symptoms
Pyrexia
Fatigue
Coagulation issues
Menopause related
Chills
Generalized side effect or negative emotion, NEC
Hot Flash
Hyperhidrosis
Fertility Issues
Insomnia/sleep disturbance
Nerve problems
Sneezing
Ageusia
Arthralgia
Lethargic
Dyspnea
Hypertension
Irritability
Lymphedema
Cough
Dizziness/disorientation/confusion
Dysfunction in developing fetus
Hair Loss
Migraine
Nausea
Pruritus
Suicical ideation
Vomiting
Proportion (%) of symptoms reported in breast cancer posts
Fig. 3. Expressed side effects in our social medial cohort. The y-axis represents the
proportions and the text labels on top of bar charts are the number of users who
expressed side effects. NEC, not elsewhere classified.
4
Discussion
We trained a transformer-based model to identify self-reported breast cancer
posts on social media and create a cohort. The developed supervised transformer-
based classifier demonstrates superior performance compared to the classical
machine learning methods that worked with the extracted features, thanks to
its innovative architecture and pre-training scheme. This finding highlights the
feasibility of constructing a substantial breast cancer cohort from social using
an automated NLP pipeline and detecting breast cancer therapy-associated side
effects using lexicon development. The methods may also be replicated to create
other similar cohorts.
Using a multi-layer rule-based model architecture that was optimized for pre-
cision, we detected medication name expressions and side effects in each unique
cohort member profile. In our analysis of accounts discussing breast cancer, hor-
mone therapy was the most expressed medication category, with tamoxifen being
the most commonly mentioned keyword. By developing a novel breast cancer
8
S. Kobara et al.
Hormone therapy
Hormone−Chemo therapy
Hormone−Kinase inhibitor
Immune checkpoint inhibitor
Hormone−Kinase−Immune checkpoint inhibitor
Chemotherapy
Hormone−Immune checkpoint inhibitor
Anxiety, stress & general mental health symptoms
Body ache & Pain
Chills
Cough
Dizziness/disorientation/confusion
Dyspnea
Generalized side effect or negative emotion, NEC
Hair Loss
Hypertension
Insomnia/sleep disturbance
Lethargic
Nausea
Nerve problems
Pruritus
Pyrexia
Sneezing
Vomiting
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fig. 4. The heat map of prevalence of significantly associated side effects with medi-
cation patterns (adjusted p-value < 0.05). NEC, not elsewhere classified.
therapy-associated side effect lexicon, we identified patterns of side effects that
were related to medication patterns.
We discovered that breast cancer therapy is associated with a broad range
of side effects, as expressed by the cohort members. Chemotherapy is associated
with a number of neurological side effects, including nausea, pain, and hair loss
[10]. Kinase inhibitors for breast cancer are associated with adverse and side
effects in the cardiovascular system, such as hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and
heart failure, gastrointestinal, and skin reactions [13,5,6]. Clinical trials of im-
mune checkpoint inhibitors indicated that colitis and pneumonitis are the most
frequent fatal adverse effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors [16]. Notably, we
were able to identify well-known side effects of hormone therapy and chemother-
apy, such as pyrexia, body ache, anxiety, and nerve problems. Furthermore, our
novel breast cancer therapy-associated side effect lexicon discovered generalized
side effect or emotion, NEC. Although this lacks a detailed description of side
effects, our cohort users may suffer from an indescribable feeling, which may be
a pre-clinical side effect of emotional distress or common side effects of breast
cancer therapy.
Our work demonstrates the utility of a social media-based cohort that is cre-
ated automatically via NLP and machine learning methods for identifying pat-
terns of medications and side effects. Such cohorts, once the methods are estab-
lished and deployed, can grow automatically over time, leading to the collection
of seemingly unlimited data. Potentially novel insights may then be mined using
the strategies we described in this paper. The discovered side effects using our
Breast cancer medication side effect discovery using NLP
9
novel breast cancer-associated side effect lexicon represent potential hypothe-
ses that can be studied and validated through more traditional studies. Such
methods of cohort data analyses may be particularly useful for new medications
entering the market for which post-marketing surveillance data is limited or ab-
sent. Such strategies may also enable the early detection of potential unknown
side effects. Also, while the side effects discussed on social media may not be
severe (e.g., nausea), they may be the reasons for non-adherence among patients,
an association that needs to be investigated in future research.
Despite the strength of our analytical framework, several aspects should be
considered for future improvement in the analysis. First, social media posts of-
ten lacked enough context for accurate classification, leading to potential mis-
identification of breast cancer-related posts. Second, we collapsed the posts based
on accounts, assuming the homogeneity of the medications’ prescription regi-
mens and associated side effects. Multiple medication expressions appearing in
one of the cohort member’s profiles can lead to false positive indications of the
association between medication and its side effects. Third, of around 1.5 million
available posts, only 198 cohort members were detected to specify the name of
at least one breast cancer-approved medication name (non-standard or generic
expressions were potentially missed in our analyses). This small sample size may
underpower our lexicon to discover a side effect occurrence.
5
Conclusion
A supervised classifier was able to identify a self-reported breast cancer cohort.
Multiple rounds of lexicon development of medications and side effects were con-
ducted, and rule-based models were designed to describe the medication usage
prevalence and their links to side effects. We demonstrate, for the first time, the
feasibility of an NLP model discovering the patterns of side effects associated
with breast cancer-approved medications. Notably, our breast cancer therapy-
associated side effect lexicon identified a potential pre-clinical side effect in breast
cancer therapy. The next steps include investigating the proposed workflow in
a larger sample size and other social media platforms. This can involve the
consideration of the usage of non-breast cancer medications and assessing the
magnitude of side effects alleviation due to supportive medications.
References
1. Al-Garadi, M.A., Yang, Y.C., Lakamana, S., Lin, J., Li, S., Xie, A., Hogg-Bremer,
W., Torres, M., Banerjee, I., Sarker, A.: Automatic breast cancer cohort detec-
tion from social media for studying factors affecting patient-centered outcomes.
In: Artificial Intelligence in Medicine: 18th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine, AIME 2020, Minneapolis, MN, USA, August 25–28, 2020,
Proceedings 18. pp. 100–110. Springer (2020)
2. Berry, D.A., Cronin, K.A., Plevritis, S.K., Fryback, D.G., Clarke, L., Zelen, M.,
Mandelblatt, J.S., Yakovlev, A.Y., Habbema, J.D., Feuer, E.J.: Effect of screening
10
S. Kobara et al.
and adjuvant therapy on mortality from breast cancer. N Engl J Med 353(17),
1784–1792 (Oct 2005)
3. Giaquinto, A.N., Miller, K.D., Tossas, K.Y., Winn, R.A., Jemal, A., Siegel, R.L.:
Cancer statistics for African American/Black People 2022. CA Cancer J Clin 72(3),
202–229 (May 2022)
4. Giaquinto, A.N., Sung, H., Miller, K.D., Kramer, J.L., Newman, L.A., Minihan,
A., Jemal, A., Siegel, R.L.: Breast Cancer Statistics, 2022. CA Cancer J Clin 72(6),
524–541 (Nov 2022)
5. Iancu, G., Serban, D., Badiu, C.D., Tanasescu, C., Tudosie, M.S., Tudor, C.,
Costea, D.O., Zgura, A., Iancu, R., Vasile, D.: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors in breast
cancer. Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine 23(2), 1–10 (2022)
6. Le Du, F., Di´eras, V., Curigliano, G.: The role of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the
treatment of her2+ metastatic breast cancer. European Journal of Cancer 154,
175–189 (2021)
7. McCowan, C., Shearer, J., Donnan, P.T., Dewar, J.A., Crilly, M., Thompson, A.M.,
Fahey, T.: Cohort study examining tamoxifen adherence and its relationship to
mortality in women with breast cancer. British journal of cancer 99(11), 1763–
1768 (2008)
8. Miller, K.D., Ortiz, A.P., Pinheiro, P.S., Bandi, P., Minihan, A., Fuchs, H.E.,
Martinez Tyson, D., Tortolero-Luna, G., Fedewa, S.A., Jemal, A.M., et al.: Cancer
statistics for the us hispanic/latino population, 2021. CA: a cancer journal for
clinicians 71(6), 466–487 (2021)
9. Munoz, D., Near, A.M., van Ravesteyn, N.T., Lee, S.J., Schechter, C.B., Alagoz,
O., Berry, D.A., Burnside, E.S., Chang, Y., Chisholm, G., de Koning, H.J., Ali Er-
gun, M., Heijnsdijk, E.A., Huang, H., Stout, N.K., Sprague, B.L., Trentham-Dietz,
A., Mandelblatt, J.S., Plevritis, S.K.: Effects of screening and systemic adjuvant
therapy on ER-specific US breast cancer mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst 106(11)
(Nov 2014)
10. Pearce, A., Haas, M., Viney, R., Pearson, S.A., Haywood, P., Brown, C., Ward, R.:
Incidence and severity of self-reported chemotherapy side effects in routine care:
A prospective cohort study. PloS one 12(10), e0184360 (2017)
11. Sarker, A., Gonzalez, G.: A corpus for mining drug-related knowledge from twitter
chatter: Language models and their utilities. Data in brief 10, 122–131 (2017)
12. Sarker, A., Lakamana, S., Hogg-Bremer, W., Xie, A., Al-Garadi, M.A., Yang, Y.C.:
Self-reported covid-19 symptoms on twitter: an analysis and a research resource.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 27(8), 1310–1315 (2020)
13. Shyam Sunder, S., Sharma, U.C., Pokharel, S.: Adverse effects of tyrosine kinase in-
hibitors in cancer therapy: pathophysiology, mechanisms and clinical management.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 8(1), 262 (2023)
14. Tong, C.W.S., Wu, M., Cho, W.C.S., To, K.K.W.: Recent Advances in the Treat-
ment of Breast Cancer. Front Oncol 8, 227 (2018)
15. Viera, A.J., Garrett, J.M., et al.: Understanding interobserver agreement: the
kappa statistic. Fam med 37(5), 360–363 (2005)
16. Wang, D.Y., Salem, J.E., Cohen, J.V., Chandra, S., Menzer, C., Ye, F., Zhao,
S., Das, S., Beckermann, K.E., Ha, L., et al.: Fatal toxic effects associated with
immune checkpoint inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA on-
cology 4(12), 1721–1728 (2018)
17. Waterhouse, D.M., Calzone, K.A., Mele, C., Brenner, D.E.: Adherence to oral
tamoxifen: a comparison of patient self-report, pill counts, and microelectronic
monitoring. Journal of Clinical Oncology 11(6), 1189–1197 (1993)
