Title: Evolution of Natural Language Processing Technology: Not Just Language Processing Towards General Purpose AI
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06228v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
Evolution of Natural Language Processing Technology: Not Just Language Processing Towards 
General-Purpose AI 
 
Evolution of natural language processing technology: 
From “language” processing to general-purpose AI. 
Recent trends from a Japanese point of view. 
 
Masahiro Yamamoto 
INFORMATION-TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION AGENCY,  JAPAN 
General Affairs Planning Department 
 
Abstract 
Since the invention of computers, communication through natural language (actual human 
language) has been a dream technology 1. H owever, n atural l anguage i s e x tremely difficult to 
mathematically formulate, making it difficult to realize as an algorithm without considering 
programming. While there have been numerous technological developments, one cannot say that any 
results allowing free utilization have been achieved thus far. 
In the case of language learning in humans, for instance when learning one’s mother tongue or 
foreign language, one must admit that this process is similar to the adage “practice makes perfect” in 
principle, even though the learning method is significant up to a point. Deep learning has played a 
central role in contemporary AI technology in recent years. When applied to natural language 
processing (NLP), this produced unprecedented results. Achievements ex ceeding the initial 
predictions have been reported from the results of learning vast amounts of tex tual data using deep 
learning. For instance, four arithmetic operations could be performed without ex plicit learning, thereby 
enabling the explanation of complex
 images and the generation of images from corresponding 
explanatory texts. It is an accurate exam ample of the learner embodying the concept of “practice makes 
perfect” by using vast amounts of tex tual data. 
This report provides a technological ex planation of how cutting-edge NLP has made it possible to 
realize the “practice makes perfect” principle. Additionally, ex amples of how this can be applied to 
business are provided. We reported in June 2022 in Japanese on the NLP movement from late 2021 to 
early 20222. We would like to summarize this as a memorandum since this is just the initial movement 
leading to the current large language models (LLMs). 
Chapter 1 presents an overview of NLP in recent years. What is made possible through vast amount 
of textual data and parameters is explained through the ex
ample of GPT-33, which caused a major stir 
when it was released. In particular, the outline of Transformer, which is one of the key technologies, 
is being ex plicated to achieve intuitive understanding. 
In Chapter 2, the potential applications of GPT-3 are presented to discuss the practical side of large-
scale language models. Some of these services have already been launched, and while they have 
clearly demonstrated the usage of AI, they have realized unprecedented language-based ex change, 
thus setting them apart from ex isting services. 
Chapter 3 discusses the ongoing studies in Japan in the field of NLP. What is the situation in Japan 
when the development of large-scale language model takes place mostly in English? The simple 
overview of this situation is discussed, along with the results of recent dialog competitions. 
Chapter 4 discusses the report stating that a large-scale language model will become the 
fundamental base model of a general-purpose AI. As most human activities can be ex plained using 
language, a general-purpose language model describes most human activities within the model. 
Therefore, the possibilities of large-scale natural language models that can lead to general-purpose AI 
will be discussed a paper from Stanford University, USA. Moreover, the relationship between large-
scale language models and robotics is discussed focusing on the perspective of direct interaction with 
the real world. 
Chapter 5 discusses the developments, mostly international, in NLP technology beyond GPT-3. The 
author provides a snapshot of the current situation, which sees daily updates, including the 
construction of larger models and the method to improve performance while reducing the scale of the 
model. 
Chapter 6 discusses the important challenges faced in the present NLP and natural language models. 
Language has a significant impact on society, and this fact will be re-ex amined. 
Chapter 7 contains the summary and future prospects. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 4 
1.1 Significant progress is supported by the rapid increase in the scale of parameters ................... 2 
1.2 Breakthrough by Transformer that has enabled efficient round-robin ..................................... 4 
1.3 Features of natural language processing by Transformer ...................................................... 7 
2. Natural language processing technology application ................................................................ 10 
2.1 Ex amples of business applications of GPT-3 ..................................................................... 11 
2.2 Technologies that apply GPT-3 ......................................................................................... 13 
DALL･E for flexible image generation through language and CLIP for flexible caption 
writing. ........................................................................................................................... 13 
Power Apps ..................................................................................................................... 14 
3 Trends in Japan ..................................................................................................................... 15 
3.1 Accommodating the Japanese language ............................................................................ 15 
3.2 Resources in Japan .......................................................................................................... 16 
3.3 Discussions within Japan ................................................................................................. 17 
4 Large-scale natural language model that can potentially lead to general-purpose AI ................. 18 
4.1 Foundation Models ......................................................................................................... 18 
4.2 Essence of natural language models .................................................................................. 20 
4.3 Robotics and large-scale natural language model ............................................................... 21 
4.4 Correspondence with the real world. ................................................................................. 22 
5 Introduction of the topics related to natural language models after GPT-3 .................................. 24 
5.1 MT-NLG, a powerful natural language model by Microsoft and NVIDIA ........................... 24 
5.2 Microsoft Project Florence-VL......................................................................................... 25 
5.3 BigScience T0 ............................................................................................................... 26 
5.4 LaMDA, dialog approach of Google ................................................................................. 27 
5.5 DeepMind RETRO (Retrieval Enhanced TRansfOrmers) ................................................... 28 
5.6 South Korean LG EXAONE ............................................................................................ 29 
5.7 Chinese BAAI Wu Dao 2.0 .............................................................................................. 30 
5.8 OpenAI GLIDE, DALL･E2 ............................................................................................. 31 
5.9 MLP Reex amination, beyond Transformer ........................................................................ 32 
6 Important Challenges ............................................................................................................. 34 
7 Conclusion ............................................................................................................................ 35 
 
 
 
 
1 
Introduction 
In 2018, Google launched an AI assistant named Duplex
4 at the company’s development 
conference, and performed a demonstration where it made a reservation at a given restaurant. Upon 
opening the Duplex a  application and using one’s voice to specify the restaurant, number of people, date, 
and time, it will automatically book a reservation over the phone. As many restaurants do not offer 
online reservations, reservations can be made at any restaurant using Duplex  as it can call the desired 
restaurant on our behalf. 
Ex amples of actual interactions with the application sound natural. It also responds sufficiently 
naturally during phone calls to restaurants to make reservations. It did not cause any confusion in the 
restaurants where the reservations were made, meaning that they did not notice that Duplex  was 
automatically conducting the whole ex change. In fact, the restaurant staff were surprised when they 
found out that they were not talking to an actual human. 
When Duplex  was launched in 2018, it required partial human assistance for 25% of its operations 
initially; the update report from 2020 revealed that 99% of its reservation operations were conducted 
through automatic response by the AI 5. M oreover, D uplex  had successfully made a million 
reservations by that point. 
In addition, Google reported that it uses Duplex  to automatically update business information on 
Google Maps and Google search6. Detailed information such as the opening hours of restaurants or 
whether the restaurant offers takeout service is updated automatically, without the need for manual 
updates. 
Duplex  not only looks up information necessary for making reservations through Google search but 
also updates the very information it uses by itself. Now, further functions have been added to realize 
additional applications, such as purchase movie tickets and reserve rental cars. When a person speaks 
to the application using natural language, the AI can perform all the tasks while offering 
unprecedentedly natural responses. 
One of the key technologies that supports Duplex  is the natural language processing (NLP). The 
general term for technologies that enable a system to simulate dialog through everyday language, and 
that enable the system to automatically perform a task and report the result of the same through natural 
language, is NLP. In fact, the Duplex ex
ample shows that NLP has various potential applications, 
ranging from interfaces to business logic. 
Currently, cutting-edge NLP technology is capable of generating a natural sentence from a single 
word irrespective of automated processing and results from language inputs. One can even say that 
the replacement of even human creative work is becoming a realistic near-future prospect. Fig.1 shows 
an ex ample (diagram) of NLP. 
2 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Natural Language Processing with use cases 
 
1.1 Significant progress is supported by the rapid increase in the number of parameters 
One of the factors behind the expansion of Duplex
 applications is a new natural language model 
(NLM)7 named bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT)8, which has large 
scale model parameters9. The rapid increase in the number of learning parameters is one of the reasons 
for the ex plosive development of NLP. Deep learning, which is the central technology for AI in recent 
years, characteristically improve the capability of AI through numerous learning parameters using 
unprecedentedly vast amounts of data. 
The performance of NLP in the last few years has improved remarkably owing to the increase in 
the number of learning parameters. Fig.2 shows seminal NLP technologies at each historical moment 
and their parameter numbers at the time of their release. In fact, the number of parameters used by 
language models has increased by hundred to thousand-fold in last five years. Currently, the number 
of parameters used in Google T5+ is 1.6 trillion. 
How do neural networks with this many parameters learn and optimize? How does one prepare the 
training data for such networks? These questions are important from intuitive and technological 
perspectives. For instance, GPT-3, which gained considerable interest due to its performance in 2020, 
uses tex tual data comprising four trillion words for its learning, and the required computational cost 
is estimated to be a few billion yen. Furthermore, it requires a vast amount of computational resources, 
estimated at computing on V100-class GPU cluster with 1420 GPUs for one year. 
 
3 
 
 
Fig.2 The parameter numbers in the language model10 
 
Computational resources continue to evolve considerably with each passing year. For instance, GPU 
A100, introduced in 2021, is ex pected to have ~20 times more capability than V100 and enable 
learning with improved realistic times and computational scales. H10011, which NVIDIA released in 
2022, is said to be capable of building NLMs 30 times faster than A100. For instance, it can build a 
vast language model approx imately the same size as GPT-3 in a week. Naturally, this makes it easier 
to enlarge the language model itself to ten or several hundred times larger than it is now. The 
computational capabilities will continue to increase remarkably as with the evolution of semiconductor 
chips. Thus, computational resources with high cost performance can be realized in the future, which 
make the facility planning crucial. 
The NLMs released in late 2021 did not necessarily have numerous learning parameters12. This 
indicates that, through innovation, a model can have performance equal to models with a large number 
of learning parameters as long as it has the required number of learning parameters. This must be 
regarded as a new trend from the perspective of computational resources. 
Interesting results have been obtained by increasing the number of parameters in GPT-3; a NLM 
successfully performed four arithmetic operations without ex plicitly learning its computing logic13. 
The aforementioned language model showed signs of performing two- and three-digit additions when 
the number of model parameters ex ceeded 6.7 and 13 billion, respectively. When the model parameters 
ex ceeded ~100 billion, it became capable of almost perfectly performing two- and three-digit addition 
and started to display signs of being able to perform two-digit multiplication and four-digit addition. 
As the number of parameters increase, the NLM acquires computational capability of addition, 
multiplication, subtraction, and division. Even though only tex tual data were used for training, a NLM 
acquired the function to perform calculations when the number of its parameters ex ceeded 10 billion. 
The vast amount of tex t data included the descriptions of calculations and a couple of corresponding 
4 
 
ex amples. However, the capability of a NLM to learn calculations, without ex plicit training data for 
the same, is an astonishing result. Furthermore, it demonstrated the possibility that, only through 
learning via tex t data a NLM with a vast number of parameters is capable of learning the described 
procedure itself and integrating it as a function. Naturally, it also learns how to write programs. 
 
1.2 Breakthrough by Transformer that has enabled efficient round-robin 
The history of research and development of the NLP, which has been ex pected to be the main 
technological area in AI is long. Though there have been many efforts made since deep learning 
became the main focus of AI, no major breakthroughs were made immediately. This was partially due 
to the characteristics of natural language. Developments in deep learning include the so-called general-
purpose computing on graphics processing units (GPGPU), which uses GPU14 for purposes other than 
image rendering. GPGPU performs calculations using numerous (approx imately a few thousand) 
product–sum operation units on the GPU in parallel. 
However, in the NLP, it is necessary to deal with meanings, directives, pronouns, etc., while going 
back and forth in their context. Understanding tex
ts, in particular, requires such processing. As such 
processing requires AI to remember specific parts while processing the whole in time series, it is 
generally not very compatible with parallel computing. Therefore recurrent neural network (RNN)15, 
which is used to deal with time series, is commonly used in natural language. As the sequence-
dependent relationship must be considered, it generates (wait for) adjustments between several 
dependent relationships, thereby complicating the parallel operations. Thus, GPGPU cannot be used 
effectively for the NLP involving sequence-dependent relationship. As the current mainstream in 
calculations using GPGPU prioritizes parallel and mechanical calculations, time-series calculations 
with dependency is intrinsically unsuitable for it. 
To address this issue, the Attention 16 mechanism was developed. Using this mechanism, the 
connection of a word with its counterparts in a sentence is discovered by focusing only on the word. 
Note that the focus is only on these connections and not the grammar and mechanics. Fig.3 shows an 
overview of the attention mechanism. In the sentence “Mount Fuji is high, and the sea is beautiful,” 
the attention is on “high.” Then, it calculates how much weight should be placed on its connection 
with other elements in the sentence, namely “Mount Fuji,” “and,” “the sea,” “is,” and “beautiful.” The 
figure shows this schematically by representing the connections through solid and dotted lines and the 
thickness of these lines. This operation is repeated for every element in the tex t. As the operation is 
performed on all the tex t that can be stored in the memory, in principle, the weight of the connection 
between elements that are far apart can be calculated. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Fig.3 Schematic diagram of attention mechanism 
 
As the tex t in the memory can be handled as though it is an image, parallel computation that 
compares the feature value(s) of one part of the tex t to the feature value(s) of other part becomes 
possible. In other words, even though NLP is intrinsically unsuitable for parallel computation, it can 
be processed through parallel computation using the attention mechanism. From a different viewpoint, 
one can also say that this reverts to the fully connected network as it calculates the connection between 
every element on the memory. 
The effect of parallel processing becoming possible is enormous. Aside from the obvious fact that 
efficient parallel computation using GPGPU has become possible, common supervised learning17 is 
no longer always necessary because, through full connection, the AI is only required to learn the 
weight relationships through tex t cross-referencing. Natural language learning cannot be easily 
evaluated, unlike human learning, so it is necessary to use existing tex
ts for learning. Furthermore, 
some amount of learning data should be used as the training data for simulating tests within the contex t 
to teach questions and answers. The problem was that the cost of producing these pairs was ex tremely 
high. However, if it comes down to what is known as a fill-in-the-blank question, so it can turn, in 
principle, any tex t into training data with almost zero cost. BERT mostly employs two simple learning 
methods namely masked language modeling (MLM), which performs what is known as fill-in-the-
blank, and nex t sentence prediction (NSP), which evaluates the similarity of sentences. 
Fig.4 shows the concept of MLM. As attention is based on bidirectional referencing, one can say 
that the biderectional referencing itself is the learning. If normal tex t data is present, one can simply 
mask a part of it and turn it into training data with the correct answer. This procedure, where data itself 
is changed/worked on to give the correct label to the original data, is called self-supervised learning. 
As it does not ex plicitly supply training data, it is attracting attention as a typical ex ample of self-
supervised learning. It has been demonstrated that masked estimation questions, where parts of a 
6 
 
sentence are masked, which is common in tests, is a valid framework for self-supervised learning, and 
significant progress has been made using this approach. 
 
 
Fig. 4 Masked Language Model (MLM) 
 
NSP compares two sentences and judges whether the second one is an appropriate sentence to follow 
the first one (Fig.5). This can be easily determined from cross-referencing information. The knowledge 
regarding training data verified in BERT showed that normal tex t data can also become high-quality 
training data18. In other words, a large amount of training data will be spontaneously generated without 
modifying the tex t data. Learning by MLM and NSP, NLMs successfully learned relationships and 
tex ts simultaneously. Furthermore, it learned calculation functions. 
 
 
Fig. 5 Nex t Sentence Prediction (NSP) 
 
The center of this attention-based basic machine learning is the technology called Transformer. 
Transformer enabled usage of normal tex ts as training data, as well as processing of numerous 
parameters by efficiently using calculation resources in parallel. Transformer, a technology that has 
attracted attention toward BERT, has made it possible to efficiently learn a vast number of learning 
parameters and ex press the corresponding functions. 
 
 
7 
 
1.3 Features of natural language processing by Transformer 
Let us introduce additional keywords necessary for understanding Transformer. These keywords, 
Parameter scale, Natural language model, Zero(Few)-Shot learning, Language benchmark, and 
Multilingual support, have become more than simply the characteristics of contemporary NLP 
technology19. 
 
Parameter scale 
For instance, when there are more parameters, useful results can be expected by ex
panding the 
reference area during learning and its reflection on the model. Thus, when the parameter scale is 
enlarged, the limit of the ex isting models will also be pushed up, and their performances are also 
ex pected to improve. Indeed, performance assurance through parameter scale enlargement in 
Transformer has been verified20, indicating that the enlargement of parameter scale directly leads to 
performance improvement. In principle, the larger the parameter number, the better the performance 
of the NLM. Therefore, larger parameter scales are currently being tested. Meanwhile, methods to 
compress the enlarged model to make it efficient are being investigated 
 
Natural language model 
Generally, a NLM is the core of machine learning for NLP, and it is the foundation of NLP. One 
element of NLP is to determine the position of a given sentence in a sentence assess. In Transformer, 
the model is built based on the probability of appearance of a given word at a specific position in a 
sentence is determined through cross referencing preceding and succeeding words. 
NLMs comprising several parameters and following large-scale prior learning21 through vast tex t 
data acquired a surprising amount of knowledge from their training data. This knowledge was mainly 
acquired by learning relationships among words. These models not only acquired knowledge but also 
learned the logical connections between descriptions, which cannot be acquired only by learning 
relationships among words. Therefore, they not only raised the quality in tex t generation tasks, such 
as tex t summarization or conversational response that is accurate and compositionally correct but also 
became capable of performing functions other than language tasks, such as calculation or automatic 
programming from specifications, through a single language model. 
 
Zero(Few)-Shot learning22 
The prior learning model contains all referential relationships described in the tex t of the training 
data. Therefore, domain tuning is possible without an example or with only one or two ex
amples, thus 
enabling wide-range output of arbitrary tasks. 
Few-shot learning is when a small number (10 to 100) of ex amples are offered for the task (during 
inference), and one-shot learning is when only one example is offered. Similarly, no ex
amples are 
8 
 
offered in zero-shot learning. Zero and Few-Shot learnings are highly dependent on the performance 
of the prior learning model. However, today, almost the best performances according to the 
benchmarks of successful task completion have been achieved without any task ex amples or only with 
one task ex ample without learning each domain, which was previously necessary. 
GPT-3, in particular, uses prompt learning23. Due to its high performance, it has become an almost 
de facto tuning method for subsequent NLMs. In prompt learning, simple ex changes are tuned on the 
dialog UI screen by presenting ex amples of simple sentence pairs according to the type of shot learning. 
This is commonly known as sequential learning. In this case, additional learning methods can be 
understood as the process of additional adjustment to determine which relationships among the vast 
number of tex t pairs in the NLM the domain should prioritize. 
 
Language benchmark 
The evaluation of NLM is ex tremely important when using the model. For instance, a person can 
determine the naturalness of a simplesentence. However, quantifying this naturalness in number is 
fundamentally difficult. If quantification of evaluation was at all possible, NLP can be conducted 
simply by supplying the quantified evaluation to an algorithm. With this situation in the background, 
several benchmarks24 have been devised as evaluation index es for NLP based on training data written 
by humans to enable objective evaluation through tests. For instance, they could include questions and 
answers, tex t generation, natural language inference of logical connections across several stages, 
solutions through referencing, and the resolution of ambiguity in the meaning of a word and its 
translation ( common in tests with the Japanese language). 
The time between the proposal of a benchmark and for an AI to ex ceed the human scores in it is 
becoming decreasing every year25. When examining several ex amples, including the widely used 
MNIST26 and recent GLUE27, it shows that AI took more than 15 years to ex ceed human scores in 
MNIST, which was proposed before 2000, it only took less than 3 years in GLUE, despite the fact that 
it was proposed recently and the contents of benchmarks became advanced. 
Since deep learning became widespread in the 2010s, the score is improving rapidly, and despite 
the fact that GLUE was proposed in accordance with this era of deep learning, AI score ex ceeding 
human scores was reported only after two years. Earlier, research and development in NLP system 
built systems only to improve benchmark and achieve higher scores. Today, however, this approach 
has changed where more general NLP systems are built, which are then ex amined through various 
benchmarks. In other words, it has shifted from learning for the sake of tests to conducting general 
and wide-ranging learning before taking tests. This indicates the fact that technologically, the 
performances of the current general-purpose NLP systems not specialized in any individual tasks and 
domains are equal to those of the specialized systems. 
Currently, ex isting benchmarks are becoming useless owing to the development in NLP technology 
9 
 
in recent years, and new benchmarks are being proposed28. Additionally, benchmarks are being used 
for assessing performance and conducting detailed diagnoses of operations. Moreover, most 
benchmarks focuse on specific task or domain because creation of universal benchmark is 
difficult. 
 However, several problems can arise while realizing applications of LLMs when these applications 
are used in society. Therefore, researchers have been conducted to determine new benchmarks that 
improve the shortcomings of ex isting benchmarks and are more suitable for social implementation to 
further refine NLP systems. Simultaneously, other aspects are ex pected of new benchmarks. The 
situation demands a serious ex amination of the risks of natural language models through the 
benchmarks. 
Many people believe that the current benchmarks are insufficient for the evaluation of several 
important risks. For instance, let us consider a situation where the output provided by an application 
that uses a natural language model for a given input is incorrect. Can we be sure that people will not 
believe this information to be true? For instance, if this application usually offers information that is 
almost 100% trustworthy, when as an ex ception the information it has given is incorrect, people would 
normally continue to trust the application. This would then become the trust bias and people would 
believe the incorrect information. Under such a situation, problems ex ist even when there is no 
malicious intent. Thus, usage of natural language models inherently contains significant risks. 
At this point, the only solution is to avoid evaluating natural language models only through 
benchmark tools and let people actually test and verify them. Thus, it is important to conduct further 
discussions on risk reduction. As discussed earlier, the reproduction of harmful social stereotypes by 
natural language models are becoming a major problem.29 In fact, one can say that studies on such 
problems are only at their initial stage. There are many people who are hoping for further 
improvements in benchmarks for better evaluation of risks. 
 
Multilingual support 
Diversity in a language is also an ex tremely important aspect of natural language models. The 
structure of a language is usually of an ex tremely localized nature, as it is heavily influenced by the 
place and culture in which it was born. A pretraining model is ex pected not only to learn cross-
referencing in one language but also to learn the universal relationships shared across multiple 
languages. Therefore, the learned universality across multiple languages is essentially the distributed 
representation that should be contained within a natural language model. In other words, it is a feature 
representation vector that should acquire. If distributed representation has acquired universality, it 
means it has acquired various relationships corresponding with objects and circumstances at a more 
fundamental language level. Thus, one can infer that even when language is different in each country, 
it does not cause problems for language models. For this reason, by using language data that is as 
10 
 
wide-ranging as possible to build a natural language model, it is possible not only to achieve two-
directional multilingual machine translation but also to make the natural language model itself of 
higher quality. 
In principle, bidirectional tex t data of the translation source and language to be translated into is 
necessary for translation. However, when a natural language model acquires distributed representation, 
machine translation of a language is ex pected to become possible, even when no sufficient 
bidirectional tex t data for its learning is available. In fact, Google announced during its development 
meeting on May 2022 that a single language approach, whereby a language model learns translation 
of a new language even when there is an insufficient amount of training data, is possible, and it newly 
added 24 languages to its translation service30. While these 24 languages are not regarded as major 
languages, the total of their users are as large as 300 million people. Thus, there is high ex pectation 
for the expansion this nex
t generation translation will offer. 
As there are more than 7,000 languages in the world31 (and strictly speaking, distinguishing among 
these languages is considerably difficult), only a small part of these languages can be translated today. 
It is known that the languages around the world are derived from the top language families31. While 
only a small number of languages have been modeled thus far, these have still had impacts on the 
improvement of distributed representation. As the number of modeled languages will increase in the 
future, one can ex pect that LLMs will acquire further universality. Moreover, accommodating more 
languages is known to be useful for responding to unknown languages. Machine translation 
accommodating every language in the world is not only an important technological challenge in itself, 
but also an intellectual challenge to understanding the language itself, considering the current position 
of natural language models. 
 
These keywords will help us to understand NLP by Transformer. If a natural language model 
possesses all these characteristics, one can say that the expression “practice makes one perfect” 
applies to AI as well. As the results of current NLP can appear to understand the meaning of language, 
the phrase ‘natural language understanding’ is beginning to be used. This is because the system appears 
to understand the content of a tex t and processes it considering its meaning. While whether the system 
truly understands the meaning is still being debated, it is undeniable that ex tremely advance processing 
has become possible. 
 
2. Natural language processing technology application 
GPT-3 was released on July 2020 as the third large-scale natural language model by OpenAI as a 
result of NLP. Its impact grew larger with time32, and now it is highly possible that, in a few years, it 
will be regarded as the turning point of AI itself. GPT-3 is a natural language model with the 
Transformer that has 175 billion parameters trained with several trillion words. 
11 
 
GPT-3 has ex tremely advanced NLP capability, and it processes and generates tex t as though it is a 
human. For instance, when a user inputs text on the prompt window, where tex
t inputs and outputs are 
fed, GPT-3 returns an output in the form of an email, tweet, or trivia quiz with consistent topics 
according to the purpose. Thus, an environment where, in principle, the entire tex t of an email, 
ex change with customers, social media entry, and news article, or at least parts of them, can be 
automatically generated suddenly emerged. 
The usage policy of GPT-3 by OpenAI supports commercial application, and in response, business 
application started instantly. Using such a natural language model, a new start-up can launch an 
application; thus, GPT-3 and its equivalent models can deliver easy access to the enormous power of 
AI to the people who are investigating the application of NLP around the world33. Indeed, when the 
author of this paper searched GPT-3 as an author in Amazon34, he found publications where GPT-3 is 
listed as the co-author. While it appears that human help is still needed to fine-tune the tex ts from GPT-
3, the fact that these publications are for sale indicates an ex tremely important turning point. 
 
2.1 Examples of business applications of GPT-3 
For ex ample, OthersideAI35 can generate an entire email from only the keywords of the main tex t 
or from its opening line. Examples of such tex
t generation from keywords also include Broca36 and 
Snazzy37 used for writing advertisement copies or campaign contents. Both companies offer trials. 
Thus, these innovations in automatic text generation can be experienced immediately. These ex
amples 
are thoroughly discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
While email has occupied a significant position as an important communication tool since the early 
days of the Internet until today, in recent years it has also been regarded as a representative of 
decreasing productivity, or indeed its cause. OthersideAI solved this problem by overcoming the 
productivity loss caused by writing e-mails, and instead is utilizing GPT-3 to increase productivity. In 
principle, let us think of a combination of a question and an answer. Not only is this generated each 
time, but it also enables detailed adjustment for each scenario even if they have similar contents, 
allowing for minor changes and the addition of necessary information for each scenario. Thus, it can 
accommodate several scenarios and situations, such as sales, support, and marketing, that 
conventionally required reorganization each time, without any problem as a common engine. Their 
demo offers an example of an email where a complete tex
t was generated only after input of keywords. 
It shows that it only requires entry of necessary and sufficient words, and the remaining email is 
generated automatically. 
Seen from another perspective, this automatic tex t generation function can also be used as typing 
assistance. When writing e-mails, using one’s own ex pression for every word and clause is difficult to 
begin with, and for business correspondence, a large portion of one’s email is standard ex pressions. In 
any case, there is no problem with the tex t itself if most of it was automatically generated. This means, 
12 
 
for instance, when writing a text through eye gaze input, tex
t is generated only through the input of 
initial words and the rest of the process only requires only checking and minor corrections. The 
benefits of such a process are in immeasurable. 
Such text generation through input assistance was not ex
pected at the start of the service. Instead, 
its possibility was recognized during the verification and analysis of automatically generated tex ts, 
which was then chosen as an area of its application. Indeed, one can say that it is one of the easiest 
input assistance tools developed so far. 
Broca and Snazzy that offers advertisement service fully utilizes tex t generation through keyword 
input. The fact that a campaign contents that takes contex t into account can be automatically generated 
from the input of one word, or from ex tremely short but impactful advertisement copy, appears to be 
a highly convenient service. 
With this automatic generation contents by an AI, Broca is attempting to ex pand contents marketing. 
Its strength is the fact that contents with high quality that used to take a few hours, or even a few days, 
to prepare can be generated in a few minutes. To quell doubt on its quality and guarantee its good 
performance, all the contents in the website of Broca is being generated through the service it offers. 
Naturally, this indicates their confidence in the quality of the contents their service offers, which can 
provide everything from contents for advertisement to social media posts. 
For instance, its website lists an ex ample of generating campaign contents for a new product. It is a 
three-step process. In reality, the first two to three sentences entered at the first step are the only input 
required from the user. The content is automatically generated only after this input, and one can obtain 
promotion content of any type consistent with its contex t. 
Several ex amples of BERT as a basic element have been reported in the literature. 
FORETHOUGHT38 provides a question-and-answer search AI agent called Agatha. Agatha uses 
knowledge-based articles and help desk templates to answer general questions through e-mails and 
Web widgets. It offers immediate answers to users. One feature of Agatha is continuous training 
through machine learning and NLP for the purpose of constant improvement with time. It can already 
accommodate 100 languages and is offering language solutions globally. 
Gong39 provides a nex t-generation CRM that performs speech analysis of conversations with 
customers. As a result, several thousand sales teams have completed business using the NLP function 
of Gong, shortening their selling cycles. As 99% of the information one shares with the customers 
does not reach CRM and the remaining 1% is heavily filtered, they are not useful for sales. For this 
reason, Gong ex tracts elements with higher order insights that are relevant for information necessary 
for real business dealings by applying NLP on information from the customers. It copies e-mails, 
phone calls and video calls from customers, then analyzes all the elements that can potentially lead to 
insights on whether the clients are prepared to propose updates on products or whether there are risks 
of losing business by utilizing machine learning. 
13 
 
Moveworks40 provides a bot that can autonomously solve various problems of the staff when they 
are using IT. In addition, it is enabled to understand conversation and ambiguous questions through its 
NLP function. Starting in the summer of 2018 where it autonomously solved 20% of IT-related 
problems for a customer without human support, the bot can currently solve up to 40% of these 
problems, and under certain circumstances, it can solve 65% of problems. In other words, 65% of 
problems that arise when using IT can be autonomously solved. See below for ex amples. 
Ex ample ’Question’ → ‘Automatic answer’ 
‘I want to edit a PDF file.’ → ‘I will issue an Acrobat Pro license.’ 
‘I want a new keyboard because I’m working remotely.’ → ‘Which one of these keyboards do you 
want? Please select the number.’ 
‘I forgot my password.’ → ‘Please follow this link to create a new password.’ 
 
Application of this function is clearly not limited to the IT field; this AI function has ex panded into 
the fields of human resources, general affairs, and finance. 
OBSERVE.AI41 analyzes the work of contact centers to optimize the same. Based on the ex perience 
that, at a contact center, only 1%, 2%, or even fewer phone calls will reach the other person, 
OBSERVE.AI applied speech analysis to this unex plored field. By using transcription of speech to 
tex t and NLP, they can discover the points of interest within a conversation, and they successfully used 
it to improve the customer ex perience. To better understand the mood of customers, they apply 
supervised learning to conversations at call centers, which led to better customer ex periences. 
 
 
2.2 Technologies that apply GPT-3 
DALL･E for flexible image generation through language and CLIP for flexible caption writing. 
OpenAI released DALL･E42, which is capable of generating images from tex t. It learns 12 billion 
parameter versions of GPT-3 through tex t and image pairs. It reads the contents of the tex ts entered 
and can generate images that do not ex ist in its learning data through combination within the model. 
The released ex amples43 show that it can generate an image (to be precise, an image group) from 
descriptions that are seemingly complete when a person reads it, but it becomes clear that detailed 
conditions are not given when one actually tries to draw from them, such as “avocado-like chair” or 
“a vase on the stool by the bed.” 
In the training of Transformer, elements that are seemingly unrelated are reflected in the training by 
weighting their necessary relationships under every condition. Thus, one can say that it is ex tracting 
all the necessary conditions for actually generating images, i.e. the detailed conditions necessary for 
drawing that are obvious conditions and can be obtained by pretraining the already learned 
commonsense, for instance light direction, shadow, tex ture, and the direction of the bedside. Thus, the 
14 
 
missing conditions are inferred to be necessary and sufficient conditions, enabling it to make a drawing 
that is a resolved picture without any problem. These conditions include various transformations, such 
as personification and the usage of emoji. It also appears to be capable of considerably flex ible 
transformation, within the range possible from the interpretation of the tex t, such as simplification or 
the display of details. As it includes the information complemented during image generation and, in a 
sense, re-links the complemented tex ts and images, this suggests another usage as an advanced 
automatic caption generation function, and ex amples of such usage are available. 
Contrastive Language–Image Pretraining (CLIP) 44 with the announcement of the DALL ･E 
performs the high-precision prediction of image and tex t snippet (caption) pairs through the new type 
of pretraining that combines an image encoder45 and tex t encoder. There are still some major problems 
in image and its tex t description. The goal is to achieve what is known as the zero-shot category, 
meaning that high-precision tex t caption can be predicted for image data not used for its training. 
One of the key ideas is a method that is simple but effective, namely the learning through a large 
amount of data, which has been shown in many ex amples thus far. While ImageNet uses 14 million 
images for its training, CLIP uses a large-scale dataset that contains 400 million pairs. Moreover, CLIP 
training uses pairs of various images and their captions on the Internet to realize the zero-shot function. 
In the actual training, an image and its corresponding caption are not directly optimized. Instead, it 
predicts the tex t label that has the closest relationship with the image. 
CLIP selects a tex t caption from 32,768 randomly sampled captions. This is efficiently performed 
through Transformer. Let us look at an easy exam ample. If the candidates for the caption include “a dog 
running,” “a cat sleeping on a sofa,” “a playing dog,” and “a dog sleeping in its kennel,” and the image 
shows a “cat,” “a cat sleeping on a sofa” has the highest probability to be the correct caption and is 
therefore selected. Images and tex t captions are linked through repetition of this process. Distributed 
representation of images and distributed representation of tex ts are being learned. Languages and 
images are strongly linked through the connections at the word and image fragment level. By using 
CLIP, labeling now done by humans can be completely automated. As labeling of images is very 
ex pensive, there are high hopes for its application. 
 
 
Power Apps46 
Microsoft is in partnership with OpenAI. Afterthe release of GPT-3, it signed an ex clusive contract 
with OpenAI for its usage47. The development platform of OpenAI has moved to Microsoft Azure, its 
cloud environment. During the developer’s meeting, Build2021, it was announced that this powerful 
natural language model GPT-3 will be used for Power Apps, and several demonstrations were 
conducted. Power Apps, the released product, is popular as a low-code application development 
platform among wide-ranging users, from so-called Sunday programmers to professional developers 
15 
 
whose job is programming. 
When GPT-3 was integrated into Power Apps, it became possible to build applications from 
descriptions in natural language without considering codes and mathematical formulas. It 
automatically converts explanations in English into Power Fx
. As the NLP function of GPT-3 is 
integrated into Power Fx 48, it also became possible to build applications by supplying samples through 
prompts. 
The new NLP function enabled by GPT-3 will be integrated into famous major products such as 
Azure in the future49. As the ex act same result as the description through mathematical formula can be 
achieved through simple words, anyone can create an application that even includes AI. 
Thus, Transformer and Attention, which is one of its core technologies, conduct learning with an 
ex tremely large number of parameters containing vast amounts of data using deep learning, which is 
the basic technology of AI software today, as well as GPGPU, which enables efficient usage of GPU 
as hardware. This situation was explained through the ex
ample of GPT-3, which caused quite a shock 
when it was released. The technology improved even further following this, as it generated competition 
to release new technologies. Some of these will be discussed later. 
 
3 Trends in Japan 
3.1 Accommodating the Japanese language 
It would be difficult for a single Japanese company to create a super-large-scale natural language 
model as good as the GPT-3. Thus, we must consider how NLP technology should be approached in 
Japan. For instance, one approach is to have several organizations collaborate to build a super-large-
scale natural language model. If one is to build a natural language model on the scale of GPT-3, the 
necessary calculation resources are estimated to be equivalent to using RAIDEN of RIKEN for 24 
hours every day for a year. (As mentioned earlier, if limited to natural language, the calculation 
resource capability improved by 600 times in the last four years. This speed of improvement is 
projected to stay the same according to the roadmaps of various companies involved in GPU. 
Therefore, one can also take a position that, as long as hardware can be updated, the calculation 
resources per unit time will eventually stop being a problem.) However, aside from the calculation 
resources, there is the issue of how to collect training data. This is a problem caused by the fact that 
we use Japanese, which is a language unique to the country of Japan. Even though, as long as there 
are texts, they can be used as training data, a significant amount of tex
t data that is comprehensive and 
without bias is necessary to build a practical general-purpose natural language model. This is an 
especially serious issue. 
Another approach to address this issue is to improve the algorithm. For ex ample, the same level of 
capability to that of GPT-3 was observed in PET/iPET50 only with 230 million parameters. Moreover, 
it ex ceeded the score of GPT-3 in SuperGLUE51, which is a benchmark. It is a semi-supervised 
16 
 
learning method where additional training data is generated from few-shot ex amples using the preleant 
ALBERT52. PET functions by first converting entered ex amples into cloze-style phrases. These are 
used to fine-tune natural language model ensembles. Then they are used to attach annotations to large 
unlabeled datasets to generate datasets with soft labels. The final model is fine-tuned through the soft-
labeled data. This soft-labeled training data is used for the main training. In this case, the training cost, 
including that of resources, can be reduced to about 1/500, meaning that if the computing environment 
were the same, what took 500 days before would be ready in less than one day of calculation. It enables 
one to develop new strategic methodologies, such as shortening of training time or scaling down of 
the computing environment. 
 
3.2 Resources in Japan 
For reference, the representative natural language models (BERT) that are available in Japan are 
listed below. Most of them take the form of free use open source licenses53, and one can use them at 
one’s own company. As it provides a general-purpose model that already completed pretraining, it 
enables trials to easily be run on tasks because one does not need to build pretraining from scratch, 
even though it will require zero (few)-shot learning when used at one’s own company. Currently, there 
are many ex amples of business applications using BERT, which is relatively agile, instead of using 
super-large-scale GPT-3. Moreover, it is also true that there is still a large scope for innovation as the 
underlying technology, as the ex ample of PET/iPET shows. It is important that today, by using the 
BERT pretraining model, each user actually can apply it to problems to be solved and tasks to be 
performed. The BERT-type Japanese model (Large) released by the Kawahara Lab at Waseda 
University is one of the most complete models in Japan54.  
 
 
Table 1 Japanese BERT Models (Sources: Each URL) 
Producer 
Software 
framework 
Used Data 
open 
source 
license 
URL 
Google 
TensorFlow 2 
Japanese 
Wikipedia, etc. 
Apache 2.0 
https://github.com/google-
research/bert/blob/master/multilingual.md 
Kyoto univ. 
Kurohashi-Chu-
Murakami Lab. 
Wasade univ. 
Kawahara Lab. 
TensorFlow 2 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
Japanese 
Wikipedia, 
CC-
100 
Apache 2.0 (Bert 
base) 
CC BY-SA 4.0 
(RoBert base) 
https://nlp.ist.i.kyoto-
u.ac.jp/index .php?ku_bert_japanese 
https://huggingface.co/nlp-
waseda/roberta-base-japanese 
https://huggingface.co/nlp-
waseda/roberta-large-japanese 
(Newer RoBERTa-base) 
17 
 
Tohoku 
Univ. 
Inui-Suzuki Lab. 
 
TensorFlow 2 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
Japanese 
Wikipedia 
Apache 2.0 
https://github.com/cl-tohoku/bert-
japanese 
NICT 
TensorFlow 2 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
Japanese 
Wikipedia 
CC BY 4.0 
https://alaginrc.nict.go.jp/nict-
bert/index .html 
GPT Model and CLIP 
rinna corp. 
(GPT) 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
Japanese 
C4, 
CC-100, 
Wikipedia 
MIT 
https://huggingface.co/rinna/japanese-gpt-1b 
rinna corp 
(CLIP) 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
CC-100, 
Wikipedia, 
CC12M 
Apache 2.0 
https://huggingface.co/rinna/japanese-clip-vit-
b-16 
rinna corp 
(CLOOB) 
PyTorch 
Transformers 
CC-100, 
Wikipedia, 
CC12M 
Apache 2.0 
https://huggingface.co/rinna/japanese-cloob-
vit-b-16 
 
On January 2022, the Japanese GPT language model was launched 55. Rinna, which became 
independent from Microsoft, released a natural language model specialized for Japanese with 1.3 
billion parameters. It is provided under the MIT license and can be used commercially. The release of 
a Japanese GPT model that is more advanced than BERT is attracting attention, as it can be easily used 
in a relatively short amount of time after only few-shot learning, such as prompt learning or fine-
tuning according to the purpose of each practical application. On May 12, 2022, the same company 
released CLIP and its improved version, CLOOB 56. The licensing of both of these allow for 
commercial usage. They will be discussed together.  For more information on recent Japanese LLM, 
please refer to the summary site57 and the LLM study group58 set up by top Japanese researchers. 
 
3.3 Discussions within Japan 
The LINE dialog system won two prizes during the dialog system symposium competition of The 
Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, and in its evaluation, it was commended for being 
indistinguishable from humans. LINE entered the competition with a dialog system utilizing the large-
scale Japanese language model59 developed with NEVER from South Korea. LINE won first place at 
the Open track and Situation track of live competition 4 at the dialog system symposium. “A 
HyperCLOVA60-based Chatbot with Unified Persona-Consistency Consideration and Knowledge 
Base” won top scores in two categories. 
It is inferred that development took about a year since the release of the general-purpose natural 
18 
 
language model by LINE in November 2020. At the point of its release, it was the first super-large 
natural model in Japanese, and it utilized a super computer with performance capability ex ceeding 
700PFLOPS. It has more than 175 billion parameters, and more than 10 billion pages of Japanese data 
was prepared. Indeed, looking at the actual development history, up to 39 billion parameter models 
can be used in its Japanese model, and up to 82 billion in can be used in its multilingual model that 
includes Japanese. 
During the ex planation for developers in November 2021 by LINE, a detailed evaluation of the 
following topics was offered: Its natural response, i.e., whether conversations are smoothly conducted; 
if it is following a topic, i.e., whether it can follow the topic in its responses; if it is providing a topic 
or asking a question, i.e., whether it can provide a topic at each response; and its achievement of goals, 
i.e., whether the purpose of the dialogs are being achieved. According to the ex planation by LINE, the 
result of performing these evaluations on the natural language models with different parameters during 
various tasks showed that the 39 billion parameters model scored the highest at almost every task. 
However, there were also aspects that require further improvement. For instance, the response to users 
with negative feelings requires a considerable amount of improvement. 
It is an important result indicating that the preparation and application of large-scale natural 
language models of Japanese have started, and that they can achieve satisfactory results. In 2023 July 
4th, NICT reports that it has created a pre-training LLM with high-quality Japanese tex t data.61 
 
4 Large-scale language model that can potentially lead to general-purpose AI 
4.1 Foundation Models 
At Stanford University, very large natural language models are being proposed as foundation models. 
This is because the result of the evaluation of multimodal activities using them demonstrated that they 
can be the basic model not only for language by also for various AI tasks62. At their workshop63, they 
discussed not only the technological aspects, but also much wider subjects, taking into account the 
fact that the realization of general-purpose AI is becoming realistic, which they believe will play an 
important role in the future society. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Foundation Models is trends of Deep Learning54 
 
19 
 
As a basic concept, Deep Learninghas been developed around features, while it is said that 
foundation models are further developing in this vein and placing an emphasis on “function.” Fig.6 
shows the overview of AI trends. 
The large-scale natural language models that were trained with large-scale and wide-ranging data, 
in other words the foundation models, are models that can accommodate diverse downstream tasks64 
(BERT, GPT-3, DALL-E, CLIP, etc.), and they clearly have achieved a paradigm shift. Naturally, 
foundation models are ex tensions of conventional deep learning, and even though they are based on 
self-supervised learning and transfer learning, they do not appear to be particularly unique at first, 
aside from their vast numbers of training data and training parameters. However, their performances 
appear to offer new emergent functions, and their effectiveness has been demonstrated in an ex tremely 
high number of tasks. 
Stanford's argument starts at this point. One model can accommodate every task, even multimodal 
inter-task tasks, providing powerful leverage, but it also means all its downstream adaptive models 
inherit the defects in the foundation model.  Thus, one must pay the utmost attention to its influence. 
With foundation models, which have a far larger number of parameters compared to preceding deep 
learning, this is even more pronounced. Despite wide-ranging benchmark results, there is still no 
sufficient understanding of how the models might function, how they can potentially fail, and what is 
most important for emergent characteristics. 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 The scope of discussion in Emergence and homogenization54 
One of the guiding principles of Stanford today is to take this situation seriously and to 
systematically address it while following the major flow in the field. They ex amine the potentials and 
risks of various subjects, from the functions of foundation models (language, vision, robotics, 
reasoning, interaction with human, etc.) to their technological principles, (model architecture, learning 
20 
 
procedure, data, system, security, etc.) and they discuss their possible applications (e.g. law, healthcare, 
and education) as well as their possible social impacts (e.g. equality (inequality), misuse, financial and 
environmental impact, and legal/ethical considerations). A diverse number of topics have been/should 
be discussed. Fig.7 lists the important keywords. In addition to technological aspects, they also 
seriously consider how technology groups are positioned within society, clearly indicating the 
possibility and influence of these technologies. 
 
4.2 Essence of natural language models 
Now, why do natural language models have such multimodal character? This was also debated 
during the workshop. In principle, a consensus is forming that this is due to an ex tremely simple reason. 
Namely, as language has the capacity to represent almost all human activities, converting it into objects 
and circumstances is thought to be relatively easy once its representational ability is modeled. 
Therefore, as natural language models learn distributed representation without any distinction, its 
training data is diverse and wide-ranging. Thus, it would contain a large amount of objects and 
circumstances, allowing it to reach the level where it is capable of tex t description regardless of 
modality. Lastly, when this distributed representation can be converted back to objects and 
circumstances, they are recreated as multimodality. 
Fig.8 shows a comparison of a common natural language model and foundation models. One can 
understand foundation models as something that developed from natural language models, which only 
handle texts, and expanded into multimodality, while still centered on tex
t. 
 
 
Fig. 8 From NLP models to Foundation Models54 
 
Foundation Models significantly improve the NLP system further, which clearly functions in the 
way similar to humans. Moreover, the language systems they acquire or the learning process they use 
21 
 
will likely to be completely different from those of human language learning. Understanding the 
meaning of the difference between NLP, which is obtained as the result of machine learning, and 
human language learning is ex tremely important for comprehending the limit and potentials of more 
powerful foundation models that will appear in the future, and for effectively utilizing them. For 
instance, human language acquisition appears to be ex tremely efficient compared to machine learning. 
For ex ample, foundation models such as GPT-3 must learn language data that contains three to four 
digits more words than most people would hear or read in their lifetimes. No children would grow up 
in such an environment. 
 
4.3 Robotics and large-scale natural language model 
When building a large-scale language model, the model is trained with an ex tremely large amount 
of tex t data. The emergence of four arithmetic operations as a result of this was discussed earlier. 
Moreover, it is natural to consider the possibility of functions other than language emerging from the 
training data. In the following, discussions on robotics, which do not appear to be close to NLP at first, 
will be presented. 
Fig.9 shows the representative input data of foundation models and the case where the same is 
applied to robotics. It becomes clear that robotics must function as though it was an integrated system.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Robotics as an ex ample of using Foundation Models54 
 
It is ex pected that whether foundation models can become literally foundational or not will be made 
clearer by considering their application to robotics. Furthermore, the fact that robots must interact with 
22 
 
real environments is also very important. That is because it must clearly solve the symbol grounding 
problem, which is also often a problem for general-purpose AI. 
Robotics requires large-scale datasets that cover diverse environments and operations. Currently, 
various approaches are being taken, including in regard to how data should be collected in real and 
virtual environments. Even without the application to robotics, simulations, interactions between 
robots, videos of humans, and ex planations of operations/environments through natural language are 
all useful as data for foundation models. The fact that evaluations of success/failure from more 
complex  data sources are required, and that the tasks involve the same operation under different 
environments, normally in zero-shot, significantly increases the difficulty. 
Due to this fact, data with multiple modalities transcends the framework of NLP since they contain 
video. On the other hand, it is inferred that by taking into account the characteristics of the foundation 
model, a wide array of issues could be resolved. This includes specifications for robotics, 
supervised/unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning65,66. 
 
4.4 Correspondence with the real world. 
Issuing orders, or inputs, to robots in normal language is one of the dream technologies. To achieve 
this, robots must understand the common sense and premises that supplement human conversation. 
Thus, considering input to robots as an ex tension of the aforementioned DALL･E and CLIP would be 
ex tremely useful. If the content of a tex t can be converted into images, it can potentially be turned into 
robot operations in a similar way. There is a report stating that the image capture generating capacity 
of CLIP is superior to models using deep imaging or room layout mapping in the Room Rearrangement 
Challenge67. This indicates that the arrangement of objects is accurately grasped. With this in mind, 
let us think of a general and ideal interaction with a robot. 
Let us think of a situation where, while following an input stating “prepare breakfast,” the robot 
infers/supplements all other elements to prepare said breakfast. A human would ask about unclear 
information on the spot to supplement it. Furthermore, he/she would first check what ingredients are 
available before preparing the breakfast. In addition, if one does not understand the concept of the 
place called the kitchen, one cannot prepare breakfast to begin with. To take real action, a robot must 
process numerous conditions and adapt to its environment. To solve this issue, it is necessary to 
integrate all the information and link the same to physical realization in response to tex t (or speech) 
input. This is significantly different in its character from the research problems of NLP or image 
processing (computer vision). At Stanford University, this possibility is being verified by using 
foundation models as the foundational models for robotics. This is one of the approaches to realize the 
usage of robots in everyday life. 
In the high-level contex t of breakfast preparation, there is a significant amount of ambiguity, and it 
involves interdependent and interacting tasks. Furthermore, as it involves interaction with the physical 
23 
 
world, every task requires details to be concretely defined. In order for a task to be sufficiently concrete 
and clear and to achieve its objectives, it must be broken into sub-tasks, and sub-objectives must be 
designated. Following this, the task to be ex ecuted can be specified. While natural language models 
are currently not able to realize every task, one can say that they have more than sufficient potential 
to be foundation models. Needless say, foundation models that can adapt to a body that interacts with 
its environment, like a robot, are more evolved general-purpose AI. 
 By understanding the purpose of a task, the robot will become capable of diverse conditioning 
accompanying a hierarchical task structure. As task specifications are normally provided by humans, 
quantifiable metrics for objectively measuring the task itself, to understand how a robot actually 
evaluates and completes the task, are not always available. Foundation Models function to convert the 
task specifications written in a natural way by humans into the task specifications for robots. This 
conversion includes a self-evaluation function through a reward function and signals necessary for 
operation. Thus, it will also become possible for the robot to evaluate the task by itself. They believe 
that, as a result, it will become possible to provide optimization of robot operation, diagnosis of 
obstacles and feedback to humans. 
For instance, it is already known that it is possible to encode the general ex planation of a kitchen, 
such as the facts that the oven is normally placed by a wall and it must be switched on to produce heat, 
into the prior information learned through the offline video of human interactions with robots, tex ts 
and/or simulations. Through such common sense knowledge, physical prior probability and visual 
prior probability, the robot is ex pected to become capable of adapting to new environments more 
efficiently. Similarly, by using many cooking videos in the training data set, it will become possible to 
learn how to adapt to the taste of a small number of users, or that of a specific one, from the 
foundational model of robot task training through adjustment of the data, in addition to learning the 
policies of common skills such as “frying an egg.” With a trained foundation model, one can simply 
provide a description saying “I want to eat breakfast,” and then it will prepare a fried egg cooked in 
the way one likes, as well as bread and coffee. 
From another perspective, in the application of foundation models to robotics, there are major issues 
accompanying physical realization, namely safety and robustness. As mentioned earlier, this is the 
perspective that makes it significantly different from NLP or computer vision. Needless to say, what 
is ultimately necessary for a robot is its operation in a real environment, regardless of how satisfactory 
its performance in a virtual space is after training with multimodal data. On the one hand, it is 
ex tremely important to ensure safety and robustness during this operation. On the other hand, this 
would make development of a foundational model even more complicated. That is because this 
perspective is not necessary contained in the data. Another problem is the fact that the data collected 
in real environments contains information that does not ex ist in foundation models, because its 
collection involves direct interaction with environments in physical worlds. It is not difficult to 
24 
 
imagine that such information will be closely related to safety. This is normally handled by restricting 
the system to limit its interaction with the real world. The task is learned under this environment 
without making critical mistakes. 
There is often debate about the chicken or the egg problem, where safety limitations for the system 
must be assigned before data can be collected. It is imperative  to consider many factors when 
interacting and training in an environment. Take training in the kitchen as an ex ample. In the kitchen, 
the system must learn to detect anything that can break. One also has to consider whether items that 
may break should be replaced when collecting data. Alternatively, the environment should be left as it 
is so that the system will learn that these items can be damaged. When conducting training without 
interruption, one must choose the former. However, the latter is necessary to generalize various 
stimulations and unpredictable behaviors. The causal analysis of agents68, safety evaluation tools and 
realistic simulation environments69,70,71 are being debated. 
Thus, one can conclude that robotics and foundation models have an ex tremely close relationship. 
At the same time, data is even more important in this field. Significant effort is required to collect or 
generate data that covers the wide range that includes diverse environments of the physical world and 
various states of ex ecution. Moreover, this data is directly connected to the safety and robustness of 
the system. This offers a very important perspective. 
 However, it is not as simple as the adaptation of foundation models by robotics leading to the 
realization of an ideal robot. For instance, in order for a robot to reproduce the action of closing buttons 
while putting on clothes, a foundation model alone is insufficient. That is because, while the 
foundation model would contain the expres pression “closing buttons,” the specific procedure would not 
be outlined. To be ex act, the action of closing one button would involve holding a button, holding the 
edge of the front side of one’s top (crest) corresponding to the position of the button, inserting the 
button held at right angles into a buttonhole from the back, and then making the button horizontal 
again when releasing it. No such descriptions would be contained in normal tex t data. Folding clothes 
is a similar case. There is a possibility that foundation models are not actually suitable for actions 
humans perform without thinking. One can only hope that this will be addressed by future 
developments. 
 
5 Introduction of the topics related to natural language models after GPT-3 
In this section, the technologies released after GPT-3 will be briefly discussed. These technologies 
are directly or indirectly linked to GPT-3. 
 
5.1 MT-NLG72, a powerful natural language model by Microsoft and NVIDIA 
MT-NLG is a natural language model developed by Microsoft and NVIDIA, and it has 530 billion 
parameters, which is 3 times more than those in GPT-3. Consisting of 105 layers, it is currently the 
25 
 
largest natural language model. At release, it was announced that its capability ex ceeded the 
performance of all ex isting NLP models. Training with such a large number of parameters required 
coordination with hardware, and realization of such was only possible through collaboration between 
Microsoft and NVIDIA. Its heart is a super computer consisting of 560 DCG servers, each one 
equipped with eight A100 GPUs that contains 432 tensor cores for machine learning and 80 GB RAM. 
The size of its training dataset is 1.5 TB, comprising several hundred billion tex t data obtained from 
11 databases, including Wikipedia and PubMed. 
It has been reported that MT-NLG scored high on the benchmarks for prediction of complete tex t 
according to its meaning, reading comprehension, generation of logical conclusions, generation of 
conclusions in natural language and distinguishing between words with multiple meanings. 
Moreover, the developers commented that they identified an emergence of the function that 
displayed the comprehension of the simplest mathematics, which was also reported in other large-
scale natural language models73. Nevertheless, the bias problem ex ists in MT-NLG, and scaling up 
alone will not solve it. Below is an ex ample from MT-NLG. It is interesting that “True” or “False” 
judgments are being made, indicating thatit is capable of evaluating the content of the tex t. 
 
Prompt: 
The banker forgot that the judge advised the professors. 
Question: The judge advised the professors. True or False? 
Answer:(MT-NLG)True. The banker forgot that the judge advised the professors. 
 
 
Prompt: 
Famous professors supported the secretary. 
Question: Professors supported the secretary. True or False? 
Answer:(MT-NLG)True. The secretary was supported by famous professors. 
 
5.2 Microsoft Project Florence-VL74 
One of the chief goals of artificial intelligence is to develop an algorithm that can effectively learn 
from multimodality data. The linking of image and tex t is equivalent to the linking of vision and 
language we habitually perform to understand the world around us. At the moment, bidirectional 
conversing between text and image, namely searching images that correspond the best to a tex
t query 
and generating a text ex
planation of an image, is becoming common. One approach to this is Florence-
VL (Florence-Vision and Language Project) launched by Microsoft. 
Web and social media are full of image and tex t pairs, which functions as an annotation of the image. 
The corresponding can be used as data labels for supervised learning. Moreover, as many videos 
26 
 
contain audio channels explaining their contents, it is possible to turn such audio into tex
t, which can 
then beused as labels. If such data can be used for Vision-Language Pretraining, it will be possible to 
distill cross-modal knowledge75 in the form of tex ts, images, and audio files, where knowledge 
learned in one modality becomes useful for learning in another modality, and manual data labeling is 
no longeer required. 
For Florence-VL, a large-scale model was prepared through pretraining consisting of the prediction 
of masked elements based on their context. As was the case with ex
isting Transformer-type models, 
self-supervised learning using a large number of image-tex t pair data from the Web and social media 
was employed. The cross-modal representation of this model was fine-tuned to accommodate so-called 
downstream tasks. Microsoft presented the result of this project in a series of papers that were 
published one after the other. UNITER, OSCAR, VILLA, VinVL, VIVO, and TAP all have their own 
unique features. For instance, VIVO achieved equivalency with humans in the new image caption task 
(nocaps). After strengthening its pretraining by using the scene tex t detected in images, it achieved 
No.1 in the TAP Tex tCaps Challenge2021. 
Moreover, UFO and METER were developed for the end-to-end pretraining necessary for further 
improvement of Florence-VL. In addition, UNICORN, an the integrated visual image model, LEMON, 
and SimVIM related to scaling and PICa for multimodal few-shot learning have been developed. How 
these projects are closely linked to each other with the ultimate goal in mind can be demonstrated as 
thus. For instance, the model architecture developed through end-to-end pretraining functions as a 
component of the integrated visual language modeling can be increased and turned into an integrated 
solution by using another method developed for upscaling. This would naturally enable usage of the 
few-shot learning function. As a result, and by using several examples in the contex
t, an integrated VL 
foundational model is born, and it can easily adapt to various tasks. 
 
 
5.3 BigScience T0 76 
As mentioned many times in this paper, it has been reported that recent large-scale natural language 
models display generalization through zero-shot learning in diverse tasks77. A hypothesis proposing 
that this is the result of multitask learning in natural language model training has been put forward78. 
How does generalization in zero-shot learning work? How does multitask learning induce it? To 
conduct a large-scale test for answering these questions, T0, a system that can perform simple mapping 
of common natural language tasks in a prompt format humans can read, was developed and used for 
detailed analysis, and the result was published. It converted large-scale supervised datasets, and several 
prompts using various natural languages were prepared for each dataset. 
The prelearnt encoder/decoder model79,80 is fine-tuned using this multitask prompting that covers 
diverse tasks81. 
27 
 
 The result successfully answered unknown tex t questions. This means zero-shot learning was 
achieved. The zero-shot performances after the training using several standard datasets displayed 
many results that were superior to other models, whose sizes were up to 16 times larger than this model. 
Moreover, it achieved performance superior to other models, whose sizes were up to six  times larger, 
in the subset of BIG-Bench benchmark tasks. It demonstrated the potential for decreasing the model 
size through prompt learning. 
 
5.4 LaMDA, dialog approach of Google82 
The LaMDA (Language Model for Dialog Applications), which Google developed with a focus on 
conversation, saw further evolution in the field of conversation. Transformer, which was invented by 
Google, learns the connections between words. Thus, it predicts the subsequent words in a sentence 
with high precision. However in conversation, that is insufficient, and it often has to understand the 
hidden nuance in each word before performing its prediction. Therefore, LaMDA employs a method 
to learn from conversations. 
To appropriately respond during a conversation, it is insufficient to simply return a response that 
corresponds to the words being used. Instead, it is necessary to understand the contex t of the topics 
being discussed in the conversation and then offer a concrete response that is specific to this contex t. 
As Google itself explai plained, the probability of a response saying “that is good” being appropriate is 
considerably high. However, as is the case in human conversation, it is insufficient to continue a 
conversation through such unspecific responses, and evaluation of how vibrantly the ongoing 
conversation is going is also important for that conversation to develop and ex pand. 
A conversation does not have a landing point, i.e., a final destination, at first, and its topic may 
change significantly toward the end. Such a situation is sometimes praised as being full of insights, or 
witty. Regarding this, LaMDA learns the relevancy between topics, which cannot be learned only 
through word-level relationships, through conversation learning. Naturally, it is starting to ex amine 
how to offer convincing answers that also include fact checking, which has become a problem in recent 
years. It states that it will continue the effort to integrate conversational ability into more products. 
LaMDA2 was introduced during the developer summit in May 2022. LaMDA2 was refined through 
trials by a few thousand staff members of the company. One of the function demonstrations of 
LaMDA2, named ‘Imagine It,’ is capable of ex pansion into clearly relevant topics even without 
previously defined answers directly related to human input. For instance, it can ex pand the 
conversation in this way: Deep sea → (Image of) Mariana Trench → Creatures, submarine… through 
questions that stimulate the dialog. This is the result of the model integrating and responding to the 
training data. They declare that backtracking never occurs in the conversation, and it is capable of 
continuously ex panding dialog. 
 
28 
 
5.5 DeepMind RETRO (Retrieval Enhanced TRansfOrmers) 
With conventional large-scale natural language models, the size of the model and data is related to 
the performance of each, meaning that a larger size will lead to better performance. In response, 
RETRO successfully maintained the performance of the model at a smaller size through direct retrieval 
of training datasets by utilizing search. As a result, it realized significant performance improvement 
compared to the standard Transformer-based model with the same number of parameters. 
Training of a natural language model requires vast computational resources. For the training of 
large-scale natural language models, such as GPT-3 with 175 billion parameters and Microsoft with 
530 billion parameters, the computing power required is too large. Thus, RETRO uses an ex ternal 
database to reduce the training cost without shrinking the training sample size. In other words, it 
outsources some of the parameters, which the model is ex pected to have within it, to an ex ternal 
database. This can be understood through simplification of the Transformer mechanism. The weight 
of the context of the word in focus is normally heavy. Therefore, it is obvious that the best ex
ample of 
a tex t with heavy weight in relation to the word in focus is the tex t that contains that very word. Thus, 
it is logical that the model functions sufficiently when it uses the tex t data itself for the weight of words 
neighboring the word focus while using the training in Transformer for farther relationships. This 
reduces the number of necessary parameters, and sufficient performance can be achieved through 
training with fewer computing resources. The above explanation uses an extreme ex
ample. In reality, 
they devise adjustments because the neighbors cannot be ignored completely. 
RETRO trains its model using a dataset composed of news articles in 10 languages, including 
English, Spanish, German, French, Russian, Chinese, Swahili, and Urdu, Wikipedia tex ts, books, and 
GitHub tex ts. The RETRO neural network only has 7 billion parameters. Therefore, it employs a 
method whereby they are supplemented by a database that contains approximately two trillion tex
t 
passages. 
When RETRO generates tex t, it performs a nearest neighbor search for each segment (equivalent to 
a paragraph of a text), and returns a similar tex
t found from its training database and results that 
continue the aforementioned text. These arrays are useful for predicting subsequent tex
ts from the 
input tex t. The architecture of RETRO combines the common Self-Attention at the tex t level and 
Cross-Attention with neighbor search at the finer passage level. As a result, it can realize more precise 
continuation based on facts. Furthermore, RETRO improve results through the direct control of search 
databases to increase the interpretation possibilities of model prediction and improve the accuracy of 
texts. It uses the database to search for passages that are the same as the written tex
t and compares 
them. This enables it to perform more precise prediction. The performance of the natural language 
model continuously improved as the size of the search database increased. At least up to two trillion 
tokens have been verified, and the two trillion tokens of training data was used as an ex ternal database 
as is. 
29 
 
In the ex periment using Pile, which is a standard natural language model benchmark, the RETRO 
model with 7.5 billion parameters displayed performance ex ceeding that of Jurassic-1, which has 175 
billion parameters, in 10/16 datasets, and displayed performance ex ceeding that of Gopher, which has 
280 billion parameters, in 9/16 datasets. Moreover, satisfactory performance can be achieved at 1/16 
the parameter size. 
Moreover, the database is capable of updating the neural network without relearning, thereby 
demonstrating that it is capable of the speedy addition of new information and deletion of old or 
incorrect information. DeepMind claims that ex ternal memory systems such as RETRO are more 
transparent than black box  models such as GPT-3. WebGPT83 by OpenAI employs a method to reuse 
the Web as the database. 
 
5.6 South Korean LG EXAONE84 
LG released EXAONE, a giant AI comprising a large-scale natural language model produced in 
collaboration with Google, is also the largest AI in South Korea. As LG is a conglomerate engaging in 
diverse businesses, employing various AI applications centered on a natural language model, which is 
the concept outlined by foundation models, makes sense as its corporate strategy. One can say that 
EXAONE plays a central role in this strategy. 
It uses a tex t corpus comprising 600 billion phrases and more than 250 million images as its training 
data, which combines these two types of data. It uses 300 billion parameters. In the ex planation by 
LG, EXAONE is claimed to be an AI that learns big data by itself, and is capable of thinking, learning, 
and making decisions like humans, which can be applied to diverse fields without being limited to 
specific purposes. Needless to say, EXA is also the prefix “EX  “EXA” meaning 10 to the power of 18 (i.e., 
a quintillion). If all the words humanity ever used were saved as data, its size is estimated to be 
approximately 5 Exabytes. LG ex
plains that the name EXAONE implies this idea. 
LG AI Research changes the parameter number of the neural network in stages. It has been 
increasing its size in stages from 1.3 billion to 13 billion, 39 billion, and 175 billion to study its 
characteristics. Its result and previous reports suggest that, in theory, training of AI based on deep 
learning would be more refined when there are more parameters. In multimodality learning, which is 
mutual learning of tex ts and images, a larger number of parameters is clearly an advantage. EXAONE 
achieved this through large-scale parameters. 
Similar to other models, EXAONE creates a hat with a pumpkin pattern if you tell it to “make a hat 
with a pumpkin pattern.” LG AI Research declares that EXAONE reaches the state where such output 
is made through inferences and creations that ex ceed the level of mere understanding of input and data. 
LG AI Research published a video of EXAONE preparing a Christmas party inside a metaverse space. 
The video shows the process whereby it understands the intentions outlined by the client, makes 
judgments and creates the decoration. 
30 
 
According to the plan of LG AI Research, EXAONE is expe pected to become the “specialist AI for 
the top 1% standard” in virtually every field, including manufacturing, research, education, and 
finance. First, it opened API to the companies within the LG group to encourage them to use EXAONE. 
This enabled companies with the LG group to use the giant AI for every business field of LG, 
including electronics, chemistry, and communication. It appears that each company is actually using 
EXAONE and achieving results, including the advancement in the performance of chatbots and the 
extraction of new materials/new substances through analysis and learning of approx imately 20 million 
publications in the chemistry field from last 100 years. 
LG group is in close collaboration with Google toward the completion of EXAONE. The cutting-
edge AI chip “TPUv4,” which Google released on May 2021 and is not yet commercially available, is 
used to develop EXAONE. Moreover, LG is collaborating with Google Brain for its software. LG has 
stated that the future goals for EXAONE include ex tension of its parameters to 600 billion, as well as 
the formation of global allied forces of national and international AI to create a colossal AI ecosystem 
through collective intelligence; indicatingLG belief that AI strategy will play the central role in its 
future development. Google Brain is collaborating with them to achieve its goal of breaking nvidia's 
stronghold. In fact, cooperation with LG is significant for Google. In AI learning, NVIDIA has more 
than 80% of the market share, representing a de facto monopoly. If LG manages to create a B2B 
business model built upon its affiliated companies in the infrastructure field, Google would obtain a 
powerful reference for challenging NVIDIA. 
 
5.7 Chinese BAAI Wu Dao 2.085 
The Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI, Chinese name: 北京智源人工智能研究
院) released a pretrained deep learning model Wu Dao2.0 with an astonishing 1.75 trillion parameters, 
which is described as “the first in China” and “the biggest in the world.” They stated that, in addition 
to the simulation of conversational speech, writing of poetry and comprehension of images, it can even 
generate recipes, and everything NLP models could do in English is now possible in Chinese. The 
model was trained with 4.9 TB of images and texts, and this includes 1.2 terabyte of tex
ts in two 
languages, namely Chinese and English. WuDao 2.0 already has 22 partner companies, including the 
smartphone maker Xiaomi and the major short video company Kuaishou. 
BAAI has reported that this natural language model has achieved the state-of-the-art (SOTA) level 
in nine benchmarks, and even ex ceeded it in some of them. When they released Wu Dao2.0, they also 
unveiled Hua Zhibing, the first Chinese virtual student in the world. Hua is said to be capable of 
learning by herself, drawing pictures and writing poems. During the presentation, it was declared that 
she will be able to learn how to code in the future. These are unique abilities not found in the original 
version of GPT-3. However, it has been reported that GPT-3 also becomes capable of generating codes 
after few-shot learning. While the details of the training data of Wu Dao are unknown, it is possible 
31 
 
that the difference in the content of the training data is reflected in its early functions. 
 
5.8 OpenAI GLIDE, DALL･E2 
CLIP is capable of reading the relative positions of objects in an image because it assigns detailed 
captions to images. One of the problems it has is that there is a limit to its capacity when dealing with 
more abstract ex pressions or certain types of tasks, such as counting the number of objects in an image 
or measuring which car is the closest one from the camera in an image with several cars. The answers 
it gave to these tasks were far from accurate, only slightly better than random estimation. Another 
problem was that it could not give satisfactory results, even with more detailed classification (such as 
car model categories and flower classification). 
While CLIP is an unprecedentedly powerful zero-shot classifier, there are occasions where it cannot 
cope with changes in word choice or turns of phrase. When this occurs, trial and error through prompt 
learning becomes necessary, requiring it to respond to each case individually. This necessitated its 
reex amination, as well as that of GAN86, which is its conventional generative model. 
GAN is a generative model with extremely good ability, and numerous ex
aminations were 
performed to realize satisfactory generative function. Currently, it requires advanced tuning of its 
hyperparameters and regularizer. This means that it is ex tremely difficult to apply it to domains other 
than the one it already learned. Thus, there is always a trade-off between significant quality 
improvement within its scope of application and considerable quality decrease outside this scope. The 
diffusion model was proposed as a solution for this problem other than GAN. 
OpenAI has reported that the improved version of this diffusion model achieved better 
performance than GAN87. While GAN uses noise vectors when generating images, in principle, there 
is no guarantee for these generated images. This is the reason why it requires the aforementioned 
tuning. To improve this situation, the diffusion model gradually adds Gaussian noise the original image 
data, replacing the data with noise until the original data is completely lost, replaced entirely by noise. 
This procedure follows the Markov process. In the training of the generative model, the data is restored 
in reverse while removing the noise. This means the control of generated images, which was difficult 
for GAN, could be learned from the beginning to the end through the relationship between noise and 
image. 
GLIDE applied this diffusion model to the model intended for text t → image. To be specific, it 
employed a diffusion model with 3.5 billion parameters using a tex t encoder, whose condition is 
natural language description, for its training. GLIDE received an 87% more positive evaluation in 
being photo realistic, and 69% more positive evaluation in caption similarity, than DALL･E, its 
preceding model. Rendering of these images can be performed in zero-shot. However, the cases where 
generation of photorealistic images was difficult when the texts used were complex
 were identified. 
In response, the model was fine-tuned to add an editing function, making it capable of painting parts 
32 
 
of an image, to enable it to generate high-quality images from more complex tex
t. When a part of an 
image is painted over and then tex t is entered, the part that was painted over changes according to the 
tex t. Moreover, this changed part contains shadows and reflections that match the style and lighting of 
the surrounding contex t, enabling synthesis that can blend in with the surrounding. 
DALL･E 288 was released on the 6th of April, 2022. Thanks to unCLIP, which adapted the diffusion 
model, its significant improvement from DALL･E is immediately apparent. An ex ample of an image 
generated by DALL･E 2 through text input immediately shows that the tex
t content and the image 
data representing it are more detailed. The evolution of its image generation function from tex t is so 
advanced that one cannot help wondering if the model acquired imagination and creativity. 
Furthermore, unCLIP is ex pected to have a representational ability that is superior to that of CLIP. For 
instance, it is highly likely that it will be able to generate a perfect digital twin and world model only 
from a few images. Its future ex amination will be drawing attention. 
 
 
5.9 MLP89 Reexamination, beyond Transformer 
Google has proposed gMLP90, a network architecture only based on MLP with gating. It is the 
improved version of Transformer without the Attention mechanism. It demonstrated the same level of 
capability as that of Transformer in main languages and in the field of image processing. In recent 
years, detailed analysis of why MLP such as gMLP can achieve high capability has started. For 
instance, there is a heated discussion on whether it was due to the effect of Attention. For instance, if 
Attention can be regarded as the introduction of dynamic parameter (effective) bias, MLP can be 
regarded as static parameter bias. 
How the way bias (weight of the attention point) changes performance is currently a very important 
subject. MLP, which is the focus here, realizes static bias through SGU91. While Attention clarifies the 
reasoning for the parameter weight by following the contex t, in another word connections, 
computation of SGU is based on simple correlation. This is the significant difference, though 
admittedly, this is not the most precise description. In images, their difference is especially conspicuous, 
and naturally, computation is easier in the latter. The high computation cost is the issue with 
Transformer that is often mentioned. Thus, this is attracting attention as a possible solution for 
improving the performance while limiting the computation cost. This is one of the reasons why the 
performance can be scaled through the size of data and number of parameters. Regardless of whether 
it is ex plicit or not, how to implement it while considering the weight relationship between the target 
vector and other data vectors will be ex tremely important. 
Other perspectives include the comparison between gMLP and ViT (Vision Transformer)92, which 
is the application of Transformer to images. One of the focuses of its comparison to other methods is 
how the basis for image recognition is acquired. The same format is derived for the basis for the 
33 
 
features of human vision regardless of whether biological analysis93, DL or frame rate of tensor 
analysis94 is used. Therefore, it is likely that no problem would be caused by thinking that the general 
basis for seeing things and distinguishing between them is limited. For instance, there is a report stating 
that the letters and alphabets we use belong to an even more simple basis group95. Thus, it may not be 
necessary to acquire them through training with large amounts of data. 
The network structure of CNN in the imaging field is designed so as to ex plicitly derive the basis. 
How is this basis, or the feature filter that conforms to it, ex tracted and structured? In Transformer, 
what came from where is traced by the position embedding layer, while SGU does not perform this 
process, and uses correlation instead. This difference is also reflected in the computation cost. 
Interestingly, in addition to the basis observed in the aforementioned visual cortex  of the brain (low-
level visual cortex ), correlated bases composed of several figures were also observed in the visual 
cortex  of the brain (high-level visual cortex )96. As the brain is a super efficient computation system 
running at 20W, it is inferred to make effective use of various features. Thus, it is believed to be 
adaptively utilizing various methods including the future development, instead of only using one of 
the methods that are currently deemed to be effective such as CNN, Transformer, or gMLP. 
Recently, there have been reports on the generation of CNN by HyperTransformer 97 and on 
increasing the speed of MLP through hash calculation. We are currently in a situation where 
Transformer, which was initially used for NLP, is showing new possibilities in the CV field98, and is 
ex pected to spread into other technological fields. 
MetaFormer99 is proposed in the report, which suggests that good results can be obtained by using 
only Transformer without assigning a token mix er module, typified by Attention. MetaFormer is an 
abstraction of Transformer whose token mix er module has not been defined, whereby the token mix er 
becomes a kind of model architecture that can be ex changed, for instance, with spatial MLP. 
For instance, when it is ex changed with a simple spatial pooling operator, it becomes PoolFormer. 
PoolFormer uses a simple pooling operator as the mix er. Naturally, the pooling operator only functions 
to aggregate a token with tokens nearby and average them, and it does not mix  information. Moreover, 
in PoolFormer, the pooling operator does not have any parameters it can learn. The fact that it 
nevertheless displayed high performance in computer vision tasks such as ImageNet-1k and DieT-B / 
ResMLP-B24 is surprising. 
What has been discussed thus far is the analysis of Transformer that was derived from the 
application of Transformer used for NLP to image processing. In the same vein, there are reports that 
question whether Attention is essential, even though it is effective for some tasks in NLP. 
Furthermore, there is a recent discussion on intermodal training methods. In addition, data2vec100, 
which vectorizes all data, images, audio, and natural language in the same way, has been released. It 
acquires latent representation, regardless of the data type, through the two modes of Teacher mode, 
which conducts feature learning through complete data, and student mode, which predicts complete 
34 
 
data from masked data. It analyses which layer of Transformer to be used for masked prediction in 
detail. The result was SOTA or its equivalent at each conventional modal. What comes after 
Transformer is already being explored, and 2021 can be deemed as the first year of this ex
ploration. 
 
 
6 Important Challenges 
Earlier it was mentioned how the biases contained in natural language models often become a 
problem. Let us discuss this point further. Equality and discrimination often surface as social issues. 
It is known that a natural language model is heavily influenced by its training data, and how it can be 
corrected so as to avoid these problems is frequently debated. As a precondition, an algorithm must be 
balanced. However, one must be aware that bias is still possible. For instance, if LGBTK+ ID 
terminologies are ex cluded from the training data, or if their number is very small, they could be 
underestimated, or completely deleted, from the data. 
If an algorithm is to be neutral, this is in fact a correct operation. However, this would be a major 
issue for a model. The relationship between training data and the inherent bias in a natural language 
model is not accurately known. Therefore, it is currently believed that if a scaling law that can be 
applied to biases is established through small-scale and systematic research, it will also be possible to 
apply it to large-scale data practices. The fact that every natural language model must use neutral 
datasets that nevertheless guarantee equality is a future challenge. 
Google conducts especially strict studies on whether it is adhering to its own AI principles. In their 
services, language plays a central role, and many mechanisms for avoiding the misuse of language 
have been introduced, based on the premise that language is one of the best tools humanity has. They 
are required to be especially vigilant toward prejudice caused through misuse, malicious ex pressions 
and the reproduction of misleading information. For instance, with a conversation application, careful 
examination of its results (i.e. conversation outputs), does not ex clude possibilities for misuse of the 
model itself. Such misuse must also be prevented. 
For this reason, Google states that the priority when creating technologies, such as LaMDA, is to 
sufficiently discuss the actions that can minimize the risks and then to ex ecute the same. The research 
and development of these technologies over many years has addressed a number of related problems, 
such as how inequality bias affects machine learning models. Furthermore, based on these ex periences, 
they provide an open source resource for analyzing models and training data, and they accept open, 
external examinations. For instance, regarding LaMDA, they explain that it was carefully ex amined 
at each stage of its development. They are attempting to demonstrate their attitude toward equality in 
their natural language models and natural language applications. 
Efforts to address content that is incorrect, inappropriate, and/or offensive were also emphasized 
during the Google developer summit in 2022, where they presented how they are actively utilizing 
35 
 
feedback from internal users. Google also reported that they are accepting methods that follow 
repetitive and regular principles as well as the opinions of external ex
perts, in accordance with their 
AI ethics. 
In May 2022, Google published a report on Imagen101. It is the Google equivalent of DALL･E2 that 
generates images from tex ts. It employs the diffusion model and has updated SOTA in several 
categories. Its comparison to DALL･E2 undoubtedly shows more refined image generation results. 
However, Google announced that they will not publish its demo or code due to the following reasons. 
It employed widely used datasets for the image data in its training data (e.g., LAION-400M102). This 
set is known to contain many tox ic images. While they, of course, carefully removed tox ic data, the 
curation of Web level tex t data used for its language model was still insufficient. Therefore, they 
reflected on how the risk of harmful stereotypes and ex pressions being encoded still remains. On this 
occasion, Google intentionally included toxic ex
pressions in their evaluation. This demonstrates the 
honesty of this report in both the state of research and development and the bias problem. 
OpenAI also released InstructGPT103, w hich i mproved t he t ex t generation by GPT-3 to better 
understand the intentions of its users, as well as to process tox ic biases. For InstructGPT, the method 
called RLHF104, where humans are involved in reinforcement learning, is employed. By using human 
preference as a reward signal, it is possible to fine-tune the model. As the problems in tex t generation 
are complex  and subjective, it plays a significant role in improving situations with which the simple 
and automatic metrics that ex ist today cannot fully cope. 
7 Conclusion 
This report summarized recent debates, with a particular focus on developments originating from 
NLP models. It demonstrated that today, it is possible to say that large-scale natural language models 
are already at the center of general-purpose AI. It is one of the representative AI fields, and we must 
continue to pay attention to it. At the moment, super computer level computational resources, and 
larger and larger amounts of data, are required for large-scale models. Thus, powerful players are 
becoming more powerful, and it is almost impossible for new players to enter this field. At the same 
time, it is also true that academic ex ploration of upcoming computation models in small-scale 
environments will become more and more important. The fact that Attention (Transformer) was only 
a result of small-scale research and development at the time of its initial release proves this point. To 
be implemented in society, developments must be conducted while considering how to use ex isting 
models, which, fortunately, are most often already available. 
In a recent DeepMind report105, it was shown that the relationship between the parameter number 
of a model and the scale of its training data is not necessarily linear. In fact, it was shown that a model 
with 70 billion parameters ex ceeded the performance of a model with 175 parameters in almost every 
benchmark. Moreover, it even ex ceeded human scores in some benchmarks. Furthermore, Flamingo106, 
with 80 billion parameters, was announced as a visual language model in late April 2022. Its image 
36 
 
contents description capability is even more refined. 
Google published a report on the Pathways Language Model (PaLM)107 with 540 billion parameters 
on April 4th, 2022. According to the report, it updated SOTA in 28 out of 29 NLP benchmarks. What 
was particularly astonishing was the fact that it could understand jokes and ex plain the points of those 
jokes, something with which previous models struggled. It adapted a solution through multistep 
prompting called Chain-of-Thought Prompting to cope with a contex t that requires several stages of 
understanding. By supplying it with several question-and-answer pairs, it can learn a series of 
hierarchical structures. As a result, it became capable of hierarchical and staged understanding, 
enabling it to, for example, ex
plain jokes, provide answers for a mathematical problem in several steps 
and generate more complex  program codes. 
Moreover, when seen from the perspective of the law of scalability16, the achievement of PaLM 
suggests that efficient learning remains a possibility when the number of parameters is increased. We 
are only starting to understand the number of parameters, scale of training data and performance of 
models. Thus, it is a field where future developments and deepening discussions are ex pected. 
In late April of 2022, Adept108 was established. It professes Useful General Intelligence to induce 
further evolution of AI by building upon the developments in this field thus far. Its members are well-
known for NLP and Transformer, typifying this fast-moving field. It appears that one would miss major 
opportunities unless one is able to at least follow these movements. Recent engagements with general-
purpose intelligence include GATO, released by DeepMind on May 12th, 2022. It is declared to be a 
Generalist Agent109. Like other large-scale language models, it was trained with Transformer. It is an 
agent that functions with a single model, and performs the role of a multimodal, multitasking, and 
multibody generalist. In response to various tasks, including Atari, image captioning, chat, and playing 
stack block with a real robot arm, a single model can supply output suitable for each contex t, including 
tex t, movement of joints, and pushing buttons. The term generalist is indeed appropriate. This is a 
landmark achievement of research and development, and it gives the impression that we are one step 
closer to the realization of foundation models. 
Lastly, let me add that interesting recent engagements show that the application of Transformer is 
starting to cause major innovations in fields unrelated to language. DeepMind has triggered major 
innovations in the structural analysis of proteins through its AlphFold110. In addition, AlphaFold2111 
brought even further development. While AlphaFold is based on CNN, AlphaFold2 is based on 
Transformer. This was not a coincidence, and it is natural to conclude that it was due to the high 
potential of the Transformer series. Needless to say, it is also true that as the task to convert the names 
of chemical substances into three-dimensional chemical structures involved symbols and structures 
composed of them, it had compatibility with Transformer. 
Similarly, there are high ex pectations for Materials Informatics (MI), which is a data-driven 
technology to optimize/accelerate material development112. Regarding training using data, this field 
37 
 
has its own unique problems, namely how to effectively use the data that is much smaller than tex t 
data, and how to precisely predict the structures and properties of new materials from ex tremely small 
data. In recent years, it has becom clear that pretrained models are also ex tremely effective for MI. 
Thus, it is predicted that pretrained models will continue to spread to various other fields. 
Masahiro Yamamoto, Adviser of General Affairs Planning Department 
[Inquiries] 
Information-Technology Promotion Agency 
General Affairs Planning Department 
Email: ga-airesearch@ipa.go.jp 
 
 
 
1 Natural language processing was discussed at the Dartmouth Workshop in 1956, where the first 
discussions on artificial intelligence took place. 
2 https://www.ipa.go.jp/digital/chousa/trend/ai.html 
3 GPT-3: An abbreviation of Generative Pre-Training-3, which is the third generation of the general-
purpose language model developed by Open-AI. https://beta.openai.com/docs/engines/gpt-3, 
https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/ 
4 Google Duplex : A.I. Assistant Calls Local Businesses To Make Appointments 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5VN56jQMWM 
5 Duplex  is getting smarter and making life a little easier 
https://blog.google/technology/ai/duplex -helpful-updates/ 
6 Bringing you the nex t-generation Google Assistant 
https://blog.google/products/assistant/nex t-genenation-google-assistant-io/ 
7 Language model: A machine learning model for natural language processing. Models based on 
probability are now mainstream 
8 BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers. The name of the machine learning 
technology for language models that Google introduced to its search engine in 2019. 
9 Parameter(s): Variable(s) to be set in machine learning. 
10 Prepared independently from the following data source; 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G5lmya6eKtc, https://ja.stateofaiguides.com/20200914-future-of-nlp/ 
11 H100 is also an NVIDIA GPU, and it uses the latest Hopper architecture released during GTC2022. 
https://www.nvidia.com/ja-jp/gtc/keynote/ 
12 Language modelling at scale: Gopher, ethical considerations, and retrieval, 
https://www.deepmind.com/blog/language-modelling-at-scale-gopher-ethical-considerations-and-retrieval 
13 Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. Tom B. Brown et al. 2020, https://arx iv.org/abs/2005.14165 
14 GPU: Graphics Processing Units. When this is used for general-purpose calculation, it is called 
(General-purpose computing on graphics processing units. 
15 RNN: Recurrent Neural Network. It has a network structure where a part of the output is connected to 
input. Before Transformer, LSTM, which is a type of RNN, was the mainstream in natural language 
processing. 
16 Attention Is All You Need., A. Vaswani et al. 2017, https://arx iv.org/abs/1706.03762 
17 Machine learning can be broadly divided into supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and 
reinforcement learning, and training data is necessary for the first. For details, please refer 2021 DX 
White Paper Appendix , Section 1, AI Technology, 3. Learning. https://www.ipa.go.jp/files/000093703.pdf  
18BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding., J Devlin el al. 
2018, https://arx iv.org/abs/1810.04805 
19 While Transformer was initially a machine learning method for natural language processing, its 
effectiveness when applied to images has also been demonstrated. This field is known as Vision 
Transformer (ViT). 
38 
 
 
20Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models., J. Kaplan et al. 2020, https://arx iv.org/abs/2001.08361  
21 This indicates learning with a large-scale corpus for the purpose of general-purpose language skills 
acquisition. It must be conducted in advance for the training for the intended task. This is ex pected to 
enable high performance, even when the data for the intended task is small. 
22 Language Models are Few-Shot Learners., T.B. Brown el al.2020,  https://arx iv.org/abs/2005.14165  
23 The method by which the learner is taught using short ex changes of sentences in dialogue format. 
24 https://paperswithcode.com/area/natural-language-processing 
25 Dynabench: Rethinking Benchmarking in NLP., D. Kiela et al. 2021, 
https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.324.pdf 
26 MNIS: Dataset widely used as the benchmark for handwritten tex t recognition. https://www.vision-
systems.com/home/article/16737424/support-vector-machines-speed-pattern-recognition 
27 GLUE: https://gluebenchmark.com/ 
28https://ruder.io/nlp-benchmarking/、https://github.com/kwchurch/Benchmarking_past_present_future 
29 There are following examples. Ex
ample where Microsoft from the United States apologized for a 
comment by its AI (https://jp.reuters.com/article/tay-idJPKCN0WU056), ex ample of gender 
discrimination by the AI tool used by Amazon of the United States. (https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-against-
women-idUSKCN1MK08G) 
30 Google I/O keynote lecture, https://io.google/2022/program/8e80903f-955f-4a5b-9118-
b0ce4acdb0e6/intl/ja/ 
31 https://www.ethnologue.com/ 
32 For ex ample, https://maraoz.com/2020/07/18/openai-gpt3/ 
33 https://gpt3demo.com/ 
34 One can verify this by entering GPT-3 as the name of the author at 
https://www.amazon.co.jp/advanced-search/books 
35 https://www.othersideai.com/ 
36 https://www.usebroca.com/ 
37 https://snazzy.ai/ 
38 https://www.forethought.ai/ 
39 https://www.gong.io/ 
40 https://www.moveworks.com/ 
41 https://www.observe.ai/ 
42 DALL･E: AI for generating images from tex ts developed by OpenAI. Zero-Shot Tex t-to-Image 
Generation., A. Ramesh et al. 2021, https://arx iv.org/abs/2102.12092 
43 https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/ 
44 CLIP: Abbreviation of Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training. https://openai.com/blog/clip/, 
Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision., A. Radford et al. 2021, 
https://cdn.openai.com/papers/Learning_Transferable_Visual_Models_From_Natural_Language_Supervi
sion.pdf 
45 An encoder compresses information, and a decoder retrieves the information. 
46 Environment for building customized application that meets business needs provided by Microsoft. It 
allows for quick development of applications. https://powerapps.microsoft.com/ja-jp/ 
47 https://www.infoq.com/jp/news/2021/01/microsoft-license-gpt-3/ 
48 Low-code language used for instances in Power Apps. It includes the general-purpose type used for 
instances in Ex cel programming, strict type specification, declarative programming and functional 
programming. 
49 https://news.microsoft.com/ja-jp/2021/05/26/210526-microsoft-introduces-its-first-product-features-
powered-by-gpt-3/ 
50 PET/iPET: Deep learning training method for natural language processing NLP) model. Abbreviation 
of Pattern-Ex ploiting Training, Iterative Pattern-Enhanced Training. It is a training method to achieve the 
same performance through smaller models. 
51 One of the natural language processing benchmarks. It consists of tests that include diverse tasks, such 
as question and answer, natural language inference, cross-referencing solution, and resolution of words 
ambiguity. 
52 ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of Language Representations., Z. Lan et al. 2019, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/1909.11942 
39 
 
 
53 For instance, Apache Software License: One of the license agreements that outlines the terms of use, 
etc., that are often used when developing/distributing open source software. 
54 https://twitter.com/daisukekawahar1/status/1524288370767134721?cx t=HHwWgoCsrc-MrqcqAAAA 
55 https://huggingface.co/rinna/japanese-gpt-1b 
56 https://rinna.co.jp/ニュース/f/rinna released clip, a language-image model specialized for Japanese. 
57 For ex ample, https://zenn.dev/hellorusk/articles/ddee520a5e4318 
58 https://llm-jp.nii.ac.jp/ 
59 Announcement of Japanese language AI using the massive language model by LINE 
https://linecorp.com/ja/pr/news/ja/2020/3508, the original Korean version, What Changes Can Large-
Scale Language Models Bring? Intensive Study on HyperCLOVA: Billions-scale Korean Generative 
Pretrained Transformers., B.Kin et al. 2021, https://arx iv.org/abs/2109.04650 
60 Current state of “HyperCLOVA” equipped with large-scale general-purpose Japanese model -2021 
Japanese version-https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V4pZulIWHpY 
61 https://www.nict.go.jp/press/2023/07/04-1.html 
62 https://crfm.stanford.edu/, On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models., R. Bommasani et al. 
2021 https://crfm.stanford.edu/assets/report.pdf 
63 https://crfm.stanford.edu/workshop.html 
64 Concrete natural language processing tasks such as classification, intention recognition and named 
entity ex traction. 
65 Deep spatial autoencoders for visuomotor learning. J Chelsea Finn et al., 2016 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 
66 Habitat 2.0:Training Home Assistants to Rearrange their Habitat., Szot et al. 2021, Neurips 2021  
67 https://github.com/allenai/ai2thor-rearrangement 
68 Causal Analysis of Agent Behavior for AI Safety., G. Déletang et al. 2021, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2103.03938 
69 A Survey of Algorithms for Black-Box  Safety Validation., A. Corso et al. 2020, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2005.02979 
70 Compositional Falsification of Cyber-Physical Systems with Machine Learning Components., T. 
Dreossi et al. 2017, In NASA Formal Methods, Springer 
71 Guaranteeing Safety for Neural Network-Based Aircraft Collision Avoidance Systems., K. D. Julian et 
al. 2019, IEEE/AIAA 38th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC) 
72 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/using-deepspeed-and-megatron-to-train-megatron-
turing-nlg-530b-the-worlds-largest-and-most-powerful-generative-language-model/,  
https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/using-deepspeed-and-megatron-to-train-megatron-turing-nlg-530b-the-
worlds-largest-and-most-powerful-generative-language-model/ 
73 Solving Quantitative Reasoning Problems with Language Models., A. Lewkowycz el al. 2022, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2206.14858 
74 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/project-florence-vl/ 
75 Knowledge distillation: Ex traction of only the necessary knowledge elements. In deep learning, it is 
mostly ex traction of a small functional network, or its formation through compression. 
76 https://huggingface.co/bigscience/T0pp 
Report: https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/promptsource 
Paper: https://arx iv.org/abs/2110.08207 
77 Language Models are Few-Shot Learners., T. Brown et al. 2020, Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 
78 Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. A. Radford et al., 2019, 
https://github.com/openai/gpt-2 
79 Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Tex t-to-Tex t Transformer., C. Raffel et al. 
2020, Journal of Machine Learning Research 
80 The Power of Scale for Parameter-Efficient Prompt Tuning., B. Lester et al. 2021 
81 Prompt learning (https://huggingface.co/bigscience/T0pp) 
82 LaMDA: https://blog.google/technology/ai/lamda/ 
83 https://gpt3demo.com/apps/webgpt 
84 LG AI Talk Concert; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6B43VNW1jk 
85 https://wudaoai.cn/home 
86 GAN: Generative Adversarial Network, image generation using deep learning. See 2021 DX White 
40 
 
 
Paper Appendix , Section 1, AI Technology, Chapter 1 9 Creation, for details. 
87Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis. P. Dhariwal et al. 2021, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2105.05233 
88 https://openai.com/dall-e-2/, https://cdn.openai.com/papers/dall-e-2.pdf 
89 MLP: Multi layer perceptron, one of basic structures that is multilayer-coupled to allow for forward 
transmission of neural networks. 
90 Pay Attention to MLPs H. Liu et al. 2021, https://arx iv.org/abs/2105.08050 
91 SGU: Spatial Gating Unit Gating mechanism that performs sequence direction calculation of input 
elements. 
92 An Image is Worth 16x 16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale, A. Dosovitskiy et 
al.,ICLR 2021, https://openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy 
93 The complete pattern of ocular dominance stripes in the striate cortex  and visual field of the macaque 
monkey. S. LeVay et al. 1985, J. Neuroscience,5 
94 Framelet analysis of some geometrical illusions.2010, H. Arai et al.,  
Japan Journal of Industrial and Applied Mathematics 
95 The Structures of Letters and Symbols throughout Human History Are Selected to Maych Those Found 
in Objects in Natural Scenes., Changjzi et al. 2006, The American Naturalist  
96 Object Representation in Inferior Temporal Cortex  Is Organized Hierarchically in a Mosaic-Like 
Structure. M. Tanifuji et al. 2013, J. Neuroscience 
97 HyperTransformer: Model Generation for Supervised and Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning., A. 
Zhmoginov et al. 2022, https://arx iv.org/abs/2201.04182 
98 Computer Vision Saizensen Winter2021, 2021 Kyoritsu Shuppan 
99 MetaFormer is Actually What You Need for Vision., W. Yu et al. 2022, CVPR2022, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2111.11418 
100 https://ai.facebook.com/research/data2vec-a-general-framework-for-self-supervised-learning-in-
speech-vision-and-language 
101 https://imagen.research.google/ 
102 https://laion.ai/laion-400-open-dataset/ 
103 https://openai.com/blog/instruction-following/ 
104 Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences., P.F Christiano et al. 2017, 
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/d5e2c0adad503c91f91df240d0cd4e49-Paper.pdf 
105 Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models., J. Hoffmann et al. 2022, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2203.15556 
106 Flamingo: a Visual Language Model for Few-Shot Learning., J-B. Alayrac et al. 2022, 
https://arx iv.org/abs/2204.14198  
107 https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/04/pathways-language-model-palm-scaling-to.html, PaLM: Scaling 
Language Modeling with Pathways., A. Chowdhery et al. 2022, https://arx iv.org/abs/2204.02311 
108 https://www.adept.ai/ 
109 https://www.deepmind.com/publications/a-generalist-agent,  
110 Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning., A. W. Senior et al. 2020, 
Nature 
111 Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold., J. Jumper et al. 2021, Nature 
112 For ex ample, Compositionally restricted attention-based network for 
materials property predictions., A. Y. Wang et al. 2021, npj Computational Materials, 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41524-021-00545-1  
