Title: An Automated Multiple-Choice Question Generation Using Natural Language Processing Techniques
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.14757v1
--------------------------------------------------

AN AUTOMATED MULTIPLE-CHOICE 
QUESTION GENERATION USING 
NATURAL 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES 
Chidinma A. Nwafor1 and Ikechukwu E. Onyenwe2 
1Department of Computer Science, Nnamdi Azikiwe University Awka, Anambra State, 
Nigeria 
1nwaforchidinmaa@gmail.com and 2ie.onyenwe@unizik.edu.ng 
ABSTRACT 
Automatic multiple-choice question generation (MCQG) is a useful yet challenging task in Natural 
Language Processing (NLP). It is the task of automatic generation of correct and relevant questions from 
textual data. Despite its usefulness, manually creating sizeable, meaningful and relevant questions is a 
time-consuming and challenging task for teachers. In this paper, we present an NLP-based system for 
automatic MCQG for Computer-Based Testing Examination (CBTE).We used NLP technique to extract 
keywords that are important words in a given lesson material. To validate that the system is not perverse, 
five lesson materials were used to check the effectiveness and efficiency of the system. The manually 
extracted keywords by the teacher were compared to the auto-generated keywords and the result shows 
that the system was capable of extracting keywords from lesson materials in setting examinable 
questions. This outcome is presented in a user-friendly interface for easy accessibility. 
KEYWORDS 
Natural Language Processing,NLP, Computer-Based Test Examination, CBTE, Automatic Question 
Generation, AOG, Document, Tokenization, Multiple-Choice Question, MCQ 
1. INTRODUCTION 
According to [1], automatic question generation (AQG) is the task of automatically generating 
syntactically sound, semantically correct and relevant questions from various input formats such 
as text, a structured database or a knowledge base. AQG can be naturally applied in many 
domains such as Massive Open Online Course (MOOC), setting objective/subjective questions, 
automated help systems, search engines, Chabot systems (e.g. for customer interaction), and 
healthcare for analyzing mental health [2]. Despite its usefulness, manually creating meaningful 
and relevant questions is a time-consuming and challenging task. For example, while evaluating 
students on reading comprehension, it is tedious for a teacher to manually create questions, find 
answers to those questions, and thereafter evaluates answers. 
In the field of education, questioning is widely acknowledged as an effective instructional 
strategy to evaluation or assessment of students or the learner at the end of a lesson. Questioning 
as an instructional tool can be traced back to the fourth century, when Socrates used questions 
and answers to challenge assumptions, expose contradictions, and lead to new knowledge and 
wisdom. Since Socrates, questioning was employed to encourage students to use higher-order 
thinking processes and it is the dominant mode of teacher-student interaction accounted for 
almost 80% of the total interactions [3]. There are three major types of assessment for 
evaluating students’ learning capabilities – Formative assessment, Interim assessment and 
Summative assessment. Generating questions that covers most areas of a lesson note would help 
in Formative and Interim assessment because the Formative assessment helps to improve 
students’ understanding and performance while the Interim assessment helps teachers identify 
gaps in student understanding and instruction. Multiple-choice Question (MCQ)s that widely 
cover all the areas of a lesson note is an important effort to test students on the above 
assessments and the students’ overall cognitive levels held at the end of a lesson. Today, MCQs 
in the area of Computer-Based Testing Examination (CBTE) is the most commonly used tool 
for assessing the knowledge capabilities of learners in the field of learning. 
Properly constructed MCQs can assess higher cognitive processing of Bloom’s taxonomy such 
as interpretation, synthesis and application of knowledge, instead of just testing recall of 
isolated facts. Most institutions and Centre of learning have embraced MCQ testing as the 
foundation of their testing systems, thereby saving cost especially where large numbers of 
candidates are involved—and it is a format that can provide precision where other measurement 
options may be lacking such as observing performance. 
Effective style of questioning as described by [4] is always an issue to help students attend to 
the desired learning outcome. Furthermore, to make it effective, balancing between lower and 
higher level question is a must [4]. Time-consuming factor in setting MCQs hinders achieving 
the above assessments and good learning outcomes due to MCQs generated tend to cover 
limited areas of a lesson note from which the MCQs are taken from. Therefore, it is necessary 
for an automatic system that will bootstrap the existing method of setting MCQs. 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a branch of artificial intelligence that deals with the 
interaction between computers and humans using the natural language. The ultimate objective 
of NLP is to read, decipher, understand, and make sense of the written or textual data in natural 
languages of human in a manner that is valuable. In this paper, we focus on the setting of MCQs 
for CBTE through NLP to improve the method of setting MCQs and modification, and for 
creating a viable question bank for subsequent use by the academicians for their learners. This 
will ensure an MCQ that includes appropriate questions and options based on the learning 
objectives and importance of the topics discussed in a lesson material. We used NLP methods, 
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and N-grams, to extract the most 
significant words present in a lesson material and the selection does not depend on any 
vocabulary; these words are keywords that capture the main topics discussed in a lesson 
material, they also serve as an indication of document relevance for users in an information 
retrieval (IR) environment. 
2. RELATED LITERATURE 
[5] developed ArikIturri, an AQG for Basque language test questions. The information source 
for this question generator consists of linguistically analysed real corpora, represented in XML 
mark-up language. [6] researched on using NLP on narrative texts to find discourse connectives 
for AQG. Discourse connectives are words or phrases that indicate relationships between two 
logical sentences or phrases and suggest the presence of mutually related extended verbal 
expression. The questions were generated by first extracting the text from the materials supplied 
by the user using text processing concept of NLP. [7] developed a system which can generate 
various logical questions from the given text input. The system uses 3-step strategy, viz; Select 
the best potential set of sentences from the given text input from which we could generate the 
questions, find the subject and context of the sentence to find its core agenda (Gap Selection) 
and analyze the best form of question that can be generated from that sentence (Question 
Formation). [8] proposed a method for automatically generating distractors for multiple-choice 
English vocabulary questions. The proposed method introduces new sources for collecting 
distractor candidates and utilises semantic similarity and collocation information when ranking 
the collected candidates. [9] looked at the development of an automatic factual open cloze 
question generation system which can generate fill-in-the-blank questions without alternatives. 
The system first extracts a set of informative sentences from the given input corpus based on 
Part-of-Speech tagging based rules. 
Then, generate questions by omitting the answer-keys which are selected by identifying domain 
specific words in the sentences. The system also suggests answer hints for the examinees to 
reduce the number of possible answers that make assessment easier. 
3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY 
The paper is based on the generation of MCQG through Natural Language Processing 
Techniques. 
This is used to process the lesson materials/documents fed by the teacher into a multi-choice 
questions alongside the answers to each questions. The NLP processes are applied using TF-
IDF and N-gram. This system only applies to the text of the document or lesson material in 
extracting keywords presented by the teacher. The document is converted into text file, loaded 
into the system memory and stored on the system. The text is split into sentences. The split 
sentences are tokenized, from which the corpus are built as TF-IDF and N-gram mode. From 
Figure 1, the raw data is the original text file from the document (lesson material). Noise 
removal is any piece of text which is not relevant to the context of the data such as stop words. 
Word Normalization converts high dimensional features or N different features to the low 
dimensional space or 1 feature, it includes tokenization and stemming. The cleaned text is the 
end result ready for further experimentation and such is used to analyse and auto-generate multi-
choice questions (MCQs). Furthermore, we develop an application interface for easy access and 
presentation of the MCQs to the teachers for acceptance or rejection. 
Figure 1. Text Preprocessing of Input Data. 
 
 
3.1. Dataset and Preparation 
In other to compute the performance evaluation of this paper to help check that it is not 
perverse, keywords extracted by the NLP techniques for accuracy computation was validated. 
First, five different lecture materials of varying sizes of sentences was selected (see Table 1). 
Table1. Statistics of the Textual Data Used 
Lesson Materials 
Number of 
Sentences 
Number of 
Words 
Number of Keywords by Teachers 
Computer Science 
39 
956 
206 
Geology 
33 
903 
86 
Philosophy 
46 
820 
100 
Religion 
61 
1474 
187 
History 
64 
1472 
210 
 
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the keywords extraction methods on these lesson materials, 
it was necessary to collect manually marked keywords to create a gold standard for the 
evaluation. The usual procedure of creating a gold standard of keywords is having one 
professional indexer who extracts the keywords based on his expertise and training, but also 
based on a set of guidelines defined by the interested parties. However, for this experiment, it 
was felt that the teachers (T) are appropriate for setting a gold standard. They know what words 
are most relevant in their lecture materials. Each lecture materials were annotated by a T to set a 
gold standard to which each set of auto-generated keywords could be compared. The statistics 
of the data used are stated in Table 1. 
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of word counts. 
Lesson Materials 
Minimum Number 
of Sentences 
Maximum 
Number of Words 
Mean number of 
Sentence 
Computer Science 
6.0 
59.0 
24.5 
Geology 
10.0 
43.0 
25.8 
Philosophy 
1.0 
39.0 
17.8 
Religion 
1.0 
59.0 
24.2 
History 
1.0 
79.0 
23.0 
 
Table 2 explains the columns “number of Sentences” and “number of words” in Table 1. For 
instance 
Computer Science in Table 3.2, the least sentence has 6-word length of size while maximum 
sentence has 59-word length of size. Summation of all the sizes of the sentences divided by the 
total number of sentences gives the mean size of sentences in Computer Science. This helps 
gain insight on how words are formed in the sentences of a lecture material. For example, 
sentences of “Minumum number of Sentence” < 5 are removed on the preprocessing stage. 
3.2. Experimental Tools 
The following NLP techniques are used for automated generation, manipulation and analysis of 
data from Figure 1. Data here is the lesson materials from teachers henceforth referred to as 
documents. In this paper, we represent each sentence in a lesson material as a document. For 
the auto-generated MCQ’s application interface, we used Django. It is a high-level 
Python Web framework that encourages rapid development and clean, pragmatic 
design. It also takes care of much of the hassle of Web development and focuses on 
writing the API without needing to reinvent the wheel 
3.2.1. Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency 
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) is used for stop-words filtering in 
various subject fields including text summarization and classification. The weight is composed 
of two terms: Term frequency (TF) and Inverse Document Frequency (IDF). 
 
TF: Term Frequency measures how frequently a term occurs in a document. It is 
possible that a term would appear much more times in long documents than shorter ones 
because every document is different in length. Thus, it is stated below as a way of 
normalization: 
TFt =
Number of times term t appears in a document
Total number of terms in the document
 
 
 
IDF: Inverse Document Frequency measures how important a term is. While computing 
TF, all terms are considered equally important. However, it is known that certain terms like ‘is’, 
‘of’, and ‘that’, may appear a lot of times but have little importance. Thus, it is computed as 
follows: 
IDFt = Loge (
Total number of documents
Number of documents with term t in it) 
 
The TF-IDFt;d weighting scheme assigns to term t a weight in document d given by 
TF-IDFt,d = TFt,d x IDFt 
3.2.2. N-gram 
This is a contiguous sequence of n items from a given sequence of text or speech. The items can 
be phonemes, syllables, letters, words or base pairs according to the application. The n-grams 
typically are collected from a text or speech corpus. An n-gram of size 1 is referred to as a 
‘unigram’; size 2 is a ‘bigram’; size 3 is a ‘trigram’. Larger sizes are sometimes referred to, by 
the value of n, for example, ‘4-gram’, ‘5-gram’, and so on. 
4. RESULT DISCUSSION 
This discusses the performance of the NLP techniques for MCQs generation applied to the 
dataset of different lecture materials contents (see Table 1) and compared with the gold standard 
created by T. Table 3 shows the result of application of the above techniques on documents 
stated in Table 1 after going through preprocessing in Figure 1. Furthermore, MCQs generation 
performance scores on the dataset were computed using precision and recall. Precision was to 
validate the quality of the keywords by MCQs generation extracted from the lecture materials 
and recall was used to measure the quantity. 
Precision answers the question – The keywords extracted from the lecture materials are they 
important words according to the gold standard marked by the teachers? While recall answers 
the question - are all the important words in the lecture materials extracted? 
 
Table 3. Statistics of the Keywords automatically extracted from documents. 
 
Lesson Materials 
Number of Keywords Auto Extracted 
Computer Science 
368 
Geology 
318 
Philosophy 
254 
Religion 
488 
History 
471 
 
For the performance evaluation, the following metrics precision, recall and f-measure 
are used in this research. 
 
Precision =
numberCorrect
numberExtracted 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
Recall =
numberCorrect
totalExtracted  
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
where numberCorrect is equal to true positive (TP), that is, important keywords 
extracted. numberExtracted in eqn 1 is summation of TP and false positive (FP). False 
Positive is extracted keywords that are not important words according to the gold 
standard. totalExtracted in eqn 2 is the summation of TP and false negative (FN). FN 
are keywords not extracted but are important words. To find the harmonic mean 
(average) of the precision and recall for computation of balance between precision (p) 
and recall (r) in the system: 
 
F −measure = 2 ∗(
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙∗𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙+𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛) 
 
 
(3) 
 
For each lecture material, for instance Computer Science (CS), there are two sets of 
data: 
 
Gold standard keywords that are important words in A prepared by the teacher. 
Henceforth known as truthset. 
 
The keywords extracted automatically from A. Henceforth known as extractedset. 
From the above explanation, assuming truthset and extractedset are sets from CS. TP is a set of 
intersection between truthset and extractedset (TP = truthset & extractedset), FP is a set of 
keywords that are in extractedset but not in truthset (fp = extractedset – truthset), while FN is a 
set of keywords that are in truthset but not in extractedset (fn = truthset – extractedset). Using 
Table 1, there are 206 truthset and 368 extractedset for CS lesson material. 
Table 4. Precision, Recall and F-measure. 
 
Lesson Materials 
TP 
FP 
FN 
Precision 
Recall 
F-measure 
Computer Science 
162 
206 
31 
0.44 
0.84 
0.58 
Geology 
79 
293 
3 
0.25 
0.96 
0.39 
Philosophy 
94 
160 
2 
0.37 
0.98 
0.54 
Religion 
169 
319 
1 
0.35 
0.94 
0.51 
History 
185 
286 
18 
0.39 
0.91 
0.55 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Bar charts of Precision, Recall and F-measure of scores on Table 4. 
 
From Table 4 and Figure 2, it can be observed from the Recall scores that the majority of the 
keywords automatically extracted are important words. Although Precision scores show that 
there are other keywords automatically extracted that are not important according to the gold 
standard set. At the moment we want to ensure that the majority (if not all) the keywords 
extracted from lesson notes are in the gold standard sets. The keywords extracted by the NLP 
processes are used to generate Multi-Choice Questions (MCQs). 
Since teachers are not technical persons, we develop a user-friendly interface where the MCQs 
generated are presented for teachers to easily access them. MCQs are generated from the 
extracted keywords by locating each keyword position given a document. 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Computer
Science
Geology
Philosophy
Religion
History
S
C
O
R
E
S
 
Precision
Recall
f-measure
 
Table 5. Sample TF-IDF weightd sentences. 
Sentence 
TF-IDFWeights 
The Difference Engine consisted 
entirely of mechanical components. 
{’entirely’: 0.305, ’consisted’: 0.305, ’components’: 
0.305, ’mechanical’: 0.209, ’difference’: 0.209} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Figure showing API for lecture material upload 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Figure showing API for generated MCQs. 
Each keyword of a document has a TF-IDF weight resulting in a composite-weighted sentence, 
this is illustrated in Table 5. How the weight in Table 5 work is when it is highest it means that t 
occurs many times within a small number of documents (thus lending high discriminating 
power to those documents); lower when the t occurs fewer times in a document, or occurs in 
many documents (thus offering a less pronounced relevance signal); lowest when the t occurs in 
virtually all documents. Given this definition, in a document we extract keywords with top 
weights as shown in Table 5. These extracted keywords are mapped to their positions within the 
document so that they are replaced with ‘–’ symbols instead. Then, we blindly and randomly 
select three other keywords from the pool of extracted keywords plus the main keyword that 
was replaced with ‘–’ to serve as options from which users are to select the right one. For a 
document, the number of multi-choice questions (MCQs) to be generated is dependent on the 
number of keywords extracted (see Table 5). These MCQs are regarded as suggested questions 
for the teachers to accept or reject. Figure 3 shows the API for lecture material upload while 
figure 4 show the API for the generated MCQs. The accept button is clicked by the teacher to 
select an MCQ if satisfied with it. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) generation for CBTE using Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) techniques is a system that helps teachers set multi-choice questions from their 
documents in a text file and thereafter provide answers to the questions generated. 
Consequently, it can be used in every area of education sector to test the knowledge or level of 
the students. However, this paper is not concerned with the issue of whether multiple-choice 
tests are better assessment methodology than other types of tests. What it focuses on is on 
application of NLP techniques to generate MCQs about facts explicitly based on keywords as 
stated in a text format of a given lesson material. From the results, it has shown that the system 
was capable of extracting keywords from lesson materials in setting examinable questions. This 
outcome is presented in a user-friendly interface for teachers easy accessibility using Django, a 
web framework for Python. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank all the teachers and students that contributed to the success of this work. Your 
feedbacks are very insightful and helpful towards the development of this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Mannem Prashanth, Rashmi Prasad, and Aravind Joshi. (2010). Question generation from 
paragraphs at UPenn: QGSTEC system description. In Proceedings of QG2010: The Third 
Workshop on Question Generation, pages 84–91. 
[2] 
Colleen E Crangle and Joyce Brothers Kart. (2015). A questions-based investigation of  
consumer mental Health information. PeerJ, 3:e867.  
[3] 
Gall MD. (1970). The use of questions in teaching. Review of Educational Research, 40: 707 
720. 
[4] 
Swart (2010). Evaluation of Final Examination Papers in Engineering: A Case Study Using 
Bloom’s Taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Education, (May 2010) Vol. 53, No.2 257-264. 
[5] 
Aldabe, I., De Lacalle, M. L., Maritxalar, M., Martinez, E., and Uria, L. (2006). Arikiturri: an 
Automatic question generator based on corpora and nlp techniques. In International Conference 
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 584-594). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
[6] 
Folajimi, Y. O., and Omojola, O. E. (2013). Natural language processing techniques for 
automatic test Questions generation using discourse connectives. Journal of Computer Science 
and Its Application, 20(2), 6076.  
[7] 
Aditya S. (2018). Using Natural Language Processing for Smart Question Generation. An Intel 
Developer Program Documentation. https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/using- natural 
language processing forsmart-question-generation. 
[8] 
Susanti, Y., Tokunaga, T., Nishikawa, H., and Obari, H. 2018. Automatic distractor generation 
for multiple Choice English vocabulary questions. Research and Practice in Technology 
Enhanced Learning, 13(1), 15.  
[9] 
Das, B., and Majumder, M. (2017). Factual open cloze question generation for assessment of 
learne’s knowledge. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 
14(1), 24. 
 
