Title: SNNLP: Energy-Efficient Natural Language Processing Using Spiking Neural Networks
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17911v1
--------------------------------------------------

i
SNNLP: Energy-Efficient Natural Language
Processing Using Spiking Neural Networks
R. Alexander Knipper, Kaniz Mishty, Mehdi Sadi, and Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu
Abstract—As spiking neural networks receive more attention,
we look toward applications of this computing paradigm in fields
other than computer vision and signal processing. One major
field, underexplored in the neuromorphic setting, is Natural
Language Processing (NLP), where most state-of-the-art solutions
still heavily rely on resource-consuming and power-hungry tradi-
tional deep learning architectures. Therefore, it is compelling to
design NLP models for neuromorphic architectures due to their
low energy requirements, with the additional benefit of a more
human-brain-like operating model for processing information.
However, one of the biggest issues with bringing NLP to the
neuromorphic setting is in properly encoding text into a spike
train so that it can be seamlessly handled by both current and
future SNN architectures. In this paper, we compare various
methods of encoding text as spikes and assess each method’s
performance in an associated SNN on a downstream NLP task,
namely, sentiment analysis. Furthermore, we go on to propose a
new method of encoding text as spikes that outperforms a widely-
used rate-coding technique, Poisson rate-coding, by around 13%
on our benchmark NLP tasks. Subsequently, we demonstrate
the energy efficiency of SNNs implemented in hardware for
the sentiment analysis task compared to traditional deep neural
networks, observing an energy efficiency increase of more than
32x during inference and 60x during training while incurring the
expected energy-performance tradeoff.
Impact Statement—As we see typical Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) architectures requiring vast amounts of computa-
tional power (e.g. ChatGPT, LLaMA, etc.), the issue of energy
efficiency in NLP becomes more apparent than ever. Spiking
neural networks (SNNs) offer vast energy savings under a new
computing paradigm, which has its strengths in processing se-
quences. However, while most NLP technologies process language
as a sequence, there is not a well-defined way to convert these
text sequences into binary “0/1” spike trains for use in the
energy-efficient paradigm introduced by SNNs. In this paper,
we recommend a method of encoding text as a spike train that
outperforms other typically used methods by roughly 13% on our
benchmark NLP tasks while using less energy, allowing NLP to
more readily be used in this energy-efficient environment.
Index Terms—Spiking Neural Networks, Low-Energy Comput-
ing, Natural Language Processing
I. INTRODUCTION
As we continue into the data-driven age, we find that
more and more applications are leveraging machine learning
Manuscript received October 27, 2023; revised XXX XX, 202X. This work
was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant
Number CRII-2153394.
The authors R. Alexander Knipper and Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu
are with the Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA. E-mail: rak0035@auburn.edu;
sks0086@auburn.edu.
The authors Kaniz Mishty and Mehdi Sadi are with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA. E-mail: kzm0114@auburn.edu; mehdi.sadi@auburn.edu.
techniques in some capacity. However, today’s machine learn-
ing approaches bring up a glaring issue: these methods are
incredibly energy-consuming, using countless floating-point
operations to process large amounts of data. As we look toward
implementing these machine learning (ML) applications in IoT
devices, we need to reduce the energy consumption on learning
tasks in order to increase the battery life of such devices.
Common approaches to reducing energy consumption to
date mainly exist in improving the underlying hardware,
while still adhering to the typical Von-Neumann architecture.
However, a more promising approach lies in the Neuromorphic
architecture, where the goal is to create biologically-inspired
computing chips for machine learning that deviates from
the standard Von-Neumann approach [1]. This biologically-
inspired approach places data and processing power in the
same place—much like how the brain operates, reducing the
overhead in moving data to/from a processor for intensive
calculations like those done in typical ML approaches.
Using these biologically-inspired Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs), we can perform similar processing to typical Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs) using a network of neurons that
exclusively communicate using binary “0/1” pulses. Further-
more, due to the nature of these ‘spiking neurons’, spiking
neural networks end up modeling the dependencies in input
data over time, which aligns itself incredibly well with pro-
cessing sequential data. With that in mind, natural language
processing (NLP) presents itself as a promising candidate
for implementations in spiking hardware, especially with the
energy-intensive networks that currently dominate the state-
of-the-art.
Current SNN research efforts focus mainly on two areas:
computer vision and information processing [2]. As a result
of these efforts, spiking neural networks were proven both
viable and useful in terms of achieving a comparable perfor-
mance (with some expected performance degradation) to real-
valued counterpart neural networks. Additionally, the spiking
neural networks exhibit much lower energy consumption than
their real-valued counterparts. However, many research areas,
including NLP, are still underexplored in the spiking neural
network setting and hence, it is compelling to study popular
NLP tasks in this neuromorphic computing setting.
As text data is sequential in nature, NLP tasks in general
lend themselves well to the processing paradigm of current
spiking neural network architectures, which involve a time
dimension and take in spike trains as inputs. However, one
of the largest issues with bringing NLP to the neuromorphic
setting is in properly encoding text into a spike train so
it can be seamlessly handled by current and future SNN
arXiv:2401.17911v1  [cs.CL]  31 Jan 2024
ii
architectures. Some typical methods that can be leveraged to
do so include binarized word embeddings [3] and rate-coding
techniques [4], but each method has its drawbacks.
In this paper, we explore the viability of processing text
using spiking neural networks by applying them to a popular
NLP problem: sentiment classification. In doing so, we aim to
answer four major questions:
1) Which works better for NLP tasks, directly using a
binary embedding or rate-coding a floating-point em-
bedding?
2) If we make rate-coding a deterministic process as op-
posed to a stochastic one, do we see higher accuracy on
NLP tasks?
3) On NLP tasks, do we see the same energy-accuracy
tradeoff that is reported in previous SNN literature?
4) How far can we decrease the latency cost of SNNs
while keeping performances competitive with traditional
ANNs?
Coupled with those major questions, we offer four major
findings, as follows:
1) While both binary embeddings and rate-coded floating-
point embeddings perform similarly on downstream
NLP tasks, directly using the binary word embedding
offers slightly improved performance.
2) We propose a method that makes rate-coding into a
deterministic process, offering significantly improved
performance (13% increased accuracy) on downstream
NLP tasks compared to a typical stochastic method,
Poisson rate-coding.
3) We observe a similar energy-performance tradeoff to
results seen in previous SNN literature [2], [5], further
grounding our results.
4) Latency can be reduced to between 9.3× and 17.5×
without significantly affecting accuracy, and can be
reduced to between 3.7× and 7× when taking a per-
formance hit of roughly 7-10%.
To be more specific, we show that, given an appropri-
ate spike formatting for input text, emerging SNN training
techniques are applicable to make inferences on text data.
We then subsequently report the energy efficiency of SNN
architectures applied to these tasks (Fig. 1). In summary,
the paper is organized as follows: Section II presents some
background information and related work. Section III explores
different methods of encoding text for use in a spiking neural
network. Section IV describes our methods and the energy
model we use. Section V describes our experimental setup, and
section VI presents our results on the sentiment classification
problems, discussing our findings. Finally, we conclude the
paper in Section VIII, discussing the limitations of our work
and some possible future directions.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Spiking Neural Networks
Spiking neural networks promise incredibly low-powered
hardware [1], adhering to a neuromorphic paradigm as op-
posed to the more energy-intensive Von-Neumann approaches
we see in everyday commercial use. However, at present,
Fig. 1.
Overall encoding/training pipeline for both SNN and ANN. Text gets
encoded into a continuous representation, converted into a spike train (for SNN
usage), and sent to the downstream neural network for training/testing. During
training/testing, operation counts are recorded so we can calculate appropriate
energy numbers for comparison.
spiking neural networks are difficult to train, lacking typi-
cal backpropagation methods and commonly-used activation
functions. Furthermore, there is still a considerable gap in
performance between a spiking neural network and its real-
valued artificial neural network counterpart. To address this,
three main approaches emerged, each aiming for a trained
SNN with comparable performance to a similar ANN:
1) Conversion Approaches: The most-studied approach has
been the conversion approach, where an ANN is trained with
backpropagation, and its learned weights are mapped to an
SNN with the same architecture. So far, this approach has
achieved the most consistent performance [5].
2) Unsupervised
Learning
Approaches:
Unsupervised
learning in SNNs is mainly explored in applications or
modifications of Spike Time-Dependent Plasticity (STDP)
[4], and is perhaps the second most-studied approach for
SNN training.
3) Supervised Learning Approaches: Arguably the most
difficult approach for learning in SNNs is supervised learning,
mostly due to the inability to calculate gradients from the spik-
ing activation function. However, active research is proposing
an alternate, “surrogate” gradient approximation function. The
most notable work in this area is SLAYER [6], which treats
the spiking activations probabilistically, and approximates the
gradient using the estimated probability density function of the
spiking activation. In this work, we focus mainly on supervised
learning and utilize SLAYER for backpropagation during SNN
training.
B. Natural Language Processing
1) Text Encoding Methods: In natural language processing,
one of the key techniques applied in nearly every approach
taken is to encode the input text into a continuous n-
dimensional ‘feature vector’ called an embedding [7], mapping
each token’s (character, word, sentence, etc.) symbolic repre-
sentation to a multidimensional latent vector space. One of the
most important properties of this vector space is that it not only
encodes the syntactic information of words but also encodes
the proper semantic information, allowing related meanings to
be extracted easily. Many word embedding techniques have
been proposed so far, e.g., Word2Vec [8], GloVe [9], FastText
[10], etc.
Going beyond word embeddings, NLP researchers have also
proposed methods that encode larger language constructs, such
as phrases [10] or sentences [11], [12]. These representations
for larger language constructs have gained more traction in
iii
NLP research as the needs for more dense representations of
text have become more apparent.
2) Embedding Binarization: While binarization efforts fall
under efficient NLP, it is also a relatively underexplored field.
However, one piece of notable work includes the proposal of
a hash-based clustering technique for learning binary embed-
dings [13], where the authors concatenated the binary codes of
the closest centroids for each word. Another notable method
is to transform an existing real-valued embedding to a binary
embedding using an auto-encoder [3], and yet another method
is to learn correlations between one-hot encoded context
and target blocks [14]. Furthermore, our own previous work
explored a method of learning compressed binary embeddings
from scratch using a genetic algorithm [15].
III. BACKGROUND ON SPIKE-AWARE TEXT ENCODING
In order to make proper use of a spiking neural network for
natural language processing, we need to first encode our input
text into a spike train. This can be done by converting already-
existing feature vectors created for any text token (character,
word, sentence, etc.) to binary spikes, either deterministically
or non-determinstically. In this work, we focus on com-
paring both deterministic and non-deterministic conversion
approaches, assessing the accuracy and energy consumption
of each.
A. Word Embeddings
In the real-valued domain, word embeddings typically cap-
ture semantic and syntactic information by observing word
co-occurrences and either predicting the target word given
its context, predicting the context given a target word, or
observing the ratios between global co-occurrences [7], [9]. To
use a word embedding vector in an SNN, we need to convert
said word vector from the real-valued domain to the spiking
domain. This involves utilizing either a binarization method
or a rate-coding approach.
When using a binarization method, like the near-lossless
binarization method proposed in [3], one can convert a
vector from a multi-hundred dimensional vector of floating-
point numbers to a binary vector, comprised of ”0/1” bits
(commonly, embeddings are made up of 64, 128, 256, or
512 bits). This allows for a reduction in both the size and
complexity of the word embeddings being used as input. While
this method typically requires an autoencoder to generate the
binary embeddings, this conversion is an operation that only
needs to be done once, so the energy cost incurred can be
ignored under the assumption that the word embeddings being
used were already converted in advance.
On the other hand, rate-coding is a well-known method of
encoding floating-point information as a spike train [4], [16]–
[18]. Using this method, floating-point numbers are easily
converted to a series of spikes based on a Poisson process,
where, for a number of timesteps k:
Yi =
(
1
if Xi < pi
0
if Xi ≥pi
(1)
Given that X ∼Binomial(k, p). This process is repeated for
all items in the input vector v, generating a spike train for
each of the input vector’s feature dimensions.
In this work, we explore and compare both binarization
and rate-coding approaches at the word level to gauge the
reliability of each. Furthermore, we put forth an additional
rate-coding technique that aims to increase the fidelity of the
downstream SNN’s input.
B. Sentence Embeddings
Unlike word embeddings, sentence embeddings typically
utilize a Transformer [19] model to encode sentences as a
single vector representation, training to maximize the ability to
seamlessly transfer sentence representations between different
NLP tasks. With these representations, each sentence’s relative
meaning is also encoded, allowing these embeddings to be
used in a similar manner to word embeddings, but at the
sentence level. However, due to their reliance on the under-
lying Transformer architecture, sentence embeddings tend to
inherently consume more energy than word embeddings in
return for increased information density, information accuracy,
and generalizability.
Similar to word embeddings, sentence embeddings can also
be converted for use in an SNN via binarization techniques
or rate-coding techniques. However, it is important to know
that the majority of sentence embeddings generate their sen-
tence embeddings each time a new dataset is introduced, as
opposed to only being calculated once. This makes sentence
embeddings far more expensive energy-wise compared to word
embeddings. As such, we make use of sentence embeddings
in this work purely to help illustrate the potential performance
of spike-aware text encoding approaches.
In this work, we make use of Universal Sentence Encoder
(USE) [12] to encode each of our input sentences into a single
512-dimension floating-point vector, allowing for a compact
representation of each text sample. Once again, in order to use
these embedded representations in an SNN, we need to convert
this floating-point vector into a binary vector using either a
binarization method or a rate-coding method. In this work, we
opt to utilize various rate-coding approaches, as binarization
methods typically involve an autoencoder in addition to the
Transformer model being used to generate the embedding in
the first place, which is far too expensive energy-wise.
IV. SENTIMENT/EMOTION CLASSIFICATION USING SNN
To demonstrate an SNN’s effectiveness in performing nat-
ural language processing tasks, we applied it to a simple,
widely-used task called sentiment classification. By extension,
we also demonstrate various possible methods of preprocess-
ing text data for use in an SNN. As described in Section
V, we choose to test the SNN on both a 2-class sentiment
classification task and a 6-class emotion classification task to
demonstrate its effectiveness and benchmark its performance.
A. Network Type
While sentiment classification tasks are currently solvable
with a high accuracy (> 94%) using state-of-the-art neural
iv
architectures like Transformers [19], SNNs do not yet have
these complex architectures reliably available to them. There-
fore, in order to perform an apple-to-apple comparison, we
opt to implement both the spiking and real-valued neural
network architectures using a fully-connected, feedforward
neural network on both of these tasks, and subsequently, report
each downstream SNN’s accuracy and energy consumption
compared to the equivalent, real-valued “shadow” network.
B. Encoding Methods
We test various encoding methods in order to find the best
way to properly utilize the time-based property of the network.
Namely, we utilize the following method-model combinations,
both at the sentence and word-level (with the exception of
SNN-bin, which is only used at the word-level):
• ANN - This is a typical ANN using regular floating-point
embeddings
• SNN-rate - This is a custom, deterministically rate-coded
embedding being used in a downstream SNN
• SNN-rate-rand - This is a Poisson rate-coded embedding
being used in a downstream SNN
• SNN-bin - This is a binarized embedding being used in
a downstream SNN
For our comparisons, we use an inference window of 50ms
with the exception of SNN-bin, which instead takes in a fixed-
length context of 512 for the 2-class task and 32 for the 6-class
task. In this method, the input text is encoded at the word-level
and formatted into spike trains as-is, so a sufficiently-long
context is required to represent all of the words in a given
input sequence.
Our other methods (ANN, SNN-rate, and SNN-rate-rand)
leverage the average of all word embeddings in the input
sequence, which allows us to get an approximation of a
sentence-level embedding without the associated energy cost.
Once we have this averaged embedding, we then encode it with
our rate-coding methods for use in our downstream SNNs. As
explained in section III-A, the Poisson rate-coding process is
a rather popular encoding method, and results in a stochastic
set of spike trains that roughly approximate the floating-point
number that was encoded. However, this approach raises a
question: What if we deterministically encode the spikes such
that the floating-point value being encoded is represented with
higher fidelity? Would this higher-fidelity spiking rate result
in a corresponding higher performance?
Our custom rate-coding method, which we refer to as
“SNN-rate” in this work, aims to address that question
by modifying the inherently stochastic Poisson rate-coding
method (referred to as “SNN-rate-rand”) to instead generate
deterministic spike trains for the given embedding. We gener-
ate our deterministic encoding as follows:
Vi(t) = Vi(t −1) + xi(t)
(2)
Yi(t) =
(
1
if Vi(t) ≥αi
0
otherwise
(3)
Where xi is the floating-point value being encoded, Vi(t) is
the membrane potential of the neuron at timestep t, and αi is
the membrane threshold of the neuron. Essentially, we modify
the standard Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model in
the following ways:
• Make the neuron take in a floating-point value: the self-
accumulation parameter
• Every timestep, perform the accumulation operation using
only the value stored as the self-accumulation parameter,
which we refer to as the self-accumulation operation
It is important to note that this modified “Self-Accumulate-
and-Fire” (SAF) neuron model (Fig. 2) only takes as input the
self-accumulation parameter, xi, with the clock, t, telling the
neuron how many times to perform the self-accumulation op-
eration. Furthermore, when the neuron receives a new floating-
point input, that input value becomes the neuron’s new self-
accumulation parameter, xi, for all future self-accumulation
operations.
Fig. 2.
Illustrated “Self-Accumulate-and-Fire” (SAF) neuron. Takes in a
floating-point value and self-accumulates it over time, spiking similarly to a
standard LIF neuron.
The SAF neuron’s output is then recorded as our rate-coded
spike train and is sent directly to the rest of the SNN. This
modified “Self-Accumulate-and-Fire” (SAF) neuron, designed
to enhance the integration of rate-coding behavior into the
SNN model’s architecture, facilitates our deterministic rate-
coding process. This approach lends itself well to the spiking
paradigm, particularly when formulated as a modified neuron
model.
C. Training Method
While using the various spike-aware text encodings dis-
cussed in Section III, we opt to train our downstream SNNs us-
ing SLAYER [6], which allows the SNN to update its weights
during training using a surrogate gradient for backpropagation.
We additionally train two “baseline” ANNs for each task: 1)
A regular ANN using the floating-point sentence embeddings,
and 2) An ANN using floating-point word embeddings.
For all networks, we maintain their network architectures
to be as identical as possible. All networks utilize an input
size eqivalent to the size of the embedding technique being
used. The input sizes used for each embedding method are as
follows:
• Floating-point & rate-coded sentence embeddings: 512
• Floating-point & rate-coded word embeddings: 200
• Binarized word embeddings: 64
All networks have two hidden layers, sized at 256 and 128
neurons respectively. Finally, we size the output layer to match
the number of output classes in each benchmark task, i.e. 2
v
neurons for sentiment classification and 6 neurons for emotion
classification.
All networks use a learning rate (η) of 1e−5, and train for
50 epochs. The ANNs use cross-entropy loss as their loss
function, while the SNNs use the spike rate as their loss
function. Namely, the SNNs aim for the correct output class’
neuron to spike for a majority of the inference window and
all other output class’ neurons to spike far less.
Furthermore, the SNNs all use the following neuron param-
eters:
• threshold: 1.25
• current decay: 0.25
• voltage decay: 0.03
• tau grad: 0.03
• scale grad: 3
Where the threshold and decay values determine the general
behavior of the Leaky Integrate and Fire (LIF) neuron, that
is, when the neuron fires and how much membrane potential
is going to decay off per timestep. Additionally, the tau grad
and scale grad values adjust the time constant and scale of
the gradient, respectively.
D. Energy Model
The energy efficiency of an SNN comes from two main
features. First, there is less computational demand due to
the event-driven binary activity of the neurons. In an SNN,
a computation is performed only if an incoming spike is
received. The neuron’s membrane potential V at time t can be
expressed as V (t) = V (t −1) + L + PN
i=1 wi
P∞
k=1 δi(t −k)
[1], [5]. The parameter wi represents the weight of synapse i,
δ is the delta function, L is the leak term and N is the number
of synaptic weights. This equation implies that in the presence
of a spike at time-stamp t, the synaptic weight is simply added
with the existing membrane potential. These computations can
be mapped as Accumulation (AC) operations and performed
by an Adder/Accumulator circuit. On the other hand, a typical
RNN/ANN neuron requires one/two Multiplication and one
Accumulation (MAC) operation. Second, the number of both
on and off-chip memory accesses is much smaller for an SNN
compared to an ANN. In a regular ANN, most of the on-
chip memory is occupied by the large intermediate activation;
sometimes, we even need to go to the off-chip to store the
internal states. As a result, there are more off-chip accesses
to fetch the network parameters and activations. In addition,
ANNs require frequent on-chip accesses (depending on the
size of the computation array unit and on-chip memory size)
to store the partial sums of the output activations. However, in
an SNN during inference, we only need to fetch the synaptic
weights and initial inputs from off-chip once.
To model the total system energy consumed by an SNN in
operation, we dissect the total energy into two parts: (i) energy
associated with the computation and (ii) energy associated
with the memory access. This paper only models the energy
required for the computations (case i), and modeling the
system energy is considered future work as it involves detailed
modeling of the hardware’s memory system hierarchy.
TABLE I
NUMBER OF TRAINING, VALIDATION, AND INFERENCE EXAMPLES USED
FOR EACH EVALUATION DATASET
Dataset
Training
Validation
Inference
Total
IMDb
30,000
5,000
15,000
50,000
CARER
12,000
2,000
6,000
20,000
We count the number of operations per layer per sample (for
each NN) to estimate the computation energy of the SNN and
ANN networks [20]. An ANN layer l with N neurons will
require (Nl−1Nl) MAC operations to produce its output. If
EMAC is the energy cost of a single MAC operation, the total
cumulative energy consumed (EANNtotal) in the computation
of L layers is modeled as follows:
EANNtotal =
L
X
l=1
(Nl−1Nl)EMAC
(4)
A spiking neuron on specialized SNN hardware will perform
an Accumulate (AC) operation per synapse if a spike is
received. An SNN layer l with N neurons upon the reception
of a spike needs to perform Nl−1Nl AC operations. However,
depending on the fraction of neuron firing rate, S, not all
the neurons will remain perpetually active [20]. Therefore, the
total energy consumed in the computation of L layers over K
timesteps is modeled as:
ESNNtotal =
K
X
t=1
L
X
l=1
(Nl−1Sl−1Nl)EAC
(5)
S is always <<1, making SNNs computation-efficient
compared to ANNs. In addition, an AC operation consumes
less than half of the energy a MAC operation consumes, as
shown in Table VI.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we describe how we evaluate and compare
each implemented SNN and its counterpart real-valued ANN.
A. Dataset
For our experiments, we used the IMDb Movie Review
dataset [21] for our simple 2-class sentiment classification
problem and the CARER dataset [22] for our multiclass (6
labels) emotion classification problem. The datasets are split
into training, validation, and testing sets as indicated in Table I,
and the tasks associated with each dataset are briefly described
below:
• IMDb Movie Review: Given a string of text from a movie
review, decide whether the text is expressing positive or
negative sentiment.
• CARER: Given a tweet as text, decide which of the 6
emotions - sadness, joy, love, anger, fear, or surprise -
are being exhibited in the text.
B. Implementation Details
For all models, we test the same model architecture on both
problems, using the layer sizes described in Section IV-C. We
train all models for 50 epochs, recording their convergence in
Figure 3.
vi
Fig. 3.
All model training curves. The top two graphs depict curves for
sentence-level methods and the bottom two graphs show word-level methods.
The left-side graphs show models trained for the IMDB 2-class task, where the
right-side graphs show models trained for the 6-class emotion classification
task.
C. Evaluation Metrics
When evaluating our models for comparison, we report two
main performance metrics: inference accuracy and the mean
reciprocal rank (MRR). We report accuracy numbers for both
tasks, but only report the MRR for the emotion classification
task, as it having more than two output classes means we can
benefit from knowing where the desired class sits in the overall
predicted ranking.
With the MRR measurements, we aim to examine how close
the correct class was to the top spot if we had ranked the output
neurons in terms of how many times they actually fired. For
a given sample set, we define MRR as:
MRR = 1
|S|
|S|
X
i=1
1
ranki
(6)
where S is the collection of testing samples and ranki
indicates the ordinal position of the correct class label for a
particular sample i.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Model Performance
In this section, we focus on answering our first two ques-
tions: 1) Which works better for NLP, binary embeddings or
rate-coded floating-point embeddings? 2) If we make rate-
coding a deterministic process as opposed to a stochastic one,
do we see a performance improvement? In addressing these
questions, we test our SNN on two NLP tasks:
• IMDb Review dataset: 2-class sentiment classification
• CARER dataset: 6-class emotion classification
We outline our results on both tasks in Tables II, III, IV,
and V. Note that we do not record the mean reciprocal rank
(MRR) for the 2-class sentiment classification problem, as it
is not meaningful for a binary classification task.
TABLE II
SENTENCE-LEVEL 2-CLASS SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION:
ACCURACY
Model
Training
Accuracy
Inference
Accuracy
ANN
0.859
0.867
SNN-rate
0.836
0.840
SNN-rate-rand
0.659
0.656
TABLE III
SENTENCE-LEVEL 6-CLASS EMOTION CLASSIFICATION:
ACCURACY & MRR
Model
Training
Accuracy
Inference
Accuracy
Inference
MRR
ANN
0.617
0.633
0.778
SNN-rate
0.534
0.522
0.703
SNN-rate-rand
0.410
0.395
0.609
As shown in Tables II, III, IV, and V, we demonstrate the
expected performance gap between the ANN and our SNNs.
Furthermore, both the word-level and sentence-level models
are largely competitive with each other, with the sentence-
level models performing better on 2-class classification (Table
II) and word-level models performing better with multi-class
classification (Table V).
Additionally, it appears that at the word-level, we see
similar performances from Poisson rate-coded spike trains and
spike trains generated directly from a binary word embedding
(Tables IV and V). In all cases, we observe slightly improved
performance when using a binary word embedding as opposed
to using a Poisson rate-coded spike train. However, we see a
significant performance increase across all measures, embed-
dings, and tasks when the rate-coded spike trains are generated
deterministically. This also exhibits a similarly significant
improvement over using the binary embedding directly.
It is important to note that most state-of-the-art results
on these tasks are achieved using Transformer architectures,
like BERT [23] and XL-NET [24], which are more complex
(and energy-intensive) models than fully-connected neural net-
works. Such architectures are currently being researched, and
stable implementations are not yet available for neuromorphic
hardware.
Overall, our results demonstrate the following conclusions:
• We observe the expected performance degradation going
from an ANN to its SNN counterpart, which is justified
by the energy improvements explored in Section VI-B.
• We observe a similar performance between Poisson rate-
coded and binary embedding spike trains, with the binary
embedding being slightly more effective than typical
Poisson rate-coding in both tasks.
• We observe a significant increase in performance when
using
deterministically-encoded
spike
trains
as
op-
posed to Poisson rate-coded spike trains. By extension,
we see a similarly significant improvement using the
deterministically-encoded spike trains over the binary
embedding-based spike trains as well.
vii
TABLE IV
WORD-LEVEL 2-CLASS SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION:
ACCURACY
Model
Training
Accuracy
Inference
Accuracy
ANN
0.821
0.824
SNN-rate
0.788
0.788
SNN-rate-rand
0.628
0.631
SNN-bin
0.650
0.664
TABLE V
WORD-LEVEL 6-CLASS EMOTION CLASSIFICATION:
ACCURACY & MRR
Model
Training
Accuracy
Inference
Accuracy
Inference
MRR
ANN
0.574
0.572
0.734
SNN-rate
0.542
0.536
0.711
SNN-rate-rand
0.424
0.432
0.633
SNN-bin
0.446
0.432
0.635
B. Energy Efficiency
In this subsection, we demonstrate the energy improvement
of our implemented word-level, SNN-based architecture over
an equivalent, conventional ANN for performing sentiment
and emotion classification on the IMDb Movie Review and
CARER datasets, respectively. We design an FP32 Multiplier-
Accumulator unit and an FP32 Accumulator unit to carry
out the GEMM operations of ANNs and the accumulation
operations of SNN tasks. We synthesize and perform PNR
(place and route) of the design using Synopsys 14-nm Standard
Cell Library [25] at a 1GHz clock frequency. Each unit’s
energy consumption per operation is listed below in Table VI.
(a) 
(c) 
(b) 
(d) 
Fig. 4.
SNN vs ANN number of arithmetic operations of Sentiment
Classification during inference (a) & training (c) and Emotion Classification
during inference (b) & training (d).
In Fig. 4, we plot the layer-wise and total computations per
sample for the ANN and SNN architectures while performing
the sentiment classification ((a)-inference, ((c)-training) and
emotion classification ((b)-inference, (d)-training) tasks. As
shown, ANNs appear to require an order of magnitude more
TABLE VI
FP MAC AND ACC MODULE ENERGY
Module
Tech. (nm)
Energy (pj)
FP Multiplier-Accumulator (FP-MAC)
14
57.14
FP Accumulator (FP-ACC)
14
25.63
(b) 
(d) 
(c) 
(a) 
Fig. 5.
Improvement of SNN in computation energy over ANN. Sentiment
Classification during inference (a) and training (c). Emotion Classification
during inference (b) and training (d).
operations than SNNs. Overall, the total number of compu-
tations in ANNs for sentiment and emotion classification are
∼15× of SNNs during inference (Fig. 4 (a)-(b)). As the SNNs
run for 50 timesteps per sample (equating roughly 50ms)
during inference, and this “inference window” can be adjusted,
this value will increase/decrease along with the configured
inference window size. Additionally, to compare training costs
on a per-epoch basis, we averaged the number of computations
per sample over all 50 epochs, which is reported in Fig. 4 (c)-
(d). As shown, ANNs require even more operations to train
their parameters: ∼27× more than SNNs. Furthermore, we
again emphasize that MAC operations dominate the ANNs
while SNNs are dominated by AC operations, further increas-
ing our energy improvements.
To showcase this improvement, we estimate the energy
consumption of the ANN and SNN for our two use cases
using equations 4 & 5, and the energy values from Table
VI. As shown in Fig. 5, the SNN achieves roughly 32×
more energy efficiency during inference (Fig. 5 (a)-(b)) and
roughly 60× during training (Fig. 5 (c)-(d)) compared to the
ANN for sentiment and emotion classification tasks. However,
we do observe calculations taking place in the SNNs’ input
layer (Layer 0), whereas the ANNs’ input layers do not have
any extra calculations. This is due to the input layer being
comprised of spiking neurons - since the input is a spike
train, it will naturally follow the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire
(LIF) behavior, which incurs extra operations. Nonetheless,
despite the extra layers’ worth of operations and energy
consumption, SNNs still achieve exceptional energy savings
compared to ANNs - roughly 32× during inference and 60×
during training.
Overall, this means that our SNN-NLP architectures achieve
the expected energy improvements in return for the previously
observed performance loss incurred.
C. Latency Impact
Furthermore, we measure the amount of time taken to
perform inference on both the ANN and the SNN to determine
the effect on the per-sample inference latency. In its current
configuration, the SNNs take 50ms to infer each sample for
both tasks, although that is a value that can be adjusted, as
explored in section VII. The ANNs, on the other hand, take
viii
about 2.69ms per sample for the sentiment classification task
and 1.429ms per sample for the emotion classification task.
This means the SNNs have an approximate 18.53× increase
in inference latency over the associated ANN for 2-class
sentiment classification and a 34.99× increase for multi-class
emotion classification. Overall, our observed latency increase
for SNN-NLP conforms with previously-reported SNN latency
increases over regular neural networks for image recognition
tasks [5]. Furthermore, this latency increase is justified for
low-power applications in edge computing.
VII. EFFECTS OF INFERENCE WINDOW SIZE
In an SNN, we can adjust how long the model runs for, that
is, the inference window of the model. In essence, it dictates
how many timesteps’ worth of spikes are sent to the model as
input, as well as how many timesteps’ worth of output spikes
the model can make. As common sense would dictate, making
the inference window larger would result in a performance in-
crease at the cost of increased latency and energy consumption.
Conversely, decreasing the inference window would result in
a performance decrease with an associated reduction in both
latency and energy consumption. In this section, we aim to
both confirm that common sense assumption and find an
acceptable performance/latency tradeoff for our downstream
SNN models.
Fig. 6.
Accuracy based on inference window size for the IMDb 2-
class sentiment classification task. The top graph depicts performance at the
sentence-level and the bottom graph depicts performances at the word-level.
For our experiments, we vary the inference window between
the following values: 100ms, 50ms (The inference window
used in all other results), 25ms, and 10ms, where each
millisecond is counted as a single timestep. Our results are
shown in Fig. 6, 7, and 8. As shown, we see the expected
performance degradation as we reduce the size of the infer-
ence window, with performance dropping off more sharply
between 25ms and 10ms. As a result, we recommend that the
inference window for most downstream models stays between
10 and 25ms, as this achieves a performance-latency tradeoff
where SNNs remain competitive with ANNs (∼7-10% less
Fig. 7.
Accuracy based on inference window size for the Twitter Emotion
6-class sentiment classification task. The top graph depicts performance at the
sentence-level and the bottom graph depicts performances at the word-level.
Fig. 8. Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) based on inference window size for the
Twitter Emotion 6-class sentiment classification task. The top graph depicts
performance at the sentence-level and the bottom graph depicts performances
at the word-level.
accuracy), and latency drops to ∼3.7-7× that of equivalent
ANNs.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this work, we explore the viability of spiking neural
networks for performing natural language processing tasks,
describing various encoding methods and testing various SNNs
on two downstream (sentiment/emotion) classification tasks.
Overall, we present the following major contributions:
• At the word-level, we demonstrate that both Poisson rate-
coding and directly using the binary embedding perform
similarly.
• By making rate-coding a deterministic process, we see
a significant improvement in accuracy over Poisson rate-
coding (roughly 13%). This narrows the performance gap
ix
between the SNNs and ANNs to roughly 3.6% at the
word-level, further underscoring SNNs’ viability on NLP
tasks.
• We observe the expected energy-accuracy tradeoff be-
tween the ANN and the SNN, as seen in previous SNN
literature [2], [5], further grounding our results.
• We successfully reduce the SNNs’ latency to 9.3−17.5x
that of the ANNs without significantly affecting perfor-
mance, and further reduce the latency to 3.7 −7x when
taking an additional performance hit or roughly 7−10%.
These results show that applying SNNs to NLP tasks is
not only viable, but it can be useful, especially in limited-
resource environments where more energy-efficient methods
are required. Additionally, we demonstrate that the SNNs are
extremely power-efficient, achieving an approximate 32× and
60× energy savings during inference and training, respectively.
Furthermore, this energy efficiency is achieved while narrow-
ing the performance gap between ANNs and SNNs to under
5% accuracy.
A. Limitations
This work is limited in a few ways, which we aim to address
as we move forward with this direction. The main limitations
of this work are as follows:
• We mainly test our SNNs on text classification tasks;
more research is needed to verify the generalizability of
SNNs to other, more complex NLP tasks (e.g., language
translation) and architectures (e.g., Transformer, BERT).
• While for NLP tasks the SNNs result in a vast increase
in energy efficiency, this comes at a slight cost to both
model performance and inference latency. However, this
energy-latency trade-off is well-known for SNNs [2], [5].
B. Future Directions
For further work, we plan to fully leverage the time-series
nature of SNNs and test its ability to process arbitrarily long
sequences of text using a series of embedded data. To that
end, we also plan to test SNNs on a wider variety of tasks to
further cement its effectiveness and usefulness, and test more
methods of encoding text into spikes in an energy-efficient
manner. Finally, we plan to incorporate the memory-access-
related energy in our energy model and evaluate the system-
level energy improvements of SNNs over ANNs.
C. Reproducibility
All code, data, and experiments contained in this paper are
available on GitHub at https://github.com/alexknipper/SNNLP.
REFERENCES
[1] C.-S. Poon and K. Zhou, “Neuromorphic silicon neurons and large-
scale neural networks: Challenges and opportunities,” Frontiers in Neu-
roscience, vol. 5, 2011.
[2] J. D. Nunes, M. Carvalho, D. Carneiro, and J. S. Cardoso, “Spiking
neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, 2022.
[3] J. Tissier, C. Gravier, and A. Habrard, “Near-lossless binarization of
word embeddings,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 33, no. 01, pp. 7104–7111, Jul. 2019. [Online].
Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4692
[4] P. Diehl and M. Cook, “Unsupervised learning of digit recognition
using spike-timing-dependent plasticity,” Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience, vol. 9, 2015.
[5] A. Sengupta, Y. Ye, R. Wang, C. Liu, and K. Roy, “Going deeper in
spiking neural networks: Vgg and residual architectures,” Frontiers in
Neuroscience, vol. 13, 2019.
[6] S. B. Shrestha and G. Orchard, “SLAYER: spike layer error reassign-
ment in time,” CoRR, vol. abs/1810.08646, 2018.
[7] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Dis-
tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, C. Burges,
L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Weinberger, Eds., vol. 26.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.
[8] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
[9] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors
for word representation,” in Proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), 2014.
[10] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word
vectors with subword information,” Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017.
[11] A. Conneau, D. Kiela, H. Schwenk, L. Barrault, and A. Bordes,
“Supervised learning of universal sentence representations from natural
language inference data,” CoRR, vol. abs/1705.02364, 2017.
[12] D. Cer, Y. Yang, S. Kong, and N. Hua, “Universal sentence encoder,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1803.11175, 2018.
[13] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, M. Douze, H. J´egou, and T. Mikolov,
“Fasttext.zip: Compressing text classification models,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1612.03651, 2016.
[14] Y. Liang, C. K. Ryali, B. Hoover, L. Grinberg, S. Navlakha, M. J. Zaki,
and D. Krotov, “Can a fruit fly learn word embeddings?” CoRR, vol.
abs/2101.06887, 2021.
[15] R. A. Knipper, M. M. Hassan, M. Sadi, and S. K. Karmaker Santu,
“Analogy-guided evolutionary pretraining of binary word embeddings,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 12th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), Y. He, H. Ji, S. Li, Y. Liu, and C.-H. Chang, Eds. Online only:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2022, pp. 683–693.
[Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022.aacl-main.52
[16] M. Kiselev, “Rate coding vs. temporal coding - is optimum between?”
in 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
2016, pp. 1355–1359.
[17] C.
Lee,
S.
S.
Sarwar,
P.
Panda,
G.
Srinivasan,
and
K.
Roy,
“Enabling spike-based backpropagation for training deep neural network
architectures,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 14, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2020.00119
[18] Y. Kim, H. Park, A. Moitra, A. Bhattacharjee, Y. Venkatesha, and
P. Panda, “Rate coding or direct coding: Which one is better for accurate,
robust, and energy-efficient spiking neural networks?” in ICASSP 2022
- 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 71–75.
[19] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1706.03762, 2017.
[20] B. Yin, F. Corradi, and S. M. Boht´e, “Effective and efficient computation
with multiple-timescale spiking recurrent neural networks,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Neuromorphic Systems 2020, 2020, pp. 1–8.
[21] A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. Potts,
“Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies.
Portland, Oregon, USA: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2011, pp. 142–150.
[22] E. Saravia, H.-C. T. Liu, Y.-H. Huang, J. Wu, and Y.-S. Chen, “CARER:
Contextualized affect representations for emotion recognition,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing.
Brussels, Belgium: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Oct.-Nov. 2018, pp. 3687–3697.
[23] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1810.04805, 2018.
[24] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. G. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and
Q. V. Le, “Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding,” CoRR, vol. abs/1906.08237, 2019.
[25] “Synopsys.” [Online]. Available: https://www.synopsys.com//
x
R. Alexander Knipper is a PhD student in the
Department of Computer Science and Software En-
gineering at Auburn University, Auburn, AL. He
received a BS degree from Indiana Institute of
Technology in Fort Wayne, IN in 2020. His current
research work is focused on developing conversa-
tional systems and working with Natural Language
Processing in Neuromorphic architectures.
Kaniz Mishty received the B.S. degree in Elec-
tronics
and
Communication
Engineering
from
Khulna University of Engineering and Technology,
Bangladesh, in 2018. She is currently working to-
wards her Ph.D. degree in ECE at Auburn Univer-
sity, AL, USA. Her research interests are energy
efficient AI hardware design and AI/ML in CAD.
She interned with Apple Inc. in Summer ’22, 23
and Qualcomm in ’21 on AI application in SoC and
custom circuit design.
Mehdi Sadi (S’12-M’17) is an Assistant Professor
at the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering at Auburn University, Auburn, AL. Dr.
Sadi earned his PhD in ECE from University of
Florida, Gainesville, in 2017, MS from University of
California at Riverside, USA in 2011 and BS from
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technol-
ogy in 2010. Prior to joining Auburn University, he
was a Senior R&D SoC Design Engineer at Intel
Corporation in Oregon. Dr. Sadi‘s research focus
is on developing algorithms/CAD techniques for
implementation, design, reliability, and security of AI hardware. He was the
recipient of SRC best in session award, Intel Xeon Design Group recognition
awards, and National Science Foundation CRII award.
Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu is currently an
Assistant Professor in the Department of Com-
puter Science and Software Engineering (CSSE) at
Auburn University, Alabama. With a broad inter-
est in the field of Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science, his primary research focus lies at the in-
tersection of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
and Information Retrieval (IR). He brings significant
experience in NLP/IR research from both academia
(Ph.D. from UIUC, Postdoc experience from MIT)
and industry internships (Microsoft Research, Yahoo
Research, @WalmartLabs). As a researcher, he has published 28 research
papers at premier venues, including ACL, EMNLP, SIGIR, WWW, COLING,
CoNLL, AACL, CIKM, IUI, ACM TIST, and ACM Computing Surveys.
His research projects have been funded by multiple agencies, including the
National Science Foundation (NSF), Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR), Army Research Office (ARO) and US Dept. of Agriculture
(USDA). For external service, he currently serves as an action editor for the
ACL Rolling Review Initiative (ARR) and as ARR’s communication chair.
Dr. Karmaker served as the tutorial chair for CIKM 2022. He has also served
regularly as a program committee member for ACL and SIGIR-sponsored
conferences for the last five years.
