Title: A Review of Published Machine Learning Natural Language Processing Applications for Protocolling Radiology Imaging
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11502v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Review of Published Machine Learning 
Natural Language Processing Applications 
for Protocolling Radiology Imaging 
 
Running title: A Review of AI in Radiology Protocolling 
 
Nihal Raju*5 , Michael Woodburn*1,5, Stefan Kachel2,3 , Jack O’Shaughnessy5, 
Laurence Sorace5, Natalie Yang2, Ruth P Lim2,4 
Austin Health, 145 Studley Rd, Heidelberg, VIC, 3084, Australia 
Corresponding author: Michael Woodburn 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0600-8866 
woodburnmichael@gmail.com 
Austin Health, 145 Studley Rd, Heidelberg VIC 3084, Australia 
Emails: 
NR: nihal.r.raju@gmail.com 
MW: woodburnmichael@gmail.com 
SK: Stefan.KACHEL@austin.org.au 
JO: jack.o'shaughnessy@austin.org.au 
LS: laurence.sorace@bigpond.com 
NY: Natalie.YANG@austin.org.au 
RL: Ruth.LIM@austin.org.au 
 
* These authors contributed equally 
1 Harvard University, Extension School, Cambridge, MA, USA 
2 Department of Radiology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville 
3 Department of Radiology, Columbia University in the City of New York 
4 Department of Surgery (Austin), The University of Melbourne 
5 Austin Hospital, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract and Keywords 
Abstract  
Machine learning (ML) is a subfield of Artificial intelligence (AI), and its applications in 
radiology are growing at an ever-accelerating rate. The most studied ML application is the 
automated interpretation of images. However, natural language processing (NLP), which can 
be combined with ML for text interpretation tasks, also has many potential applications in 
radiology. One such application is automation of radiology protocolling, which involves 
interpreting a clinical radiology referral and selecting the appropriate imaging technique. It is 
an essential task which ensures that the correct imaging is performed. However, the time that 
a radiologist must dedicate to protocolling could otherwise be spent reporting, 
communicating with referrers, or teaching. To date, there have been few publications in 
which ML models were developed that use clinical text to automate protocol selection. This 
article reviews the existing literature in this field. A systematic assessment of the published 
models is performed with reference to best practices suggested by machine learning 
convention. Progress towards implementing automated protocolling in a clinical setting is 
discussed. 
 
Key Words:  
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Radiology, Review 
Literature as Topic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background 
 
Machine learning (ML) is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that describes computer 
algorithms which learn relationships and patterns within data in order to produce a desired 
output(1). ML has increasingly been applied in Radiology to interpret images. It is commonly 
used to automate tasks where radiologists interpret features within images to reach medically 
relevant conclusions. A recent systematic review showed that deep learning, a subtype of ML 
which uses artificial neural networks(2), had equivalent performance to healthcare 
professionals in detecting some diseases in medical images (3). ML can be used for other 
applications beyond diagnosis. For example, a recent study described a successful ML model 
that identified biomarkers in body CT scans for cardiovascular risk stratification which were 
more predictive than clinical parameters (4). ML has also been used to improve radiologist 
efficiency, such as by automating the triaging of adult chest radiographs, which significantly 
reduced reporting delays for images with critical findings. (5)   
 
Natural language processing (NLP) is another subfield of AI that describes techniques and 
processes which “convert unstructured text into a structured form, and therefore enable 
automatic identification and extraction of information” (5). NLP has not been as widely 
studied for Radiology applications, however, since radiologists must document their findings, 
interpretation, and recommendations in written reports, there are many theoretical 
applications which make use of that text data. Examples of target outcomes include 
automated identification of follow up recommendations (6), automated extraction of the 
diagnosis from a report (7), or classification of report free text into discrete labels.(8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another example of free text data in Radiology is the clinical referral for a scan. Study 
protocolling for computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans 
relies upon clinical text information provided by the referrer to generate a written 
‘prescription’ by a radiologist for the optimal way to perform the requested study to answer 
the clinical question (Fig 1).  
 
A correctly prescribed protocol can improve patient outcomes and reduce costs (9, 10). An 
incorrect, inappropriate, or incomplete protocol can result in wasted resources, delayed 
diagnosis, or unnecessary exposure to ionising radiation in CT studies (10). One study 
calculated that protocolling occupies up to 6.3% of a radiologist’s time (9), therefore its 
automation would conceivably allow more time for image interpretation, interventional 
procedures and direct communication with referrers and patients.  
 
The following is an example of a referral and corresponding protocol from one of the 
included studies(11): 
Referral:  
Indication: long smoking history and weight loss. rule out malignancy 
Protocol: 
CT Chest without contrast 
 
In this review article, we begin with a brief overview of ML theory. We then present an in-
depth systematic review of the existing literature for NLP for Radiology protocolling, with 
reference to relevant elements of the recently published Checklist for Artificial Intelligence in 
Medical Imaging (CLAIM) guidelines, which set a standard that Radiology studies should 
meet to legitimately report the development of a successful ML model(12). Finally, we 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
summarise progress to date and discuss future directions to bring automated protocolling into 
the clinical domain. 
 
Methods: Search Strategy 
Embase and Medline (Ovid) online databases were searched in February 2021 using 
keywords and medical subject headings. Results were limited to English. Articles were 
incorporated if they demonstrated the development of an automated protocolling model 
related to any imaging modality according to PRISMA guidelines(13). The search strategy 
and selection criteria are summarized in Appendix i and ii.  
 
Based on our search strategy, five studies of radiology protocolling using ML were identified 
(Table 1).  
 
Machine Learning:  A Brief Overview 
 
Developing a ML model for protocolling is an example of supervised ML (Figure 2). In 
supervised ML, during training, the model is shown the ground truth labels. For the 
developed models which this review assesses, we discuss the selected task, data, hardware, 
software, and evaluation strategy.  
 
ML automation is generally strongest for tasks similar to protocolling scans, i.e. tasks that are 
repetitive and have a clearly defined and valuable objective. To ensure that the proposed task 
has these qualities radiologist in-domain expertise is essential.  Experience as a machine 
Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning practitioner is also often necessary to confirm that automation of a task is 
technologically feasible.  
 
Supervised ML requires a dataset of pairs of inputs and associated labels (radiologists may 
refer to these as reference standards, or ground truths).  A label is an indicator that a sample 
belongs to a specific class. For protocolling, each label is a specific protocol selected by an 
expert as the most appropriate protocol for a given text referral. Labelling by clinical experts 
is recommended by most guidelines, although it often limits the size of the labelled dataset 
due to labour costs. 
 
The tools used in ML include hardware capable of storing data, a Central Processing Unit 
(CPU) or Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) for efficient calculations, and software to develop, 
train and test an appropriate model. Since NLP models use text as inputs, and text inputs are 
often processed by deep learning models, not all models can be trained on ordinary 
computers.  
 
Evaluation of a model uses metrics (e.g. recall and precision) for the proposed task, and can 
include assessment of the model’s generalisability to previously unseen data. Evaluation must 
be done according to specific conventions to be considered statistically valid.  
 
 
The Task: Protocol Selection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Radiology protocolling lends itself well to ML, since it is a task that is completed frequently 
by radiologists and results in an abundance of data already stored in electronic format in 
Radiology Information Systems (RIS). Radiology referrals with clinical indications (inputs) 
and radiologist-informed protocols (labels) can be retrospectively extracted and used for 
model training and testing. 
 
All identified studies used retrospectively sampled MRI scan data, except for Kalra et al. (11) 
which also included CT data. Tasks included prescribing each specific sequence to be 
performed during an examination (14), determining whether contrast administration is 
necessary and, in Brown et al. (15), determining whether a radiological scan should be 
prioritised to occur within 24 hours.  
 
The proposed benefits of automated protocolling highlighted by the studies were: achieving 
appropriate and consistent selection of radiological examination (14), improved efficiency 
(11, 16, 17) and prioritisation of urgent examinations(15), with downstream benefits to 
patient care, safety (mitigating inappropriate ionising radiation or contrast) and a reduction in 
overall health costs (17).  
Data 
 
Good quality data is an integral determinant for the success of a ML model. Radiologists will 
be familiar with the old adage, “garbage in, garbage out” as applied to radiology requests, 
Figure 3:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also recognised in data science as the acronym GIGO (18). Thus, quality data is essential for 
developing an automated protocolling model. Referral quality is determined by the referring 
doctor writing the clinical indication, and protocol selection quality based on the referral is 
the responsibility of the radiologist. 
 
Referrals  
Referring physicians are directed to include necessary information to choose a protocol to 
match the clinical indication. If the appropriate protocol is not clear for a radiologist from the 
provided indication, it will likely be similarly unclear to a model. Four out of five studies 
used unadjusted clinical text as inputs into their data pipelines (some included additional 
inputs), and each of their models had to contend with this inherent uncertainty(11, 14, 15, 
17). For example, a referral of ‘abdominal pain’ could lead to several protocols. If calculus is 
suspected, a non-contrast CT KUB would be selected.  If appendicitis is favoured, a portal 
venous phase CT would be more appropriate. A suspicion of mesenteric ischaemia would 
require multi-phase imaging. Referrer communication and education has been historically 
emphasized as an area of improvement for optimising radiology examination appropriateness 
(19, 20).  
 
To potentially address this issue, information beyond the referral can be gathered from the 
electronic health records (EHR) as ancillary input data. This could include past medical 
history and estimated glomerular filtration rate, which have been recommended as inputs to 
improve the appropriateness of the output protocol (11, 14, 17). Trivedi et al. and Brown et 
al. explicitly used human-authored clinical indication as the sole input (14, 17). In contrast, 
Kalra et al. included multiple fields in its inputs including clinical history, some of which was 
auto-generated by the Computerized Patient Record System (11).  Lee et al.’s inputs were a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination of the referring department, the region of interest, whether contrast was used, 
gender, and age of the patient (16). 
 
In all five studies assessed, only single institution data was used (11, 14, 17). Kalra et al. 
collected the largest dataset (18,192 samples) (11) and Trivedi et al. the smallest dataset 
(1,520 samples), perhaps reflecting the latter’s choice to manually review and classify each 
sample (17). The more data available for training in ML, the better the chance the algorithm 
has of learning relevant features and dealing with previously unseen data. A notable example 
is the RSNA dataset of intracranial haemorrhage which contained 25,000 CT brain images 
and resulted in the development of highly accurate models (21). 
 
Protocol labels 
Of equal importance to the input data is the quality of its associated output – the label. Labels 
provide the ground truth which the model uses to learn. Ideally, a clinical referral has a one-
to-one relationship with its protocol i.e., the same clinical referral is protocolled the same 
way consistently. However, for many reasons, one-to-many relationships between clinical 
referrals and protocol labels stored in RIS exist, which disrupts training in ML(15). Variation 
in protocols may be caused by differences in the level of experience of the individual 
choosing the protocol (e.g. radiographer versus radiology trainee versus experienced 
radiologist), or intra-individual variation in protocols due to human error.  
 
For reliable results, accurate labelling of data should be performed by at least one expert 
radiologist for radiology protocols (22).  Consensus labelling with more than one radiologist 
performing labelling is even more reliable than a single expert radiologist. Of the five studies, 
only Kalra et al. and Trivedi et al. stated that the protocol label had been confirmed by a fully 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trained radiologist, as opposed to a trainee radiologist or a radiographer (17), which 
strengthens the validity of their test metrics. 
 
In clinical practice, the protocol label to be assigned to a referral is usually selected from a 
predefined set during clinical workflow for ease of implementation and efficiency (Figure 3). 
Labelling from a predefined set is an advantage to ML classification models, because it limits 
the number of possible outputs. In general, for classification tasks, fewer potential label 
classes result in better performance scores on common metrics, since the probability of a 
correct classification is not ‘diluted’ across numerous label classes.  
 
Hardware and Software 
Table 2 
 
ML involves computations which improve the model during training so that its outputs 
become more accurate to the ground truth labels. In assessing the computational hardware 
and software, we ascribe high value to methods that adhere to ML best practices, as well as 
those that are replicable by other researchers.  
 
Hardware 
Classic ML models (e.g Support Vector Machine, Random Forest, Logistic Regression) as 
used in four of the studies(11, 14, 15, 17), typically have hardware requirements that can be 
met by standard personal computers equipped with a CPU, thus posing no barrier to entry for 
the typical researcher. In contrast, the training of deep learning models on large datasets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usually requires access to a quality GPU, which decreases training time by orders of 
magnitude(23).  
 
Three studies used deep learning methods. Lee et al. employed a commercially available 
GPU(16). Kalra et al. atypically trained a simple deep learning model without a GPU(11), 
which is sometimes feasible due to small dataset size. Trivedi et al. used the IBM Watson 
service, which makes use of server-side hardware remote from the user (17). Such cloud-
based services offer, by a large degree, the greatest computing power the typical programmer 
can access.  
 
Software  
In both studies by Brown et al. and Trivedi et al. (14, 15, 17), classic ML models were trained 
in the R programming language. In Kalra and Lee (11, 16) the language employed was 
Python, a competitor to R. The two languages have some overlap in their domains; Python is 
more popular and more versatile, and R is statistics and machine-learning specific(24). Whilst 
in 2017 the growth of the two languages was equal (25), in the last three years Python has 
outpaced R  and is now the dominant language in machine learning(26). Neither language 
will, ipso facto, develop superior ML models, but due to the popularity of Python, the models 
developed with it will likely be more accessible and reproducible for other scientists.  
 
 
In addition to the language, the ‘libraries’ for training can significantly affect reported results. 
By using popular open-source ML libraries in Python, sci-kit learn (27) and Keras (28), Kalra 
et al. (11) increases the ease with which those methods can be implemented by other users. In 
contrast, Trivedi employed IBM Watson, a paid ML service (17), with its operations 
obscured from the user. It is difficult to achieve deterministic results and to replicate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiments with such a service. However, its availability as a cloud service means that 
experiments can be implemented quickly by researchers who pay for the service. Whilst 
cloud-based ML solutions likely represent the future of research, they also create potential for 
privacy and data security breaches and may require additional security measures to protect 
patient data (29, 30).  
 
Model Training 
Representation and pre-processing 
A supervised ML NLP model receives text data created by humans as an input. In computer 
science, this input is known as free text. Free text must be transformed into a computer-
readable format, for example, by representing the presence of absence of a word with a 1 or 
0. The diversity of written language creates a great number of variables, generating ‘noise’ in 
the data which might obscure the real relationship between inputs and outputs (31). Pre-
processing text is a strategy to represent text without losing meaning and reduce noise before 
it is presented as an input to the model.  
 
In all included studies, two common pre-processing methods were employed. ‘Stopwords’, 
which are words so common in the English language that they convey little meaning (e.g. 
‘the’), were removed. Lemmatisation was also employed, in which words are transformed 
into their dictionary form by removing inflectional endings. (e.g ‘scanned’, ‘scans’, and 
‘scanning’ all become ‘scan’). 
 
Neural network (deep learning) models are commonly combined with a type of pre-
processing termed embedding. In embedding, words with similar meanings are presented to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the model as ‘close together’ in vector space, allowing for a memory-efficient and meaning-
rich representation of text. In Lee et al. (16), word embedding was used. Conversely, 
although Kalra et al (11) employed a neural network, embeddings were not used, thus 
demonstrating that although effective, they remain an optional pre-processing step in deep 
learning (32). 
 
To achieve the highest model performance, an optimal method of pre-processing is usually 
selected, which is usually determined by adjusting pre-processing parameters iteratively (33). 
It is not stated whether multiple pre-processing methods were trialled in the five studies 
reviewed, and it is not discoverable since development code has not been made publicly 
available. 
 
Model selection 
 
The model is the algorithm which learns, for protocolling purposes, which protocol a 
radiology referral should be assigned. Models are divided into two classes: classical ML and 
deep learning models.  
 
Classical ML models include k-Nearest Neighbours, which predicts that samples, when 
represented as points in space, are likely to be of the same class (for our purposes the class is 
the protocol) as samples which are close to them. Support Vector Machines represent another 
important classical ML technique, which works similarly but instead creates a boundary 
around points of the same class. Points within that boundary are predicted to belong to that 
class. Classical models were used in four studies (11, 14, 15, 17). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deep learning models, which can learn higher level abstractions of input features, such as 
those used in Kalra, Trivedi, and Lee (11, 16, 17), tend towards better performance as the 
dataset size increases(34). This was the case in Kalra (11) where the deep neural network 
slightly outperformed the random forest (classical ML) approach, with a dataset of large size 
(18,192 samples). 
 
Best practice in model selection involves experimenting with many models and maintaining 
an open mind as to which will achieve the highest performance. Reassuringly, all papers 
except Lee et al. experimented with multiple models (Table 2) and compared their results 
(16). Lee only used a CNN model, and a comparator classical model was not developed on 
their dataset (16). 
 
 
Evaluation and Optimisation 
Table 3:  
 
Every task has specific criteria for success. However, in ML, there are conventional ways of 
proving that a model works by using ‘metrics’, which can be thought of as performance 
scores. Models are scored on how they perform on internal data, which is usually sourced 
from the same institution(s) as the training data, and models can also be scored on how they 
perform on external data, which is often sourced separately, preferably from another 
institution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal Data  
In ML, the dataset of referral-protocol pairs is split into at least two sets, training, and test 
(Figure 3). A validation set is sometimes split from the training set (typically approximately 
10-20% of the training set). The training and validation sets are used to optimise the model. 
Models learn from the training set, are fine-tuned on the validation set, and their accuracy is 
reported on the test set. 
 
The way these splits are chosen is vital to the validity of the study, as a contrived division of 
samples can be used to artificially increase the performance of the model and exaggerate its 
quality (35). Therefore, the splits should be made according to a standard set of rules. 
Commonly, approximately 80% of the entire sample goes into the training and validation 
sets; and 20% are held in the test set (36).  
 
In all five studies, this convention was abided by with minor variations. Kalra (11) reported 
an 80-20 split by protocol, to achieve proportional representation of all classes in the test set.  
Trivedi (17), similarly, opted for an 82-18 training/validation-test split, albeit also 
implementing weighted sampling so that the test set contained an equal amount of both 
classes (not proportionate to their actual incidence, and therefore likely to result in a different 
reported accuracy than if the model were tested on representative data). In Lee (16), all the 
protocols in the test set were selected from a one-month period, January to February 2017, 
but the justification for choosing that time period was not provided. The variability in dataset 
division methods suggests a lack of accepted convention regarding data partition in 
Radiology ML at the time of the studies’ publication, now addressed by CLAIM (12). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Test set integrity 
 
The performance of the model on the test set was reported in all five NLP protocol studies 
(11, 14-17) to grade performance. The integrity of the test set is a fundamental requirement to 
ensure an accurate reflection of model performance. This has its pitfalls, as the accuracy of 
the model on the test set can be artificially elevated by at least two common means. 
 
First, when the test set is visible to the researchers, the model can be trained with many 
random adjustments to its internal variables known as ‘hyperparameters’ over a massive 
number of iterations until a model is achieved which achieves an artificially high 
performance on the test set. Secondly, a model can be trained with constant hyperparameters 
but the dataset can be split in many random ways until, by pure chance, a test set is generated 
on which the model achieves an artificially high performance. 
 
The integrity of the results can only be upheld if the test set is withheld from and invisible to 
the researchers until they have finalized their model. This requires a setup of considerable 
sophistication and can be seen in practice in radiological data science competitions (37-39). 
None of the experiments reviewed in this paper provided clear indication that the integrity of 
the test set was maintained at this standard, although this detail may not have been explicitly 
stated. 
 
Performance metrics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interpreting metrics  
 
When interpreting metrics, consideration should be made towards the priority of recall 
(identifying as many of the true positives as possible) versus high precision (having 
confidence that a predicted positive result is a true positive). There is usually a trade-off 
between these two metrics. In medicine, high recall reduces missed diagnoses. All five 
studies reported recall and precision or a variation thereof.  
 
The two studies which developed binary classification models (two possible labels) used 
similar metrics. In Lee et al. (16), the metrics Area Under the Receiver Operating Curve 
(AUROC) (40), sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive 
value (NPV) are appropriately used since classes are approximately balanced (and binary) at 
2043 tumour and 3215 routine protocols respectively. Trivedi used the same, except for 
AUROC. In Brown (2017) (15), similarly, metrics are used appropriately for the two binary 
classification subtasks where both classes were relatively balanced. 
 
For multiclass classification, metrics for each individual class are required to validate a 
model’s performance. However, in general, for the studies which developed multiclass 
classification models, Brown (2017), Brown (2018), and Kalra (11, 14, 15), model 
performance was not reported for each individual class. Only the mean metrics for all 
protocols were presented. This may conceal poor performance for uncommon protocols. This 
was particularly relevant for Kalra et al. (11), with 108 possible protocols and significant 
class imbalance. The use of mean metrics, and especially ‘accuracy’, is insufficient to report 
the specific weaknesses of trained models, with greater rigour encouraged in the CLAIM 
guidelines (12). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, perhaps to combat the large number of possible protocol outcomes, Kalra (11) used 
an innovative approach to metric selection. It was proposed that where the model’s own 
confidence in correctly selecting a single protocol was low, the model could output the three 
most likely protocols. Returning such a result was termed ‘Clinical Decision Support’ and 
could conceivably be useful to aid an inexperienced individual with protocolling. The model 
achieved a high accuracy according to this proposed metric (91.5%). The validity of applying 
a model in this way should be peer reviewed by domain-specific experts, in this case, 
radiologists.  
 
Explaining how the model works 
 
In ML, the ‘black box’ problem exists, whereby it may not be possible to meaningfully 
explain how a model produces certain outputs(41). The CLAIM guidelines (12) suggest that 
all AI medical imaging studies should include an attempt to interpret how a model works. 
Saliency graphs achieve this by showing what features in an image or words in a string of 
text a model interprets as ‘important’. Even though many of the papers reviewed here did in 
fact use interpretable models, only Brown et al. (15) provided a list of words ordered by their 
importance to the model. In the other models, the features deemed important to the model 
were not reported.  
 
Another way to explain a model is error analysis, which is an oft-cited requirement for the 
progression of medical AI (42).  Kalra et al. evaluated the model’s errors by comparing the 
performance of two expert radiologists with each other and the model for protocolling (11). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These experts were shown to be only 36% concordant on referrals where the model was in 
error, suggesting that the model was failing at protocolling ambiguous clinical referrals that 
also challenged domain experts. Trivedi et al. (17) listed examples of referrals for which the 
model produced false negative results and offered hypotheses for the errors. 
 
External Validation 
Trained models should also be tested on datasets sourced externally to that used in their 
development (22). If a model can perform well on external datasets, it is likely to generalise 
well to other institutions, which is desirable for widespread or commercial use.  
 
None of the ML protocolling studies to date performed external validation, with models all 
trained from data sourced from a single institution and tested on internal data from the same 
institution. Therefore, the generalisability of the developed models remains unproven. To our 
knowledge, there is presently no publicly available dataset of referral-protocol pairs which 
could facilitate external validation.  
 
Model Availability 
Although not a requirement of CLAIM, there are benefits to a trained NLP model being made 
publicly available. Its performance can be verified by independent groups with external 
datasets (22),  or used for further model development in a process known as transfer learning 
(43). None of the studies reviewed made their code or trained model publicly available. 
 
Regulatory Approval 
The regulatory landscape for AI models in medicine is complex and under development. 
Notably, 64 AI algorithms, 30 of which are imaging-based as of 2020, have already been 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cleared for commercial use in the United States (44, 45).  In general, models that play a 
clinical support role rather than fully independent role carry lower risk and, to date, have 
been more readily approved. The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists 
recently released a Standards of Practice for Artificial Intelligence document to guide ethical 
use of AI in the field (46).  
 
The five studies reviewed stated hypotheses were to, in general, assess the accuracy of a 
model for automated protocolling. For regulatory approval to be given, a study would also 
need to be designed to fulfil the requirements of the relevant regulatory body, which typically 
demand more extensive evaluation than that published in the studies reviewed. 
Conclusion  
We have assessed the existing literature for automated protocolling of radiology 
examinations using ML. Overall, the studies demonstrated feasibility, but only partially 
fulfilled expert guidelines necessary for rigorous validation. Whilst internal validity was 
evaluated, external validity and clinical utility were not formally assessed or reported.  
Future directions include sharing the models and accompanying code from these studies, 
enabling others to verify and potentially improve model performance. Sharing the 
(deidentified) datasets would facilitate more rapid development of more accurate algorithms, 
as has been observed in other domains with datasets including Word-Net for language models 
(47) and ImageNet for image-based tasks (48), or for Radiology, with the CheXpert and 
MIMIC-CXR datasets for chest X-ray interpretation (49, 50). Application of more powerful 
recently developed NLP models, such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers (BERT)(51), could further improve performance. Deep learning hardware 
advances, cloud computing services such as Google Colab (52), and user-friendly software 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are readily available for application. With scientific collaboration, current technological 
assets, clear domain-specific guidelines (12) and appropriate regulatory approval, automated 
protocolling can be translated in the near future to the clinical domain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tables 
Table 1: The five included studies in this review and the selected task(s) for each developed model 
First Author 
and Year 
Protocol Task 
Task type 
Possible Classes 
Balanced 
Classes 
Value proposition 
Kalra A et.al 
(2020)(11) 
Select the protocol of 
multisystem CT and 
MRI scans   
Multiclass 
classification 
108 unique standard 
protocols  
No 
Enhance multispeciality CT 
and MRI protocol 
assignment quality and 
efficiency. 
Trivedi H et.al 
(2018)(17) 
To determine 
whether to use 
intravenous contrast 
protocol for 
musculoskeletal MRI 
protocols.  
Binary 
classification 
2 protocols: NC (Non-
contrast), WC (With 
contrast)  
Yes 
Improve efficiency and one 
day serve as a decision 
support tool for contrast 
assignment. 
Lee YH 
(2018)(16) 
Select the 
musculoskeletal MRI 
scan protocol from 
two options 
Binary 
classification 
2 protocols: 
Tumour/Infection and 
Routine  
Yes 
Provide timely and highly 
accurate protocol 
determinations that only 
require rapid confirmation. 
Brown AD 
et.al 
(2018)(14) 
Select the protocol 
for MRI brain studies.  
Multiclass 
classification 
41 unique standard 
protocols. 
No 
To guide sequence 
acquisition decisions and 
potentially improve 
efficiency, quality, and cost. 
Brown AD et. 
al (2017)(15) 
Select the protocol 
 of MRI brain 
examinations from 
MRI requisitions 
1. Multiclass 
classification  
13 unique standard 
protocols.  
No 
To streamline the patient 
experience and improve the 
safety and efficiency of 
imaging procedures.  
Select whether 
contrast is given in 
MRI brain 
examinations 
2. Binary 
classification  
2 protocols: with 
contrast or without.  
Yes 
Select the priority of 
MRI brain 
examinations 
3. Binary 
classification 
2 protocols: Study 
performed within 24 
hours or not. 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Hardware and software (including specific ML model algorithms) used in the included studies. 
† SVM: Support Vector Machine, SLDA: Scaled Linear Discriminant Analysis, CART: Classification and Regression Tree, 
GLMNET: Lasso and elastic-net regularized generalized linear model 
‡ DNN: Deep neural network, CNN: Convolutional neural network. 
§ GPU: Graphics Processing Unit. 
 
 
First 
Author 
and 
Year 
Cloud or 
Local 
Machine 
Language 
Libraries 
Preprocessing 
Classic Models† 
Deep 
Learning‡ 
GPU§ 
Kalra A 
et.al 
(2020)(11) 
Local 
Python 
Scikit-
Learn, 
Keras 
Lemmatization, 
Stopwords removed, 
TF-IDF 
k-Nearest 
Neighbours, 
Random Forest 
DNN 
No 
Trivedi H 
et.al 
(2018)(17) 
Local 
and 
Cloud 
R 
R NLP 
libraries, 
RTextTools 
Lemmatization, 
Stopwords removed, 
SVM, SLDA, 
boosting, Bagging, 
CART, Random 
Forest, GLMNET, 
maximum entropy 
Watson 
Yes 
Lee YH 
(2018)(16) 
Local 
Python 
Tensorflow, 
Keras 
Lemmatization, 
Stopwords removed, 
embedding 
None 
CNN 
Yes 
Brown AD 
et.al 
(2018)(14) 
Unknown 
R 
R libraries 
Lemmatization, 
Custom stopwords 
removed 
SVM, Gradient 
Boosting Machine, 
Random Forest 
No 
Unknown 
Brown AD 
et. al 
(2017)(15) 
Unknown 
R 
R libraries 
Lemmatization, 
Stopwords removed, 
acronyms expanded 
Random Forest, 
SVM, k-neareset 
neighbour 
No 
Unknown 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Comparison of datasets obtained, and evaluation strategies incorporated 
† PPV: Positive Predictive Value, NPV: Negative Predictive Value, AUC: Area Under the Receiver Operating Curve.  
First 
Author 
and Year 
Dataset 
size 
Train : 
test 
dataset 
split 
Split 
process  
Metrics 
Used† 
Key result 
emphasized in 
discussion 
Model 
behaviour 
explained 
or 
interpreted 
Code 
and 
model 
weights 
available 
online 
Tested 
on 
external 
data 
Kalra A 
et.al 
(2020) 
18192 
0.8 : 0.2 
Random at 
protocol 
level 
Weighted 
Precision 
and Recall 
95% accuracy 
in automation 
mode. 
92% accuracy 
in clinical 
decision 
support mode 
Yes, errors 
interpreted 
No 
No 
Trivedi H 
et.al 
(2018) 
1520 
0.82 : 
0.18 
Random 
with 
weighted 
sampling to 
achieve 50-
50 balance. 
Sensitivity, 
Specificty, 
PPV, NPV, 
Accuracy 
90% accuracy 
Yes, errors 
interpreted 
No 
No 
Lee YH 
(2018) 
6276 
0.84: 0.14 
Subsequent 
in time 
AUC, 
Sensitivity, 
Specificity, 
PPV, NPV, 
Accuracy 
94% accuracy 
No 
No 
No 
Brown 
AD et.al 
(2018) 
7487 
0.7 : 0.3 
Random 
Accuracy, 
Precision, 
Recall, 
Hamming 
Loss 
95% accuracy 
No 
No 
No 
Brown 
AD et. al 
(2017) 
13,982 
0.8 : 0.2 
Random 
Accuracy, 
Sensitivity, 
Specificity, 
PPV, NPV, 
AUC 
83% accuracy 
Word 
importance 
scored 
No 
No 
10,100 
83% accuracy 
10,100 
88% accuracy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures 
Figure 1: The steps in assigning a protocol to a referral in order to achieve a scan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Steps in developing and testing a supervised ML model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: An example of a simple ML text classification dataset with 5 samples (3 in the training set, 2 in the test set). See 
Internal Data section for discussion of training and test sets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  i 
Search Strategy 
1. Radiology.mp. or exp Radiology/ 
2. exp Tomography, X-Ray Computed/ or Computed Tomography.mp. 
3. exp Magnetic Resonance Imaging/ or MRI.mp. 
4. 1 or 2 or 3 
5. exp Automation/ or Automation.mp. 
6. Natural Language Processing.mp. or exp Natural Language Processing/ 
7. Machine Learning.mp. or exp Natural Language Processing/ 
8. Protocol.mp. or Protocoling.mp. or Protocols.mp. 
9. 5 or 6 or 7  
10. 4 and 8 and 9  
11. Limit 4 to (yr=“2017 -Current” and english) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix ii 
 
 
 
References
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 
Lakhani P, Prater AB, Hutson RK, Andriole KP, Dreyer KJ, Morey J, et al. Machine Learning in 
Radiology: Applications Beyond Image Interpretation. J Am Coll Radiol. 2018;15(2):350-9. 
2. 
Soffer S, Ben-Cohen A, Shimon O, Amitai MM, Greenspan H, Klang E. Convolutional Neural 
Networks for Radiologic Images: A Radiologist's Guide. Radiology. 2019;290(3):590-606. 
3. 
Liu X, Faes L, Kale AU, Wagner SK, Fu DJ, Bruynseels A, et al. A comparison of deep learning 
performance against health-care professionals in detecting diseases from medical imaging: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Digit Health. 2019;1(6):e271-e97. 
4. 
Pickhardt PJ, Graffy PM, Zea R, Lee SJ, Liu J, Sandfort V, et al. Automated CT biomarkers for 
opportunistic prediction of future cardiovascular events and mortality in an asymptomatic screening 
population: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Digit Health. 2020;2(4):e192-e200. 
5. 
Pons E, Braun LM, Hunink MG, Kors JA. Natural Language Processing in Radiology: A 
Systematic Review. Radiology. 2016;279(2):329-43. 
6. 
Carrodeguas E, Lacson R, Swanson W, Khorasani R. Use of Machine Learning to Identify 
Follow-Up Recommendations in Radiology Reports. J Am Coll Radiol. 2019;16(3):336-43. 
7. 
Chen MC, Ball RL, Yang L, Moradzadeh N, Chapman BE, Larson DB, et al. Deep Learning to 
Classify Radiology Free-Text Reports. Radiology. 2018;286(3):845-52. 
8. 
Short RG, Bralich J, Bogaty D, Befera NT. Comprehensive Word-Level Classification of 
Screening Mammography Reports Using a Neural Network Sequence Labeling Approach. J Digit 
Imaging. 2019;32(5):685-92. 
9. 
Blackmore CC, Mecklenburg RS, Kaplan GS. Effectiveness of clinical decision support in 
controlling inappropriate imaging. J Am Coll Radiol. 2011;8(1):19-25. 
10. 
Boland GW, Duszak R, Jr., Kalra M. Protocol design and optimization. J Am Coll Radiol. 
2014;11(5):440-1. 
11. 
Kalra A, Chakraborty A, Fine B, Reicher J. Machine Learning for Automation of Radiology 
Protocols for Quality and Efficiency Improvement. J Am Coll Radiol. 2020;17(9):1149-58. 
12. 
Mongan J, Moy L, Charles E. Kahn J. Checklist for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging 
(CLAIM): A Guide for Authors and Reviewers. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence. 2020;2(2):e200029. 
13. 
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 
2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372:n71. 
14. 
Brown AD, Marotta TR. Using machine learning for sequence-level automated MRI protocol 
selection in neuroradiology. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2018;25(5):568-71. 
15. 
Brown AD, Marotta TR. A Natural Language Processing-based Model to Automate MRI Brain 
Protocol Selection and Prioritization. Acad Radiol. 2017;24(2):160-6. 
16. 
Lee YH. Efficiency Improvement in a Busy Radiology Practice: Determination of 
Musculoskeletal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Protocol Using Deep-Learning Convolutional Neural 
Networks. J Digit Imaging. 2018;31(5):604-10. 
17. 
Trivedi H, Mesterhazy J, Laguna B, Vu T, Sohn JH. Automatic Determination of the Need for 
Intravenous Contrast in Musculoskeletal MRI Examinations Using IBM Watson's Natural Language 
Processing Algorithm. J Digit Imaging. 2018;31(2):245-51. 
18. 
Quinion M. Garbage in, garbage out [Internet]. World wide worlds; 2005 [cited 2020 
December 13]. Available from: http://www.worldwidewords.org/qa/qa-gar1.htm. 
19. 
Jans LB, Bosmans JM, Verstraete KL, Achten R. Optimizing communication between the 
radiologist and the general practitioner. JBR-BTR. 2013;96(6):388-90. 
20. 
Bouette A, Karoussou-Schreiner A, Ducou Le Pointe H, Grieten M, de Kerviler E, Rausin L, et 
al. National audit on the appropriateness of CT and MRI examinations in Luxembourg. Insights 
Imaging. 2019;10(1):54. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
America RSoN. RSNA Intracranial Hemorrhage Detection [Internet]. Kaggle2020 [cited 2021 
January 3]. Available from: https://www.kaggle.com/c/rsna-intracranial-hemorrhage-
detection/overview. 
22. 
Bluemke DA, Moy L, Bredella MA, Ertl-Wagner BB, Fowler KJ, Goh VJ, et al. Assessing 
Radiology Research on Artificial Intelligence: A Brief Guide for Authors, Reviewers, and Readers-
From the Radiology Editorial Board. Radiology. 2020;294(3):487-9. 
23. 
Raina R, Madhavan A, Ng AY. Large-scale deep unsupervised learning using graphics 
processors.  Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning; 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery; 2009. p. 873–80. 
24. 
Team RC. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2017 [20/06/21]. Available from: https://www.R-project.org/. 
25. 
Robinson D. The Impressive Growth of R: Stackoverflow; 2017 October 17 [cited 2021 
January 14]. Available from: https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/10/10/impressive-growth-r/. 
26. 
Stackoverflow. Stack Overflow Trends [Internet]. Stack Overflow; 2021 [cited 2021 January 
5]. Available from: 
https://insights.stackoverflow.com/trends?tags=python%2Cjavascript%2Cjava%2Cc%23%2Cphp%2C
c%2B%2B&utm_source=so-owned&utm_medium=blog&utm_campaign=gen-
blog&utm_content=blog-link&utm_term=incredible-growth-python. 
27. 
Pedregosa FaV, Gal and Gramfort, Alexandre and Michel, Vincent and Thirion, Bertrand and 
Grisel, Olivier and Blondel, Mathieu and Prettenhofer, Peter and Weiss, Ron and Dubourg, Vincent 
and others. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of machine learning research. 
2011;12(Oct):2825--30. 
28. 
Chollet Fao. Keras: GitHub; 2015 [Available from: https://github.com/fchollet/keras. 
29. 
Authors TG. 6 Cloud Security Threats Healthcare Companies May Face – With Solutions 
[Internet]. Tripwire; 2020 July 14 [cited 2020 November 15]. Available from: 
https://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/featured/6-cloud-security-threats-healthcare-
companies-face-solutions/. 
30. 
Seh AH, Zarour M, Alenezi M, Sarkar AK, Agrawal A, Kumar R, et al. Healthcare Data 
Breaches: Insights and Implications. Healthcare (Basel). 2020;8(2). 
31. 
Nadkarni PM, Ohno-Machado L, Chapman WW. Natural language processing: an 
introduction. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2011;18(5):544-51. 
32. 
Elvis Saravia SP. Modern Deep Learning Techniques Applied to Natural Langauge Processing 
[Internet]. NLP Overview2021 [cited 2020 December 17]. Available from: https://nlpoverview.com/. 
33. 
Agarwal R. NLP Learning Series: Part 1 - Text Preprocessing Methods for Deep Learning: 
MLWhiz; 2019 January 17 [cited 2020 December 14]. Available from: 
https://mlwhiz.com/blog/2019/01/17/deeplearning_nlp_preprocess/?utm_campaign=shareaholic&
utm_medium=reddit&utm_source=news. 
34. 
Cho J, Lee K, Shin E, Choy G, Do S. How much data is needed to train a medical image deep 
learning system to achieve necessary high accuracy? arXiv preprint arXiv:151106348. 2015. 
35. 
Merrel D. Avoiding Common Pitfalls in Machine Learning Model Validation [Internet]. David 
Merrell's Blogsite2019 November 4 [cited 2020 December 15]. Available from: 
https://dpmerrell.github.io/technical/2019/11/04/model-evaluation.html. 
36. 
Chollet F. Deep learning with Python: Manning New York; 2018. 
37. 
Hamilton BA. Data Science Bowl 2017: Can you improve lung cancer detection? [Internet]. 
Kaggle; 2017 [cited 2020 December 10]. Available from: https://www.kaggle.com/c/data-science-
bowl-2017. 
38. 
America RSoN. RSNA Pnuemonia Detection Challenge: Can you build an algorithm that 
automatically detects potential pneumonia cases? [Internet]. Kaggle; 2019 [cited 2020 December 
15]. Available from: https://www.kaggle.com/c/rsna-pneumonia-detection-challenge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39. 
America RSoN. RSNA STR Pulmonary Embolism Detection: Classify Pulmonary Embolism 
cases in chest CT scans [Internet]. Kaggle; 2020 [cited 2020 December 15]. Available from: 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/rsna-str-pulmonary-embolism-detection. 
40. 
Brownlee J. How to Use ROC Curves and Precision-Recall Curves for Classification in Python 
[Internet ]. Machine Learning Mastery 2018 August 31 [updated 2021 January 13; cited 2020 
November 11]. Available from: https://machinelearningmastery.com/roc-curves-and-precision-
recall-curves-for-classification-in-python/. 
41. 
Rudin C. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and 
use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence. 2019;1(5):206-15. 
42. 
Langlotz CP, Allen B, Erickson BJ, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Bigelow K, Cook TS, et al. A Roadmap for 
Foundational Research on Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging: From the 2018 
NIH/RSNA/ACR/The Academy Workshop. Radiology. 2019;291(3):781-91. 
43. 
Brownlee J. A Gentle Introduction to Transfer Learning for Deep Learning [Internet]. 
Machine Learning Mastery2017 [updated 2019 September 16; cited 2021 January 1]. Available from: 
https://machinelearningmastery.com/transfer-learning-for-deep-
learning/#:~:text=Transfer%20learning%20is%20a%20machine,model%20on%20a%20second%20tas
k.&text=Common%20examples%20of%20transfer%20learning,your%20own%20predictive%20mode
ling%20problems. 
44. 
Wichmann JL, Willemink MJ, De Cecco CN. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in 
Radiology: Current State and Considerations for Routine Clinical Implementation. Invest Radiol. 
2020;55(9):619-27. 
45. 
Benjamens S, Dhunnoo P, Mesko B. The state of artificial intelligence-based FDA-approved 
medical devices and algorithms: an online database. NPJ Digit Med. 2020;3:118. 
46. 
Oncology FoCRaR. Ethical Principles of AI in medicine [Internet]. The Royal Australian and 
New Zealand College of Radiologists; August 2019 [cited 2021 January 14]. Available from: 
https://www.ranzcr.com/college/document-library/ethical-principles-for-ai-in-medicine. 
47. 
Fellbaum C. WordNet.  Theory and applications of ontology: computer applications: 
Springer; 2010. p. 231-43. 
48. 
Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li L-J, Li K, Fei-Fei L, editors. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical 
image database. 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2009: Ieee. 
49. 
Irvin J, Rajpurkar P, Ko M, Yu Y, Ciurea-Ilcus S, Chute C, et al., editors. Chexpert: A large chest 
radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison. Proceedings of the AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence; 2019. 
50. 
Johnson AE, Pollard TJ, Greenbaum NR, Lungren MP, Deng C-y, Peng Y, et al. MIMIC-CXR-
JPG, a large publicly available database of labeled chest radiographs. arXiv preprint arXiv:190107042. 
2019. 
51. 
Devlin J, Chang M-W, Lee K, Toutanova K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:181004805. 2018. 
52. 
Bisong E. Google colaboratory.  Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on 
Google Cloud Platform: Springer; 2019. p. 59-64. 
 
 
