Title: Using Natural Language Processing to find Indication for Burnout with Text Classification: From Online Data to Real-World Data
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14357v1
--------------------------------------------------

Using Natural Language Processing to find Indication for Burnout 
with Text Classification: From Online Data to Real-World Data 
Mascha Kurpicz-Briki1, Ghofrane Merhbene1, Alexandre Puttick1, Souhir Ben 
Souissi1, Jannic Bieri2, Thomas Jörg Müller3,4, Christoph Golz2 
 
1 Applied Machine Intelligence, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Biel, Switzerland 
2 School of Health Professions, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Bern, Switzerland 
3 Private Clinic Meiringen, Bern, Switzerland 
4 Translational Research Center, University Hospital of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland 
Abstract 
Background: Burnout, classified as a syndrome in the ICD-11, arises from chronic 
workplace stress that has not been effectively managed. It is characterized by 
exhaustion, cynicism, and reduced professional efficacy, and estimates of its 
prevalence vary significantly due to inconsistent measurement methods. Recent 
advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and machine learning offer 
promising tools for detecting burnout through textual data analysis, with studies 
demonstrating high predictive accuracy. 
Objective: This paper contributes to burnout detection in German texts by: (a) 
collecting an anonymous real-world dataset including free-text answers and 
Oldenburg Burnout Inventory (OLBI) responses; (b) demonstrating the limitations of 
a GermanBERT-based classifier trained on online data; (c) presenting two versions of 
a curated BurnoutExpressions dataset, which yielded models that perform well in 
real-world applications; and (d) providing qualitative insights from an 
interdisciplinary focus group on the interpretability of AI models used for burnout 
detection. 
Methods: We used data triangulation across three sources: (a) pre-existing online 
datasets, (b) manually curated synthetic datasets, and (c) a real-world dataset 
featuring free-text responses collected alongside results from OLBI, a research-
validated burnout inventory. A pre-trained GermanBERT model was used, with a 
vocabulary that was augmented to include terms from the BurnoutExpressions 
dataset prior to fine-tuning for binary classification (burnout indication vs. no 
indication). Four classifiers were developed, each trained on different datasets with 
an 80/20 training and validation split. The models were subsequently evaluated 
using real-world data, consisting of free-text responses labeled with OLBI scores. 
Additionally, an explainability analysis was conducted, leveraging word attribution 
visualizations to interpret model decisions, including qualitative results from 
discussions with domain experts. 
 
 
Results:  
The classifier trained solely on online data showed poor performance in real-world 
testing despite high training scores. Classifiers fine-tuned on the combined dataset of 
online and synthetic data achieved the best F1-scores, indicating improved 
generalization. Models trained on the manually curated dataset also performed well, 
with marginal performance differences between the use of only curated expressions 
as training data and augmenting training data with AI-generated extensions. 
Conclusions:  
Our findings emphasize the need for greater collaboration between AI researchers 
and clinical experts to refine burnout detection models. Additionally, more real-world 
data is essential to validate and enhance the effectiveness of current AI methods 
developed in NLP research, which are often based on data automatically scraped from 
online sources and not evaluated in a real-world context. This is essential for ensuring 
AI tools are well suited for practical applications. 
 
Keywords: burnout;mental health;natural language processing;machine 
learning;artificial intelligence;large language models;LLMs;text classification;online 
data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Stress is a complex concept with physiological and psychological components. It can 
be triggered by numerous stressors building up and creating an imbalance between 
environmental demands and one's ability to cope [1]. Stress refers to the interaction 
between a person and their environment, characterized by experiencing the 
environment as burdensome or overwhelming and perceiving a threat to their well-
being [2]. This state of distress must be taken seriously, as it can significantly impair 
one's daily life [3]. Work-related stress is caused by job-related stressors and can lead 
to physical, behavioral, or psychological consequences, affecting both the employee's 
health and well-being, as well as that of the organization for which they work [4]. 
While limited stress can promote psychological growth to some extent, high levels of 
and/or prolonged work-related stress can adversely affect both mental and physical 
health [4,5]. When it persists over an extended period, work-related stress can lead 
to exhaustion, burnout, cynicism, and apathy, making it difficult for the affected 
individual to cope with challenges [6]; it is one of the strongest factors influencing job 
satisfaction and burnout symptoms [7]. 
The ICD-11 defines burnout as a syndrome resulting from chronic workplace stress 
that has not been successfully managed. It is characterized by three dimensions: 
feelings of energy depletion or exhaustion, increased mental distance from or 
negative feelings associated to one's job, and reduced professional efficacy.  
The reported incidence of burnout ranges largely due to the heterogeneity of 
measurement methods and because it is not classified as a medical condition and 
therefore not systematically monitored [8,9]. Even within populations with the same 
profession, such as physicians, we find prevalences ranging from 0% to 80.5% [10]. 
A meta-analysis from Switzerland reported a 4% prevalence of severe burnout and 
an average burnout prevalence of 18% [8]. Regarding professions that were under 
particular pressure due to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as healthcare professionals, 
the aggregated proportion of reported burnout was 39% [11]. In the USA in 2016, 
expenditures for the consequences of work-related stress ranged from $125 to $190 
billion dollars a year [12].  
 
In recent decades, there has been continuous innovative development in the field of 
information technology, with these milestones contributing to the advancement of e-
healthcare in terms of quality, continuity, and efficiency [13]. Natural Language 
Processing (NLP), a field that has evolved to become mostly a subset of the broader 
field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), has made rapid progress in the past two decades. 
NLP tools are now used daily by every smartphone user and have significantly 
contributed to the development of speech translation, chatbots and personal digital 
assistants, and voice-controlled home automation systems [14]. NLP can also be used 
for text mining tasks, drawing useful insights from unstructured text data [15]. In 
particular, text mining also has different applications and use cases in the health 
domain, see e.g., [16]. Various techniques and algorithms are used in text mining, 
including supervised and unsupervised methods for document categorization and 
cluster analysis [17]. 
 
Recent studies have shown promising results in the use of NLP for the detection of 
burnout syndrome. One study achieved an accuracy of close to 80% in detecting 
burnout from text snippets using support vector machine (SVM) classifiers [18], 
providing a foundation for future generations of clinical methods based on NLP 
[18]. A later study analyzed the performance of NLP methods using a larger dataset 
and improved upon the first study by achieving a balanced accuracy of 0.93 and a test 
recall of 0.93 [19]. Another study also demonstrated the potential of machine learning 
methods in predicting early indicators of job burnout in employees, achieving a 70% 
prediction accuracy [20]. A systematic review of literature from 2015 to 2020 
demonstrates that information technologies, particularly software and mobile apps, 
lead to improved detection of burnout syndrome [21]. The authors suggest 
considering the use machine learning for predicting susceptibility to burnout, aiding 
in preventive measures for companies. The review recommends developing mobile 
apps incorporating the Maslach Burnout Inventory test for accurate symptom 
assessment and suggests further research on technology's role in burnout-related 
conditions [21]. These studies collectively highlight the potential of technology and 
in particular NLP and machine learning in the early detection of burnout syndrome. 
 
Natural Language Processing based on textual data has also been applied to detect 
indicators for other mental health problems from textual data. A recent survey [22] 
gives an overview of the work in the field, and shows that there are several limitations 
in the state-of-the-art:  
a) A vast majority of the data used to train the classifiers are based on data from social 
media. Even though good performance metrics are achieved, this can lead to major 
limitations when applying these systems to real-world patient data, including (1) 
statements about diseases being subjective, (2) little or no demographic information 
and hence difficulty in ensuring diversity in the datasets, or (3) restrictions on the 
sharing of collected social media data for research [22].  
b) A large part of research (45% of the examined studies in [22]) focused on 
depression, demonstrating an opening for researchers to explore other issues, such 
as burnout or stress.  
c) The vast majority (81%) of the papers surveyed in [22] dealt with English texts, 
with 10% and 1.5% including Chinese and Arabic respectively. As language is very 
relevant in the context of mental health [22], addressing additional languages in use 
of NLP for mental health is essential. In general, the strong bias towards relatively few 
languages in NLP research is criticized in the literature [23].   
 
Explainability is crucial in NLP applications for mental health, in order to ensure the 
robustness, trustworthiness and effectiveness of the models. Explainability refers to 
the ability to describe the internal processes of a model in a way that is 
understandable to humans. Given the sensitive nature of mental health data, it is 
essential for stakeholders, including healthcare professionals and patients, to 
understand how and why certain decisions or predictions are made by the models. 
Such transparency can help in validating the model's reliability, identifying potential 
biases, and making informed adjustments to improve accuracy and fairness.  
In the field of mental health, Wang [24] investigated interpretable and explainable AI 
models for Alzheimer's, Dementia, and Depression. The study introduced an 
interpretable deep learning framework designed to automatically detect Alzheimer's 
and Dementia using patient interview transcripts. This framework used attention 
mechanisms to emphasize the sections of the transcripts that had the most significant 
impact on the model's decision-making process. By concentrating on specific 
linguistic features and their relevance to the diagnosis, the model offered insights into 
the correlation between certain speech patterns, Alzheimer's and Dementia. 
Han et al. [25] introduced a Hierarchical Attention Network for explainable 
depression detection on Twitter. Their model uses metaphor concept mappings and 
incorporates a novel attention-based encoder to enhance interpretability. By 
emphasizing both context-level and word-level features, this approach offers 
valuable insights into how specific tweets and metaphors are employed by 
individuals with depression, thus providing additional justification for the model's 
predictions. 
Large language models (LLMs) have shown great promise in various applications due 
to their ability to process and generate human language. Wang et al. [26] 
demonstrated the efficacy of LLMs in not only predicting but also explaining 
responses to the Beck’s Depression Inventory (BDI) questionnaire using social media 
data. The study highlighted the ability of LLMs to provide transparent and 
interpretable results, which are critical for clinical applications. 
 
The main objective of this study is to compare the performance of BERT text 
classifiers in detecting indicators for burnout fine-tuned on different data sources, 
including a) online data, commonly used in the state-of-the-art, b) a manually curated 
synthetic dataset, and c) an anonymously collected real-world dataset. In addition, 
we conducted a qualitative analysis of explainable AI methods applied to the trained 
models in an interdisciplinary focus group. 
Methods 
We applied different methods for data triangulation of (1) pre-existing online 
datasets, (2) manually curated synthetic datasets, and (3) a real-world dataset 
featuring free-text responses alongside a validated burnout scale. The labels 
predicted by the machine learning models on the real-world data and features 
highlighted by explainable AI methods were discussed in consultation with an 
interdisciplinary focus group consisting of domain experts. 
 
Dataset 1: Online Data (Baseline) 
As a baseline, we use an existing dataset [27] consisting of a mixture of interviews 
with burnout patients from Rahner [28] and web scraped data. Given that 
descriptions of burnout experiences in German are scarce (as opposed to English, see 
e.g., Merhbene [19] using Reddit data), manual scraping and data curation was used. 
Various data sources were considered in data collection: online articles, blogs, 
interviews containing testimonials from people affected by burnout, and transcripts 
from Youtube videos in which burnout experiences were recounted. These online 
sources were used both for the burnout data, as well as the control group 
(testimonials of people describing their daily life with regard to their job, without the 
matter of burnout being relevant). Further statements from the book Buchenau [29], 
which contains 13 testimonials of people who have suffered from burnout syndrome, 
were added. As some texts of this book seemed like to have undergone proof-reading 
and redaction, examples not too heavily stylized were selected.  
 
The resulting dataset contained 310 records for the control class and 387 for the 
burnout class, which were manually curated. We use this dataset as a baseline in this 
paper, as an example indicative of the vast body of research using online data in the 
field of NLP for mental health.  
 
Dataset 2: BurnoutExpressions 
Given the limitations of using web-scraped data for real world applications, we 
decided to explore the potential of state-of-the-art text generation models, such as the 
latest GPT models, to create the BurnoutExpressions dataset. The following 
procedure was used to create this dataset: Initial seed words or expressions (N=103) 
describing the symptoms of burnout were extracted from the symptoms overview 
table presented by Albrecht [30], which was built upon the work of Burisch [31]. In 
some cases, the burnout symptoms described in the table are contradictory (e.g., 
hyperactivity and lack of energy). Emphasis was placed on expressions that seem 
likely to be expressed in text form by patients answering open questions relating to 
their personal experience. Some symptoms, such as rigid black-and-white thinking 
(de: “rigides Schwarzweissdenken”), are more difficult to capture in only a few words 
or phrases.  
 
The table of symptoms covers aspects ranging between motivational issues like 
reduced engagement (de: reduziertes Engagement), emotional topics such as loss of 
positive feelings (de: Verlust positiver Gefühle), and physical symptoms like back pain 
(de: Rückenschmerzen).  
 
As detailed in the following section, a native German speaker augmented the 
expressions extracted from the symptom table with synonyms and additional context. 
The data for the control group was created by selecting an opposing word or phrase 
for each expression in the burnout list (e.g., simply inserting the word not  to negate 
expressions indicating symptoms of burnout). Together, these expressions make up 
the BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset (N=508 for burnout, and N=508 for the control 
group).  
 
This manually curated dataset was then augmented using generative AI (OpenAI API 
with GPT-3.5 Turbo). Sentences were generated based on the expressions from the 
initial dataset, leading to the BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset (N=2026 for burnout, 
and N=1895 for the control group), which is descrbed in further detail below. Figure 
1 provides an overview of the dataset compilation process.  
 
The work presented here relies on binary classification for burnout vs. no burnout, in 
line with the majority of work in the field of NLP for the detection of mental health 
issues (e.g., Tadesse et al., 2019 [32] for depression; Shen and Rudzicz, 2017 [33], for 
anxiety) as well as commonly used inventories, which typically make use of a 
threshold score for classification. In a later section, we discuss the potential of more 
granular classification based, for example, on the dimensions underlying clinically 
validated inventories, which arose as a salient topic within a focus group of medical 
experts and the limitations of this study. 
 
 
Figure 1 The overall process to create the BurnoutExpressions dataset. 
Dataset 2a: BurnoutExpressions v1 (Manually Curated Dataset) 
For each word or expression from the initial list (based on the table from Albrecht 
[30]/Burisch [31]), synonyms or words with a similar meaning (expanding the 
context) were manually collected by a native speaker. A focus was placed on 
formulating self-narratives based on selected terms (e.g., ich bin heute nicht da (engl: 
I am not here today) in relation to the word Fehlzeiten (engl: absences)), or rephrasing 
expressions in a more colloquial form using infinitives (e.g., keine Hoffnung mehr 
haben (engl: not to have hope anymore) as a variant of Desillusionierung (engl: 
Disillusionment)). Some phrases expressing actions based on seed words were used; 
for example, from Neigung zum Weinen (engl: Tendency to cry), the expressions nahe 
am Wasser gebaut sein1 or Tränen fliessen (engl: tears flowing) were derived. For some 
expressions, several additional variants were identified, in other cases, no new 
phrases were added. All terms were aggregated and checked for duplicates. This 
 
1 Word by word translation to English: being built near the water. Meaning of the expression in 
English: Being a person that cries easily. 
resulted in an extended list of 508 unique expressions concerning the symptoms of 
burnout.  
 
To obtain a list of expressions for data representing the lack of burnout indicators, for 
each element of the 508 burnout expressions, an opposing phrase was manually 
identified by a native German speaker. The identification of opposites proved 
challenging in some cases; some words did not have a clear opposite, or, as mentioned 
above, some symptoms from the literature were already oppositional. Not only exact 
opposites were considered; more general terms describing the absence of a particular 
symptoms were also used. For example, it was difficult to find an opposite for Magen-
Darm-Geschwüre (engl: Gastrointestinal ulcers), so a more general expression like sich 
gesund fühlen (engl: feeling healthy) was selected. 
 
The combined BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset consists of 508 expressions with the 
label 0 for the control group and 508 with the label 1 for the burnout group. Table 1 
gives examples from both categories. 
 
Table 1 Examples from BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset. 
Burnout Expression 
Control Group Expression 
emotionale 
Erschöpfung 
(engl: 
emotional exhaustion) 
emotionale 
Kraft 
haben 
(engl: 
have 
emotional power) 
Abstumpfung (engl: Blunting) 
Euphorie (engl: Euphoria) 
Stimmungsschwankungen (engl: Mood 
fluctuations) 
ausgeglichen sein (engl: be balanced) 
Nörgeleien (engl. Nagging) 
positives Feedback geben (engl: give positive 
feedback) 
… 
… 
 
Dataset 2b: BurnoutExpressions v2 (Manually Curated + GPT Text Generation) 
In a second step, the BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset was extended using generative 
AI. Additional sentences were generated using OpenAI’s API with the GPT3.5 model 
(gpt-3.5-turbo-1106). The initial dataset was processed in batches of 20 entries (all 
burnout and all control group expressions were iterated). The prompt was 
constructed as follows: 
 
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": prompt} 
with 
prompt = "Generate 10 sentences each in German for the following expressions. The 
sentences should represent the wording of a person being in this kind of mental 
state:» + the 20 words from a specific batch separated by comma. 
 
In some cases, sentences were partially cut (in cases where longer sentences were 
created), or fewer sentences were generated than requested by the prompt. Any 
partial sentences were removed manually. 
 
After this step, the BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset was compiled, containing N=2026 
sentences with burnout symptoms, and N=1895 sentences without burnout 
symptoms. Table 2 shows an example of the generated data. 
 
Table 2 Examples from the BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset. 
Text 
Label 
Ich spüre eine große emotionale Kraft in mir, die mich 
antreibt.  
(engl: I feel a great emotional strength within me that drives 
me forward.) 
0 
Trotz der schwierigen Situation bewahre ich meine 
emotionale Kraft.  
(engl: Despite the difficult situation, I retain my emotional 
strength.) 
0 
Ich fühle mich voller emotionaler Energie und Tatendrang. 
(engl: I feel full of emotional energy and drive.) 
0 
Der Stress hat mich längerfristig in einen Zustand der 
Erschöpfung versetzt.  
(engl: The stress has put me in a long-term state of 
exhaustion.) 
1 
Meine körperliche Erschöpfung ist so groß, ich fühle mich 
wie eine leere Hülle. 
(engl: My physical exhaustion is so bad, I feel like an empty 
shell.) 
1 
Die geistige Erschöpfung macht es mir schwer, klar zu 
denken. 
(engl: The mental exhaustion makes it difficult for me to think 
clearly.) 
1 
… 
… 
Dataset 3: Real-World Dataset for the Test Phase 
A real-world dataset was compiled for validation by conducting an anonymous online 
survey and to discuss the labels assigned by the machine learning models with clinical 
and scientific experts in the focus groups described later.  
Recruitment online survey 
A convenience sampling among adults from the German-speaking part of Switzerland 
was conducted. Emails with information about the study’s aims, inclusion criteria, 
data protection, and the survey link were dispersed amongst the researchers’ 
networks, along with a request to forward the invitation to other colleagues. The 
researchers also posted the study information on social media platforms (LinkedIn 
and X) and on mental health-specific community platforms such as www.psychic.de. 
Participation was voluntary. 
Data collection 
Cross-sectional data was collected using the online survey instrument Limesurvey 
between August and November 2023. The instrument asked participants to provide 
their age before proceeding to answer four free-response questions developed by the 
researchers, as well as the 16-item German Version of the Oldenburg Burnout 
Inventory (OLBI) [34]. Thus, each respondent provided four text samples labelled 
with a clinically validated burnout score. 
 
Free-text fields 
The four free-text fields were developed to allow participants to describe how they 
feel on a usual day. The free-text questions were pretested using cognitive debriefing 
with five individuals from the researchers’ networks. They found the questions to be 
understandable and answerable as intended. The free-text questions are detailed in 
Appendix 1. In a few cases, test subjects provided no or single word responses; these 
cases were removed from the dataset. 
 
 
Oldenburg Burnout Inventory 
The Oldenburg Burnout Inventory measures burnout along two dimensions, namely 
"disengagement from work" (disengagement) and "exhaustion" (exhaustion). Clinical 
studies have shown the inventory to be valid and reliable [35]. The items were scored 
on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from “Strongly agree” (1) to “Strongly disagree” (4). 
The aggregate score for the inventory is the mean of the respondent’s answers. 
 
Different cut-off values are suggested in the literature to translate the scores along 
the different dimensions of the OLBI into a burnout or burnout risk indicator. In this 
study, we considered three different thresholds: 
The first threshold classifies burnout as corresponding to scores ≥2.25 for exhaustion 
and ≥2.1 for disengagement [36]. Researchers have demonstrated that these values 
correlate to the mean scores on the widely used Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) 
amongst employees diagnosed with burnout by a physician [37]. 
The second threshold differentiates between very high burnout in a working sample 
and high burnout in a clinical sample. For the working sample, the cut-off scores are 
≥2.85 for exhaustion and ≥2.6 for disengagement. For the clinical sample, the 
threshold scores are higher, with cut-offs of ≥3.13 for exhaustion and ≥2.72 for 
disengagement, reflecting more severe burnout [38]. 
The third threshold in the literature uses total scores in place of means, with a score 
of 35 or above (out of 64) indicating an increased risk for burnout. This approach has 
been referenced in the literature as a reliable indicator of heightened burnout risk 
[39]. 
Focus Group 
A focus group was organized with clinical and scientific experts in mental health to 
validate the labels predicted by our machine learning models on samples from the 
real-world dataset. Participants were recruited by convenience sampling from the 
researcher’s networks. 
We planned 1 ½ hours for the focus group, in which the results from dataset 3 were 
presented and discussed with regard to plausibility and implications. 
In the focus group, we presented samples of model predictions and asked the 
participants to rate whether they agree with the AI’s output. For each sample the 
proportion of agreement was calculated. In addition, the reasons for rejection were 
collected and discussed. We also included open questions to initiate a discussion 
among the participants on their experiences of how burnout symptoms are expressed 
verbally. The focus group interview was documented in writing by an assistant and 
the protocol was analyzed using content analysis.  
Data Analysis 
We used Dataset 3 as validation data for machine learning classifiers trained on the 
(1) the online dataset, (2) BurnoutExpressions v1, (3) BurnoutExpressions v2, and 
(4) a combined dataset of the online dataset and BurnoutExpressions v2. We wanted 
to investigate how classifiers trained on non-clinical data perform on real-world data.  
 
Experimental Setup 
The overall experimental setup consists of the following steps: a) selecting a pre-
trained BERT model for the German language, b) adding vocabulary not priorly 
known to the model (e.g., words from our BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset), c) fine-
tuning the resulting model for binary classification (indication for burnout in the text, 
or not) using a random split with 80% of each dataset for training (this step is done 
separately for the four datasets, resulting in four classifiers), d) testing the classifiers 
with real-world data obtained from a survey (text answers labelled with the 
Oldenburg Burnout Inventory scores). The experimental setup is visualized in Figure 
2. 
 
 
Figure 2 Experimental Setup: the different steps of training 4 burnout classi@iers, and testing them with real-world 
data. 
 
Training/Evaluation: GermanBERT Classifiers 
As a foundation model for the four classifiers, we use the GermanBERT model version 
bert-base-german-cased2. Any words from the BurnoutExperessions v1 that were not 
already in the model’s vocabulary were added before fine-tuning. We then used 
BertForSequenceClassification to fine-tune the model for binary classification using 
the HuggingFace library3. The training arguments are detailed in Appendix 2. We 
experimented with 2-4 training epochs, all but one of the final models were trained 
for 3 epochs, with the remaining model taking only 2 epochs.  
Using this setup, we trained four models with different training data: (1) for the 
online data, (2) for BurnoutExpressions v1, (3) for BurnoutExpressions v2, and (4) a 
combined dataset of (1)+(3).  
 
Test Datasets: Applying Classifiers to Real-World Data 
Dataset 3, collected with a survey and taken to be a good representation of real-world 
data, was used to test the fine-tuned models, but never as training data. Each test 
subject’s answers to each of the free-response questions was labelled by the model in 
question according to whether it contained indicators for burnout. 
Three different labels based on the effective OLBI scores, one for each of the cut-off 
values specified in the literature (see section Method for details), were considered as 
the ground truths and compared to the classifiers’ predictions. 
 
2 https://huggingface.co/google-bert/bert-base-german-cased  
3 https://huggingface.co/transformers/v3.0.2/model_doc/bert.html#bertforsequenceclassification  
Explainability Study 
To get an indication of what information the system used in its decision-making 
process, an explainability study using the library transformers-interpret 4  was 
conducted. The predictions of the classifier trained on the combined dataset applied 
to the real-world data from the survey were examined. Using transformers-interpret, 
visualizations were generated of the weight the model attributed to each word in a 
given sample, indicating the contribution of given words towards or against the 
classifier’s prediction (indication for burnout, or not). These visualizations were then 
discussed with domain experts in focus groups.  
 
Ethical Considerations 
An ethics approval is deemed unnecessary according to the legislation Swiss Federal 
Act on Research Involving Human Beings (see 810.30 HRA Art. 2) since data collection 
was anonymous for the online data and in the focus group interview no health related 
data of the participants was collected. The study was conducted in accordance with 
the Declaration of Helsinki. It was performed on a voluntary basis for all participants. 
All participants were free to stop filling out the questionnaire at any time. Participants 
received written information before the start of the study about the contents, aim and 
voluntary nature of their participation and gave their informed consent by 
completing the first survey page, respectively, by participating in the focus group 
interview. 
Results 
Training: GermanBERT as Classifier 
For each classifier, the training data was split into 80% for training and 20% for 
evaluation (random split). The following graphs show the training loss, as well as the 
loss, f1-score and accuracy from evaluation. We trained four classifiers for the four 
different datasets as mentioned in the experimental setup (see Figure 2).  
 
In Figure 3, we observe the performance of the GermanBERT classifier which was 
trained on data collected from online sources. The training loss (red line) consistently 
decreases, indicating effective learning. The evaluation loss (blue line) also decreases, 
closely mirroring the training loss, which suggests good generalization to the 
evaluation data. The F1-score (orange line) and accuracy (green line) both show 
steady improvement, stabilizing around 0.85 and 0.8, respectively. These trends 
demonstrate that the classifier is effectively learning to distinguish between burnout 
and non-burnout cases, achieving high accuracy and F1 scores with low loss values 
by the end of the training period. 
 
 
 
4  https://github.com/cdpierse/transformers-interpret  
 
Figure 3 As a baseline, we consider the classi@ier trained on the data collected from online sources. 
In Figure 4, we observe the performance of our classifier trained on the 
BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset. The training loss (red line) shows slight fluctuations 
but generally trends downward, indicating that the model is learning. The evaluation 
loss (blue line) remains relatively stable, with a slight decreasing trend, suggesting 
consistent performance on the evaluation data without significant overfitting. The F1-
score (orange line) starts low and rapidly increases, stabilizing around 0.65, which 
indicates an improved balance between precision and recall. Similarly, the evaluation 
accuracy (green line) shows a steady increase initially, stabilizing around 0.65, 
reflecting the model’s growing ability to correctly classify burnout cases.  However, 
the performance of the GermanBERT model trained on online data still outperforms 
that of the model trained on the BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset. 
 
 
Figure 4 Training and evaluation performance of the classi@ier trained on the BurnoutExpressions v1 dataset. 
 
The training and evaluation performance of the GermanBERT classifier trained on the 
BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset is illustrated in Figure 5. The training loss (red line) 
shows a consistent decline, indicating the model's effective learning over time. The 
evaluation loss (blue line) also decreases, mirroring the trend of the training loss, 
which suggests that the model generalizes well to the evaluation data without 
significant overfitting. The F1-score (orange line) and accuracy (green line) show 
substantial improvements, quickly rising and then stabilizing around 0.85 and 0.83, 
respectively. This trend demonstrates that the classifier effectively learns to 
distinguish between burnout and non-burnout cases, achieving high accuracy and F1 
scores with low loss values by the end of the training period. 
 
Figure 5 Training and evaluation performance of the classi@ier trained on the BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset. 
Figure 6 presents the training and evaluation performance of the GermanBERT 
classifier trained on the combined dataset, which includes both online data and 
BurnoutExpressions v2. The training loss (red line) demonstrates a continuous 
downward trend, signifying the model's effective learning process. The evaluation 
loss (blue line) follows a similar downward trajectory, further confirming the model's 
ability to generalize well to unseen data. Both the F1-score (orange line) and accuracy 
(green line) show rapid increases initially, stabilizing at approximately 0.87 and 0.85, 
respectively. These metrics indicate that the classifier trained on the combined 
dataset achieves similar performance compared to the model trained solely on the 
BurnoutExpressions v2 dataset. 
 
Figure 6 Training and evaluation performance of the classi@ier trained on the combined dataset (online data + 
BurnoutExpressions v2). 
 
Test Phase: Real-World Dataset 
The real-world dataset is composed of the answers to free-text questions and 
answers to the OLBI questionnaire. Each free-text answer was labelled according to 
the three different cut-off values for OLBI (see method for detailed description). In 
total, N=17 individuals (8 female, 8 male, 1 no gender specified) completely filled out 
our online survey. Each text provided (i.e., the answers to each free-text question, 
considered separately) was mapped to the OLBI score. Empty answers were dropped 
(2 cases). This resulted in 66 data points. Based on the OLBI scores of each individual, 
the labels 1 (indication for burnout) and 0 (no indication for burnout) were attributed 
to each data point according to three different threshold values. This led to the 
following distribution shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3 Distribution of Burnout and No Burnout Labels based on the different cut-off values. 
Cut-Off Value  
Nr. Burnout (Label 1) 
Nr. No Burnout (Label 
0) 
Cut-Off Value 1 
4 
13 
Cut-Off Value 2 
2 
15 
Cut-Off Value 3 
7 
10 
 
Even though the survey was intensively distributed among people potentially 
suffering from a burnout or related mental health problem, only a small subset of 
respondents had an OLBI score high enough to be classified as part of the burnout 
group according to each of the cut-off scores. 
 
We then applied our four machine learning classifiers to these samples. Table 4 gives 
an overview of the F1-Scores we observed in our experiments. 
 
Table 4 Overview of the F1-Scores from the different experiments on Dataset 3. 
Pre-Trained 
Model 
Dataset for Fine-
Tuning 
Epochs F1 
for 
Cut-Off 1 
of 
Test 
Data 
F1 
for 
Cut-Off 2 
of 
Test 
Data 
F1 
for 
Cut-Off 3 
of 
Test 
Data 
GermanBERT 
Online 
Data 
(Baseline) 
3 
0.170 
0.130 
0.230 
GermanBERT 
BurnoutExpressions 
v1 
3 
0.360 
0.570 
0.290 
GermanBERT 
BurnoutExpressions 
v2 
2 
0.330 
0.350 
0.440 
GermanBERT 
Combined 
Dataset: 
BurnoutExpressions 
v2 + Online Data 
3 
0.580 
0.610 
0.510 
 
Explainability Study and Focus Groups 
Table 5 summarises the examples provided, the model’s predictions and the 
proportion of experts in agreement. The first example was classified as below the 
threshold for burnout. All experts agreed and stated that, in particular, the phrase 
“recharged energy” was indicative of not having burnout. However, it was discussed 
that the expression could relate to only a snapshot of a specific moment and should 
be considered in the context of a more extended period. The sentence “longing for 
more free time” may indicate a burnout risk factor and was also marked as a 
indicating potential risk by the AI model. However, the positive statements in the 
sample in question were rated more relevant. For the second example, most agreed 
with the labelling that the sentence indicates burnout. However, it was discussed 
whether such statements may not be somewhat indicative of depression rather than 
burnout. The line between the two is not clear-cut, leading to a challenge 
identification. For the third example, the experts agreed it should not be labelled as 
burnout because of missing information, which is crucial for a clear allocation. It is 
unclear which aspects of the day resulted in the reported exhaustion; burnout is a 
relates to the occupational context, but work-related information was not provided. 
This is also the case for example four, which was labelled as burnout by AI, whereas 
the participant did not reach any OLBI threshold for burnout. In this example as well, 
no work-related information is given. 
 
Table 5 Examples (translation from German) with OLBI cut-off score, AI-assigned label and expert agreement. 
ID Example 
OLBI 
Cut-off 
Labelled 
by AI 
Expert 
Agreement 
1 
It was a very relaxing weekend that 
recharged my energy. Cheerful mood 
had an impact on the experience. More 
relaxed and spontaneous as there were 
No 
burnout 
No 
burnout 
100% 
no obligations and time pressure. 
Longing for more free time 
2 
I go to bed. Because I'm completely 
exhausted. I don't care about the day. 
It’s like the next one or the one before. A 
struggle from morning to night 
burnout 
burnout 
80% 
3 
I am often exhausted from the day and 
feel more or less satisfied with my daily 
activities. Most of the time, I plan things 
that I want to do better in the future. I 
try to reflect on which strategies I can 
use to create more meaning and 
satisfaction in my life 
2/3 
burnout 
No 
burnout 
100% 
4 
My partner was away over the weekend, 
and I felt partly lonely, longing for a 
'real' family. I was able to positively 
influence my mood by doing something 
with the little ones and meeting another 
family. Through what I did, I could 
influence 
my 
feelings 
and 
mood 
positively. Conversely, my emotions 
and mood led to me perhaps needing a 
bit more energy to get things done. 
No 
burnout 
burnout 
0% 
 
Discussion 
Principal Results 
On one hand, the classifier trained on web data shows poor performance in our 
experiments, despite demonstrating high performance in the training and validation 
phases (see Figure 3). On the other hand, considering that the real-world test dataset 
is imbalanced (see Table 3), the performance can be seen as moderate for the 
classifiers presented in this paper. In particular, the best f1-scores were observed 
using the combined dataset, which was training on online data, manually curated data 
and AI-generated synthetic data. This indicates that the wider scope of the combined 
data allows the classifier to better handle unseen data. 
The manually curated dataset based on the symptoms described in the literature and 
then extended with generative AI performs well during training and gives generally 
promising results on validation data. Interestingly, there is not much difference in 
performance between the manually curated dataset, and the synthetically augmented 
data extending it (BurnoutExpressions v1 even performs better in two cases, see 
Table 4). We speculate that the generated texts provide greater volume, but not more 
information. The results from the focus group indicate that there is high agreement 
with the decision of the labelling. However, the experts expressed several limitations, 
which should be considered to increase the model’s performance and reliability. 
Comparison with Prior Work 
We observed high validation F1-scores in the training phase for all datasets, up to 
over 0.9. This is in line with existing work in the field. For example, similar 
performance was reported for burnout detection on Reddit data [19], or for 
Depression detection [32]. However, our results on the real-world test dataset 
indicate this performance does not necessarily transfer to other, closely related types 
of data. Whereas the other work in the field of mental health classification uses social 
media data in the vast majority of cases (81% in a recent survey paper [22]), these 
models might not be readily transferable to clinical data. Other recent work in the 
field has developed specific language models specialized for the mental health 
domain, including MentalBERT [40] and MentaLLaMA [41]. However, these are 
primarily trained on English data and thus cannot be compared directly to our results, 
dealing with German text data.   
Burnout vs. Depression 
Existing literature shows that the empirical evidence for distinguishing burnout from 
depression is inconsistent [42]. A meta-analysis indicated a high association between 
burnout and depression, as well as anxiety [43]. This overlap of symptoms makes it a 
challenge to make a clear-cut diagnosis. Moreover, the evidence of discriminant 
validity between burnout and depression is low, theoretically and empirically. One 
clear distinguishing criterion is that burnout is currently understood as a 
phenomenon in the occupational context [44], which may be the key discriminating 
factor. When applying machine learning, the underlying measurement instrument, 
seen as a valid criterion, must be chosen critically. However, the discourse has been 
further complicated by the emergence of parental burnout as a burnout phenomenon 
that is not work-related [45]. There seem to be some specific consequences of the 
conditions which allow differentiation, such as the intent to leave the organization for 
job burnout or violence/neglect for parental burnout, none of which are fully 
explained by depression in general [45].  A text-based assessment using AI should 
therefore take such behaviors into account when collecting data. 
 
Snapshot vs. Long-Term 
This study used texts that are situational excerpts from people's everyday lives. A 
person who writes that they are exhausted may feel exhausted, but it does not 
necessarily have to be directly associated with burnout. Research shows that stress 
reactions do not lead directly to burnout, but rather, burnout is a response to chronic 
occupational stress [42]. It concerns the amount of time certain stress factors are 
experienced at work and resist resolution. The time factor makes capturing data 
using text even more challenging because retrospection is often distorted. Research 
indicates that memory bias is subject to negative mood states. In particular, feelings 
of anxiety, depression, and helplessness are amplified in overall retrospective 
assessments compared to daily ratings [46]. The text should therefore not be 
collected at a single point in time but several times over a certain period from the 
same person to create a more adequate data quality. 
 
Limitations 
One limitation of our work is the small sample size of the real-world dataset. 
Additionally, the dataset was unbalanced. Our findings will need to be confirmed with 
a larger dataset. Our survey was conducted anonymously, and thus we cannot assess 
how well the classification has worked for different demographic groups; this needs 
to be further explored to avoid encoding societal bias within machine learning 
models. Modeling mental health as a binary classification task is oversimplified, and 
collaborators in clinical psychology have expressed a desire for future work to 
explore the potential of more fine-grained classification, taking into assessing 
different dimensions of burnout described in the literature, considering specific 
symptoms, and integrating comorbidity and comparison with other mental health 
issues. Reproducing these kinds of experiments is challenging, as the fine-tuning 
phase of BERT models is a stochastic process, and the randomized test sets were small 
enough that performance metrics exhibited significant variance. In future work, it 
could also be interesting to incorporate methods that improve model performance by 
automatically isolating sentences in the data that are the most relevant for assessing 
mental health, similar to approaches in earlier work [47] in the context of eating 
disorders. Such targeted scraping methods could also be used to augment our existing 
dataset with similar sentences from online discussion forums and other relevant 
corpora. 
Conclusions 
Our research indicates that further validation of the state-of-the-art with real-world 
data is required to ensure the methods based on online data transfer to real clinical 
data. This is enabled by an interdisciplinary collaboration, where NLP and healthcare 
researchers work in close collaboration with clinical partners.  
 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by funding from the thematic field Caring Society from 
the Bern University of Applied Sciences, which we gratefully acknowledge. We would 
like to express our gratitude to Sophie Haug for providing the dataset used in this 
study, which was produced as part of her bachelor thesis at Bern University of 
Applied Sciences.  
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared. 
Abbreviations 
JMIR: Journal of Medical Internet Research 
ML: Machine Learning 
NLP: Natural Language Processing 
OLBI: Oldenburg Burnout Inventory 
RCT: randomized controlled trial 
 
Appendix 1 Survey Free-Text Questions 
 
Question 1  
Beschreiben Sie, wie Sie sich an einem gewöhnlichen Wochentag fühlen, wenn Sie 
morgens aufstehen. Beschreiben Sie Ihre Gefühle oder die Art und Weise, wie Sie 
Ihren Körper wahrnehmen. Versuchen Sie, schriftlich auszudrücken, wie Sie den Tag 
angehen. 
(engl: Describe how you feel on a normal weekday when you get up in the morning. 
Describe your feelings or the way you perceive your body. Try to express in writing how 
you approach the day.) 
 
Question 2 
Wie fühlen Sie sich während des Mittagessens an einem typischen Wochentag? 
Beschreiben Sie, wie Sie diese Tagesmitte erleben und welche Gefühle Sie in Bezug 
auf Ihren Alltag haben. 
(engl: How do you feel during lunch on a typical weekday? Describe how you experience 
this middle of the day and what feelings you have in relation to your everyday life.) 
 
Question 3 
Beschreiben Sie Ihre Gefühle vor dem Schlafengehen an einem typischen Wochentag. 
Wie blicken Sie auf den Tag zurück, den Sie erlebt haben? Beschreiben Sie Ihre 
positiven und/oder negativen Eindrücke. Wie haben Sie sich gefühlt, haben sich diese 
Gefühle im Laufe des Tages verändert? Wie haben Sie sich und Ihre Umgebung 
wahrgenommen? 
(engl: Describe your feelings before going to bed on a typical weekday. How do you look 
back on the day you experienced? Describe your positive and/or negative impressions. 
How did you feel, did these feelings change during the day? How did you perceive 
yourself and your surroundings?) 
 
Question 4 
Denken Sie an das letzte Wochenende. Wie haben Sie sich gefühlt? Beschreiben Sie, 
wie Sie das Wochenende erlebt haben und in welcher Stimmung Sie es 
wahrgenommen haben. Haben Ihre Gefühle oder Ihre Stimmung die Art und Weise 
beeinflusst, wie Sie die Dinge erledigt haben? 
(engl: Think back to last weekend. How did you feel? Describe how you experienced the 
weekend and the mood in which you perceived it. Did your feelings or mood influence 
the way you did things?) 
 
Appendix 2 Training Parameters 
 
The following parameters were used for the training of the four classifiers: 
 
training_args = TrainingArguments( 
    num_train_epochs=3, 
    per_device_train_batch_size=16, 
    per_device_eval_batch_size=64, 
    warmup_steps=500, 
    weight_decay=0.01, 
) 
 
With exception for the dataset BurnoutExpressionsv2, where num_train_epochs=2 
was used instead. 
 
References 
1.  
Vingerhoets A. The Assessment of Stress. In: Westerink JHDM, Ouwerkerk M, 
Overbeek TJM, Pasveer WF, de Ruyter B, editors. Probing Experience: From 
Assessment of User Emotions and Behaviour to Development of Products Dordrecht: 
Springer Netherlands; 2008. p. 109–117. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-6593-4_10ISBN:978-
1-4020-6593-4 
2.  
Folkman S, Lazarus RS, Gruen RJ, DeLongis A. Appraisal, coping, health status, 
and psychological symptoms. Journal of personality and social psychology American 
Psychological Association; 1986;50(3):571. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.50.3.571 
3.  
American Psychological Association. Stress in America: The state of our nation. 
Stress in AmericaTM Survey; 2017.  
4.  
Glazer S, Liu C. Work, stress, coping, and stress management. Oxford Research 
Encyclopedia of Psychology 2017; doi: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.30 
5.  
Crum AJ, Akinola M, Martin A, Fath S. The role of stress mindset in shaping 
cognitive, emotional, and physiological responses to challenging and threatening stress. 
Anxiety, Stress, & Coping 2017 Jul 4;30(4):379–395. doi: 
10.1080/10615806.2016.1275585 
6.  
Penprase B, Johnson A, Pittiglio L, Pittiglio B. Does mindfulness-based stress 
reduction training improve nurse satisfaction? Nursing management LWW; 
2015;46(12):38–45. doi: 10.1097/01.NUMA.0000470772.17731.e6 
7.  
Li L, Ai H, Gao L, Zhou H, Liu X, Zhang Z, Sun T, Fan L. Moderating effects of 
coping on work stress and job performance for nurses in tertiary hospitals: a cross-
sectional survey in China. BMC Health Serv Res 2017 Dec;17(1):401. doi: 
10.1186/s12913-017-2348-3 
8.  
Al-Gobari M, Shoman Y, Blanc S, Canu IG. Point prevalence of burnout in 
Switzerland: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Swiss medical weekly 
2022;152(3738):w30229–w30229.  
9.  
Canu IG, Marca SC, Dell’Oro F, Balázs Á, Bergamaschi E, Besse C, Bianchi R, 
Bislimovska J, Bjelajac AK, Bugge M, others. Harmonized definition of occupational 
burnout: A systematic review, semantic analysis, and Delphi consensus in 29 countries. 
Scandinavian journal of work, environment & health Nordic Association of Occupational 
Safety and Health; 2021;47(2):95.  
10.  
Rotenstein LS, Torre M, Ramos MA, Rosales RC, Guille C, Sen S, Mata DA. 
Prevalence of burnout among physicians: a systematic review. Jama American Medical 
Association; 2018;320(11):1131–1150.  
11.  
Nagarajan R, Ramachandran P, Dilipkumar R, Kaur P. Global estimate of burnout 
among the public health workforce: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Human 
Resources for Health Springer; 2024;22(1):30.  
12.  
Goh J, Pfeffer J, Zenios SA. The relationship between workplace stressors and 
mortality and health costs in the United States. Management Science INFORMS; 
2016;62(2):608–628.  
13.  
Drigas A, Koukianakis L, Papagerasimou Y. Towards an ICT-based psychology: 
E-psychology. Computers in Human Behavior Elsevier; 2011;27(4):1416–1423. doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.045 
14.  
Rani PJ, Bakthakumar J, Kumaar BP, Kumaar UP, Kumar S. Voice controlled 
home automation system using natural language processing (NLP) and internet of things 
(IoT). 2017 Third International Conference on Science Technology Engineering & 
Management (ICONSTEM) IEEE; 2017. p. 368–373. doi: 
10.1109/ICONSTEM.2017.8261311. 
15.  
Hagiwara M. Real-world natural language processing. Shelter Island: Manning 
Publications; 2022. ISBN:978-1-61729-642-0 
16.  
Lavelli A, Holderness E, Jimeno Yepes A, Minard A-L, Pustejovsky J, Rinaldi F, 
editors. Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and 
Information Analysis (LOUHI). Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid): Association 
for Computational Linguistics; 2022. Available from: 
https://aclanthology.org/2022.louhi-1.0  
17.  
Balamurugan R, Pushpa DS. A review on various text mining techniques and 
algorithms. 2nd International Conference on recent innovations in science, engineering, 
and management JNU convention center, New Delhi, 22nd November 2015.  
18.  
Nath S, Kurpicz-Briki M. Burnoutwords-detecting burnout for a clinical setting. 
CS & IT Conference Proceedings CS & IT Conference Proceedings; 2021. p. 177–191. 
doi: 10.5121/csit.2021.111815 
19.  
Merhbene G, Nath S, Puttick AR, Kurpicz-Briki M. BurnoutEnsemble: 
augmented intelligence to detect indications for burnout in clinical psychology. Frontiers 
in big Data Frontiers; 2022;5:863100. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2022.863100 
20.  
Zhernova P, Bodyanskiy Y, Yatsenko B, Zavgorodnii I. Detection and prevention 
of professional burnout using machine learning methods. 2020 IEEE 15th International 
Conference on Advanced Trends in Radioelectronics, Telecommunications and 
Computer Engineering (TCSET) IEEE; 2020. p. 218–221. doi: 
10.1109/TCSET49122.2020.235426 
21.  
Cabanillas-Carbonell M, De la Cruz-Velasquez A. Efficiency of information 
technologies for measure the level Burnout Syndrome, a systematic review. European 
Journal of Molecular & Clinical Medicine 2021;8(03).  
22.  
Zhang T, Schoene AM, Ji S, Ananiadou S. Natural language processing applied to 
mental illness detection: a narrative review. npj Digit Med 2022 Apr 8;5(1):46. doi: 
10.1038/s41746-022-00589-7 
23.  
Joshi P, Santy S, Budhiraja A, Bali K, Choudhury M. The state and fate of 
linguistic diversity and inclusion in the NLP world. arXiv preprint arXiv:200409095 
2020;  
24.  
Wang N. Interpretable and Explainable AI for Mental Health. Stevens Institute of 
Technology; 2021.  
25.  
Han S, Mao R, Cambria E. Hierarchical Attention Network for Explainable 
Depression Detection on Twitter Aided by Metaphor Concept Mappings. In: Calzolari N, 
Huang C-R, Kim H, Pustejovsky J, Wanner L, Choi K-S, Ryu P-M, Chen H-H, Donatelli 
L, Ji H, Kurohashi S, Paggio P, Xue N, Kim S, Hahm Y, He Z, Lee TK, Santus E, Bond 
F, Na S-H, editors. Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics Gyeongju, Republic of Korea: International Committee on Computational 
Linguistics; 2022. p. 94–104. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.9  
26.  
Wang Y, Inkpen D, Gamaarachchige PK. Explainable depression detection using 
large language models on social media data. Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on 
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology (CLPsych 2024) 2024. p. 108–126.  
27.  
Haug S. Natural Language Processing for Clinical Burnout Detection. Biel, 
Switzerland: Bern University of Applied Sciences;  
28.  
Rahner E. Das Burnout-Syndrom bei Ärzten: eine qualitative Studie zur 
Selbstwahrnehmung von Ursachen und Lösungsansätzen [PhD Thesis]. 2011.  
29.  
Buchenau P, Nelting M. Burnout: von Betroffenen lernen! Springer-Verlag; 2015.  
30.  
Albrecht S. Burnout-der Weg danach: Burnout im Lichte von Theorie und Praxis. 
VDM Publishing; 2008.  
31.  
Burisch M. Das burnout-syndrom. Springer; 2014.  
32.  
Tadesse MM, Lin H, Xu B, Yang L. Detection of Depression-Related Posts in 
Reddit Social Media Forum. IEEE Access 2019;7:44883–44893. doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2909180 
33.  
Shen JH, Rudzicz F. Detecting Anxiety through Reddit. Proceedings of the Fourth 
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and            Clinical Psychology –- From 
Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality Vancouver, BC: Association for Computational 
Linguistics; 2017. p. 58–65. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-3107 
34.  
Demerouti E. Burnout: Eine Folge konkreter Arbeitsbedingungen bei 
Dienstleistungs-und Produktionstätigkeiten. Lang; 1999.  
35.  
Demerouti E, Bakker AB. The Oldenburg Burnout Inventory: A good alternative 
to measure burnout and engagement. Handbook of stress and burnout in health care Nova 
Science Publishers; 2008;65(7):1–25.  
36.  
Peterson U, Demerouti E, Bergström G, Samuelsson M, Åsberg M, Nygren Å. 
Burnout and physical and mental health among Swedish healthcare workers. Journal of 
advanced nursing Wiley Online Library; 2008;62(1):84–95.  
37.  
Schaufeli WB, Salanova M, González-romá V, Bakker AB. The Measurement of 
Engagement and Burnout: A Two Sample Confirmatory Factor Analytic Approach. 
Journal of Happiness Studies 2002;3(1):71–92. doi: 10.1023/A:1015630930326 
38.  
Demerouti E, Veldhuis W, Coombes C, Hunter R. Burnout among pilots: 
psychosocial factors related to happiness and performance at simulator training. 
Ergonomics Taylor & Francis; 2019;62(2):233–245.  
39.  
Summers RF, Gorrindo T, Hwang S, Aggarwal R, Guille C. Well-being, burnout, 
and depression among North American psychiatrists: the state of our profession. 
American Journal of Psychiatry Am Psychiatric Assoc; 2020;177(10):955–964.  
40.  
Ji S, Zhang T, Ansari L, Fu J, Tiwari P, Cambria E. MentalBERT: Publicly 
Available Pretrained Language Models for Mental Healthcare. In: Calzolari N, Béchet F, 
Blache P, Choukri K, Cieri C, Declerck T, Goggi S, Isahara H, Maegaard B, Mariani J, 
Mazo H, Odijk J, Piperidis S, editors. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources 
and Evaluation Conference Marseille, France: European Language Resources 
Association; 2022. p. 7184–7190. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-
1.778  
41.  
Yang K, Zhang T, Kuang Z, Xie Q, Huang J, Ananiadou S. MentaLLaMA: 
Interpretable Mental Health Analysis on Social Media with Large Language Models. 
Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 New York, NY, USA: Association for 
Computing Machinery; 2024. p. 4489–4500. doi: 10.1145/3589334.3648137 
42.  
Bianchi R, Schonfeld IS, Laurent E. Burnout–depression overlap: A review. 
Clinical Psychology Review 2015 Mar;36:28–41. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.01.004 
43.  
Koutsimani P, Montgomery A, Georganta K. The Relationship Between Burnout, 
Depression, and Anxiety: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Psychol 2019 
Mar 13;10:284. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00284 
44.  
WHO. Burn-out an “occupational phenomenon”: International Classification of 
Diseases. 2019. Available from: https://www.who.int/news/item/28-05-2019-burn-out-
an-occupational-phenomenon-international-classification-of-diseases [accessed Feb 1, 
2024] 
45.  
Mikolajczak M, Gross JJ, Stinglhamber F, Lindahl Norberg A, Roskam I. Is 
Parental Burnout Distinct From Job Burnout and Depressive Symptoms? Clinical 
Psychological Science 2020 Jul;8(4):673–689. doi: 10.1177/2167702620917447 
46.  
Sato H, Kawahara J. Selective bias in retrospective self-reports of negative mood 
states. Anxiety, Stress & Coping 2011 Jul;24(4):359–367. doi: 
10.1080/10615806.2010.543132 
47.  
Merhbene G, Puttick AR, Kurpicz-Briki M. BFH-AMI at eRisk@ CLEF 2023. 
Proceedings of CLEF 2023: Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum 2023 Sep 21; 
doi: 10.24451/ARBOR.20736 
 
 
 
