Title: Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08628v2
--------------------------------------------------

Explainable Natural Language Processing with
Matrix Product States
Jirawat Tangpanitanon1,2,†, Chanatip Mangkang3,†, Pradeep
Bhadola4, Yuichiro Minato5, Dimitris G. Angelakis6,7, Thiparat
Chotibut3,∗
1 Quantum Technology Foundation (Thailand), Bangkok, Thailand
2 Thailand Center of Excellence in Physics, Ministry of Higher Education, Science,
Research and Innovation, Bangkok, Thailand
3 Chula Intelligent and Complex Systems, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
4 Centre for Theoretical Physics & Natural Philosophy, Nakhonsawan Studiorum for
Advanced Studies, Mahidol University, Nakhonsawan Campus, Thailand
5 Blueqat Inc., Japan
6 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete,
Chania, Greece
7 Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore
E-mail: thiparatc@gmail.com, thiparat.c@chula.ac.th
† Equal contributions
* Corresponding author
7 April 2022
Abstract.
Despite empirical successes of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in
natural language processing (NLP), theoretical understanding of RNNs is still limited
due to intrinsically complex non-linear computations.
We systematically analyze
RNNs’ behaviors in a ubiquitous NLP task, the sentiment analysis of movie reviews, via
the mapping between a class of RNNs called recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs) and a
matrix product state (MPS). Using the von-Neumann entanglement entropy (EE) as a
proxy for information propagation, we show that single-layer RACs possess a maximum
information propagation capacity, reﬂected by the saturation of the EE. Enlarging the
bond dimension beyond the EE saturation threshold does not increase model prediction
accuracies, so a minimal model that best estimates the data statistics can be inferred.
Although the saturated EE is smaller than the maximum EE allowed by the area
law, our minimal model still achieves ∼99% training accuracies in realistic sentiment
analysis data sets. Thus, low EE is not a warrant against the adoption of single-layer
RACs for NLP. Contrary to a common belief that long-range information propagation
is the main source of RNNs’ successes, we show that single-layer RACs harness high
expressiveness from the subtle interplay between the information propagation and the
word vector embeddings. Our work sheds light on the phenomenology of learning in
RACs, and more generally on the explainability of RNNs for NLP, using tools from
many-body quantum physics.
arXiv:2112.08628v2  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  6 Apr 2022
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
2
Keywords:
Matrix Product State, Entanglement Entropy, Entanglement Spectrum,
Quantum Machine Learning,
Natural Language Processing,
Sequence Modeling,
Recurrent Neural Networks
1. Introduction
The study of many-body quantum physics prompts the development of theoretical
and numerical techniques to compactly represent and analyze quantum states living
in an exponentially large Hilbert space.
One of the most prominent examples is a
compact representation of a ground state of a one-dimensional gapped quantum lattice
system with local interaction as a matrix product state (MPS), which can eﬃciently
parametrize an appropriate ground state using resources that grow only linearly with
the system size [1]. Compact representations generalizing MPS to higher dimensional
systems include projected entangled pair state (PEPS) [2], multiscale entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA), which eﬃciently parametrize critical high-dimensional
systems [3], and, more generally, tensor network (TN) states [4]. These compact state
representations drastically reduce the number of parameters from exponential to at most
polynomial in the system size, rendering the analysis and the simulation of many-body
quantum systems computationally tractable.
Dimensionality reduction has enabled
insights into a broad range of many-body quantum phenomena, ranging from quantum
phase transitions to topological phases of matter.
On the other hand, machine learning (ML) has also beneﬁtted from algorithms
that extract a compact representation of complex data of interests.
In supervised
machine learning, many algorithms eﬃciently convert a gigantic set of data-label pair
{(Xi, li)}, where Xi ∈Rd is the ith data vector and li is the scalar label of that data
vector, into a compact representation encoding the relationship between data-label as
a conditional probability P(l|X, θ) parametrized by a set of parameters θ. With the
advent of deep learning (DL), a modern paradigm of ML that imitates computational
models of biological neural networks, probabilistic relationships between data-label pairs
as complex and extensive as picture-name matching, sound-text pairing, or text-speech
generation, can be eﬃciently represented [5].
In fact, the ability of DL to extract
a compact representation of complex data has fueled modern artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies, including image recognition, speech recognition, and language translation,
to name a few.
Since many-body quantum physics and supervised ML both beneﬁt from a compact
representation of high-dimensional mathematical objects, applying successful techniques
from one discipline to the other has led to a fruitful cross-fertilization. For example,
variational ansatz based on artiﬁcial neural networks oﬀers a useful, though less
interpretable, representation of complex many-body quantum states [6, 7, 8]. Automatic
classiﬁcation of quantum phases of matter also beneﬁts from supervised ML approaches
[9]. In the opposite direction, techniques from many-body quantum physics can oﬀer
novel computational paradigms for supervised ML. References [10, 11, 12, 13] propose
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
3
tensor networks as a quantum-inspired supervised ML ansatz that can achieve high
performance in image recognition tasks. Furthermore, entanglement entropy in quantum
tensor networks can shed light on the information propagation in the dual artiﬁcial
neural networks [14, 15]. Such duality between quantum tensor networks and artiﬁcial
neural networks can help scientists scrutinize the inner working of complex neural
network algorithms, providing new tools to tackle the explainability aspects of black-box
DL approaches. Recent work applies quantum techniques to tackle the explainability of
image recognition tasks [12], though the analysis for realistic natural language processing
(NLP) tasks is still lacking.
With the goal of investigating the inner working of DL in NLP, we study the
behaviors of single-layer recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs), a class of recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) that can be mapped to an MPS [14], in a ubiquitous NLP task, the
sentiment analysis of movie reviews. The objective of sentiment analysis is to classify
each written review into an appropriate category such as ‘like’ or ‘dislike’. We show that,
by using the entanglement entropy (EE) of the dual MPS as a measure of information
propagation in the networks, single-layer RACs achieve highest prediction accuracies
when the information propagation saturates.
By saturation we mean there exists a
critical model size χ∗(measured by the number of hidden neurons) such that larger
models have prediction accuracies and the EE as high as those of the model with size
χ∗.
Thus, there is a minimal single-layer RACs model that can best estimate the
statistics of sentiment analysis data. The prediction accuracies are excellent though the
saturated EE is below the maximum EE restricted by the area law of an MPS.
In NLP, another crucial component of successful DL models is a word embedding,
a vector representation of a word that encapsulates word semantics.
While the EE
analysis reveals the behaviors of information propagation within single-layer RACs, it
disregards the role of word embedding.
In this work, we also analyze the interplay
between information propagation and the word embedding. We report that, with a
trainable word embedding, single-layer RACs can achieve higher prediction accuracies
at a smaller EE, compared to those of a model with a ﬁxed embedding. As the EE
drops down from its maximum value to saturation as the model size increases, the
word embedding becomes more meaningful (as measured by the behavior of the cosine
similarity between word vector representations.) Hence, single-layer RACs have a trade-
oﬀbetween achieving long-range information propagation and attaining a meaningful
word embedding in sentiment analysis tasks.
Although a long-range correlation in an MPS is bounded above by the area law
[16], our results demonstrate that an MPS can still serve as a useful variational ansatz
in a realistic NLP task, provided the input word embedding is well designed. Recently,
tensor network models for sequence modeling have been proposed [17, 18, 19, 20, 21];
however, most work focus on setting up new TN-based variational ansatz that may not
have an exact mapping to the RNNs counterpart. Albeit interesting, these models do
not meet our goal to scrutinize the inner working of RNNs.
The manuscript is organized as follow. We begin with a self-contained background
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
4
on a probabilistic sequence modeling and statistical language modeling in section 2.
Sequence modeling in the era of RNNs and how to represent a word meaningfully as
a vector are provided in sections 2.1-2.2. The mapping between RACs and MPS as
well as the meaning of entanglement entropy as a proxy for information propagation
are discussed in section 2.3. Section 3 reports numerical methods and the results of
RACs performance on sentiment analysis for the IMDb data set, a standard movie
review data set, revealing the information propagation capacity in RACs. Comments
on RACs’ behaviors and the role of word embedding are provided in details in the
same section. Similar results for a smaller movie review data set (Rotten Tomatoes)
are reported in the Appendix. Finally, we conclude with the discussion and outlook in
section 4.
2. Statistical language modeling with RNNs and MPS
Since language is a sequential phenomenon, in which a sequence of words (or alphabets)
dictates its meaning, we ﬁrst review a statistical approach to model sequences.
A
central mathematical object for statistical sequence modeling is the joint probability
distribution P(X1:T) ≡P(X1, X2, . . . , XT) where a discrete random variable Xt with
t ∈{1, . . . , T} can take a value xt from a ﬁnite set SN with N elements. One can regard
the list of correlated random variables X1:T as a discrete time-series. Using Bayes’ rules,
the joint distribution can be factorized into the product of conditional probabilities,
conditioned on the knowledge of the past, as
P(X1:T) = P (X1) P (X2 | X1) P(X3 | X1:2) · · · P (XT | X1:T−1) ,
(1)
where X1:t denotes the sequence of random variables in the ﬁrst t steps;
i.e.
X1:t ≡(X1, X2, . . . , Xt). However, given a time series data, inferring the conditional
distribution P (XT | X1:T−1) from occurrence frequency of a long data sequence can
be impractical, as each realization X1:T−1 = (x1, x2, . . . , xT−1) typically occurs with a
relative frequency ∼N 1−T (assuming Xt is uniformly distributed over SN), which is
exponentially small in T.
One may assume a short temporal correlation in the sequence, so that the
conditional probabilities depend only on the n previous steps
P(XT | X1:T−1) ≈P(XT | XT−n:T−1).
(2)
For a small n, a realization XT−n:T−1 = (xT−n, . . . , xT−1) now occurs with a non-
negligible frequency ∼N −n ≫N 1−T, rendering the estimation of (2) manageable. For
n = 1, (2) is the familiar Markov assumption, which gives a Markovian approximation
of a stochastic process X1:T in (1) .
In the context of natural language processing (NLP), a probabilistic model that
prescribes probabilities to sequences of words (or alphabets) is called a language model
[22]. Predicting the next word (or alphabet), given a sequence of previous words (or
alphabets) is one important example with myriad applications. A model that predicts
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
5
Figure 1. A schematic for the sentiment analysis (binary classiﬁcation) of a word
sequence w1:T performed by a vanilla recurrent neural network (RNN), which outputs
the probability that the sequence has a positive sentiment σ ∈[0, 1]. Each word wt is
embedded as a vector Φ(wt) ∈RdI, with dI of around 300-500 for other large language
modeling tasks [24, 25]. The recurrent computation is iterated from a dynamical system
ht = f
 W Hht−1, W IΦ (wt)

∈RdH, with some non-linear map (activation function)
f : RdH × RdI →RdH. In the last time step t = T, when sentiment classiﬁcation
is performed, one computes the sigmoid function σ
 W OhT + bO
which assigns the
probability that the sequence w1:T has a positive sentiment.
the next word based only on the last n −1 words according to (2) is called an n-gram
language model.
However, even with a small n = 4, constructing a 4-gram model from a gigantic
text, such as all the Wikipedia’s english articles, can be impractical. Consider a random
variable Xt in (1) which now takes a realization as a word wt from SN, a dictionary with
N words. Oxford English dictionary contains N = 171, 476 ≈105 English words that
are currently used [23]. In this case, the frequency of occurrence of a sequence of 4 words
(wt−4, wt−3, wt−2, wt−1) can be vanishingly small ∼N −4 ≈(105)−4 = 10−20, rendering
the estimation of P(Xt | Xt−4:t−1) impractical.
In addition, accurate prediction of
the next word often depends on the words that appear in the far past. For instance,
the prediction accounting for the subject-verb agreement in “This example that we
demonstrate for you
” can be syntactically wrong if the model retains only the last
few words, whose prediction would be “are”. It requires a 7-gram model to correctly
predict “is” in this example. Therefore, to construct a useful language model, one needs
to devise a computational approach that can encapsulate a long-range correlation in a
sequence of words, while also circumventing the sparsity of a long sequence problem.
This can be achieved with recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which we now discuss.
2.1. Statistical language modelling with RNNs
Rather than conditioning the prediction task on a window of size n as in an n-gram
language model, RNNs allow conditioning the prediction on all previous words that
appear in a text, approximating (1) while requiring only ﬁnite computational resources.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
6
RNNs can also perform the next item prediction as it is widely used to estimate the
conditional probability P(XT|X1:T−1); however, one ubiquitous yet simpler task in NLP
is to estimate P(σ|w1:T), where σ is a discrete quantity that characterizes a sequence
of words w1:T of length T. We will focus on characterizing the sentiment of written
sentences, a task termed sentiment analysis in NLP, in which σ is a binary variable that
takes a value 0 if a given sequence has a negative sentiment, and a value 1 if a given
sequence has a positive sentiment. This task can be used, for example, to automatically
rate product reviews or analyze news sentiment.
We now describe the simplest (Elman’s/vanilla) RNN that is typically adopted to
approximate conditional probabilities. Figure 1 shows a recurrent computational unit
that estimates P(σ|w1:T). At every time step, except the ﬁrst and the last, this recurrent
computational unit computes from an input Φ(wt) of dimension dI and a hidden or latent
vector ht−1 of dimension dH a non-linear output function f, called output hidden vector
ht of dimension dH,
ht ≡f(W IΦ(wt), W Hht−1, b).
(3)
Here W I is the input weight matrix with dimension dH ×dI that aggregate signals from
the input vector Φ(wt) , W H is the weight matrix aggregating the signals from the
hidden vector whose dimension is dH × dH, and b is the so called bias with dimension
dH. The non-linear activation function f imitates the behaviors of biological neurons,
such that the weighted input and the weighted hidden vector are summed together
(mimicking aggregation of potentials), while the bias (representing the background
neuron’s potential) is added to the aggregated weighted sum. In Elman’s RNNs, each
component s(i)
t
of the aggregated sum st = W IΦ(wt) + W Hht−1 + b represents a total
potential each hidden neuron i ∈{1, . . . , dH} experiences, which triggers each hidden
neuron to be activated and outputs a corresponding component of the hidden vector into
the next time step as h(i)
t
= f(s(i)
t ). The notation in the last equality and (3) signiﬁes that
the same activation function f is applied identically to every hidden neuron. Standard
non-linear activation function f motivated by neurobiology is a sigmoid function or
tanh function, whereas modern machine learning typically employs rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU) deﬁned by f(x) = Max{0, x} and its variants [5, 26].
With (3) as a computational building block, one can iterate the computation
recursively taking into account all the inputs in the sequence Φ1:T ≡(Φ(w1), . . . , Φ(wT))
of size T, provided a hidden vector h0 was initialized. Due to the recursive structure,
it’s plausible that information in the far past can inﬂuence the output vector at the last
step hT. This manifestation of long-term temporal dependencies through a recursive
computation circumvents the problem of an astronomical number of parameters needed
to model a long sequence encountered in the previous section. Here one only requires to
store the bias vector b of dimension dH, W I of dimension dH ×dI, and W H of dimension
dH × dH, all of which are independent of the sequence length T.
The simplest sentiment analysis task, which we focus on, is a binary classiﬁcation
task where there are only 2 sentiments σ ∈{0, 1}.
In such case, the ﬁnal hidden
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
7
vector will be passed to the classiﬁcation neuron with the output weight W O whose
dimension is 1 × dH together with the added scalar bias bO as the aggregated signal of
the classiﬁcation neuron sO = W OhT + bO before the classiﬁcation neuron predicts a
number ˆσθ ∈[0, 1] computed from the sigmoid activation function
ˆσθ ≡
1
1 + exp(−sO),
(4)
where we denote the set of all parameters in this RNN that inﬂuences the value of this
last neuron as θ ≡{b, W I, W H, W O, bO}.
To train the model, one adjusts parameters θ ≡{b, W I, W H, W O, bO} to minimize
the cost (loss) function C which accumulates the amount of mismatches between the true
sentiment σ(wm) associated with the mth sequence wm ≡w1:T,m = (w1, w2, . . . , wT)m
and the RNNs’ sentiment prediction ˆσθ(wm), for all sequences in the training sample
m ∈{1, . . . , M}. For a binary classiﬁcation task with the probabilistic prediction given
by (4), the cost function is typically taken as the binary cross-entropy
C ≡1
M
M
X
m=1

σ(wm) log [ˆσθ(wm)] + (1 −σ(wm)) log [1 −ˆσθ(wm)]

.
(5)
In a movie review task, for example, M can be the number of written reviews with
predetermined sentiments from M diﬀerent reviewers that encapsulates a reasonable
relationship between word sequences and their associated sentiments.
Note that minimizing the cross-entropy C ≡HRNNθ (P) between the empirical
distribution P(σ|w1:T) constructed from the training data and the distribution predicted
by the RNN parametrized by θ, denoted by RNNθ(σ|w1:T), is equivalent to minimizing
the KL divergence DKL (P || RNNθ) [27, 28].
Since the KL divergence reﬂects the
dissimilarity between the two distributions, the optimization (minimization) procedure
of the cost function (5) would search for a vanilla RNN parametrized by θ∗that estimates
well the empirical distribution P(σ|w1:T). Provided the training data is properly curated
and the optimization procedure (e.g., gradient methods and their modern variants
[26, 5]) is reliable, one shall arrive at a reasonable statistical relationship between a
long sequence of words and its associated sentiment parametrized by an RNN with a
ﬁnite number of parameters θ∗. In other words,
P(σ|w1:T) ≈RNNθ∗(σ|w1:T).
(6)
This is the main philosophy behind statistical language modeling using recurrent neural
networks.
2.2. On the word vector embedding Φ
Suppose one randomly assigns or ‘tokenizes’ each word with a unique integer wi ∈
{1, . . . , N}, where 1 ≤i ≤N with N being the size of the dictionary.
Then each
written review is represented by a sequence of integers w1:T = (w1, ..., wT). Here, the
length of each review is forced to be T, by padding 0’s at the beginning of the review
if its length is less than T, or by selecting only the ﬁrst T words if its length is greater
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
8
than T. For example, for T = 6, the sentence ‘Physics is beautiful’ can be encoded
as w1:T = (0, 0, 0, 532, 3, 46), where ‘Physics’= 532, ‘is’= 3, and ‘beautiful’= 46. The
tokenization process, however, artiﬁcially introduces the notion of distance between two
words that does not encode word semantics.
How shall one mathematically represent words so that their semantics are encoded?
A widely-adopted solution is to embed a word w as a vector Φ(w) ∈RdI. By representing
a word as a vector embedded in dI dimensions, words with similar meanings that
co-occur frequently in the same context can be assigned unique vectors such that
their pairwise Euclidean distance are small. Also, a negative cosine similarity of the
embeddings of the two words wa, wb computed from
sim (Φ(wa), Φ(wb)) =
Φ(wa)
||Φ(wa)||2
·
Φ(wb)
||Φ(wb)||2
(7)
can signify that wa and wb rarely co-occur in the same context, and hence could have
opposite meanings.
There are a few methods to numerically obtain an embedding Φ that eﬀectively
represents word semantics [24, 25, 29]. A simple yet classic Word2vec method [24], which
is also adopted in our numerical experiments, is to assign the embedding function Φ as a
matrix of size dI × N, so that the ith column of Φ corresponds to the word vector Φ(wi)
of the word wi. The embedding dimension dI is a hyper-parameter that can be tuned to
best suit the problem. The matrix elements in Φ are treated as variational parameters
to be optimized along with the optimization of the RNN for a language modeling task
of interests. For example, to perform a sentiment analysis using a vanilla RNN without
knowing a priori the embedding matrix, one would add the matrix elements of Φ into
the trainable parameters ˜θ ≡{θ, Φ} = {b, W I, W H, W O, bO, Φ}. In this way, training
the RNN according to section 2.1 will not only yield the network parameters, but also
the word vector embedding. With a suﬃciently large and well curated training data set,
one expects that the embedding matrix Φ would eﬀectively encapsulate word semantics
in the dictionary of interests.
Despite the empirical success of statistical language modeling using vanilla RNNs
together with the well-trained word embedding as explained above, highly-nonlinear
iterations of (3) by standard activation functions render the analysis of how RNNs
approximate empirical sequence distributions very challenging.
In the following, we
review recent attempts to analyze the expressiveness of RNNs (i.e. the set of function
that can be eﬀectively parametrized by RNNs) with a speciﬁc activation function,
through the mapping to their dual the tensor network counterparts.
2.3. Recurrent Arithmetic Circuit (RAC) and the mapping to Matrix Product State
(MPS)
Consider the activation function deﬁned by the Hadamard product
fRAC(a, b) = a ⊙b,
(8)
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
9
WH
fRAC(a, b)
WH
WH
WI
WI
WI
Φ(w1)
Φ(w2)
Φ(wT)
h0
…
fRAC(a, b) = a ⊙b
fRAC(a, b)
fRAC(a, b)
A
A
A
h0
…
Φ(w1)
Φ(w2)
Φ(wT)
δ
WI
WH
≡
χ
χ
χ
χ
64="Nrm/INbjutFXWkQfeWxU1JvlTt4=">A
AB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMQL2E
3iHoMevEY0TwgWULvZDYZMju7zMwKIeQTvH
hQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqbrq7gkRwbVz32
8mtrW9sbuW3Czu7e/sHxcOjpo5TRVmDxiJ
W7QA1E1yhuFGsHaiGEaBYK1gdDvzW09MaR
7LRzNOmB/hQPKQUzRWeijea9YcivuHGSVe
BkpQYZ6r/jV7c0jZg0VKDWHc9NjD9BZTg
VbFropolSEc4YB1LJUZM+5P5qVNyZpU+CW
NlSxoyV39PTDSehwFtjNCM9TL3kz8z+ukJ
rz2J1wmqWGSLhaFqSAmJrO/SZ8rRo0YW4J
UcXsroUNUSI1Np2BD8JZfXiXNasW7rFzcV0
u1myOPJzAKZTBgyuowR3UoQEUBvAMr/DmC
OfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8AivmNUQ=</l
atexit>(a)
(b)
(c)
hT
= hT
A
dI
dI
Figure 2. The graphical representation of the mapping between a single-layer RACs
for sentiment analysis task (a) to the dual MPS (b).
As a fundamental building
block, the translational invariant MPS (without the contraction by boundary vector
h0) consists of the rank-3 tensor Ast
αtαt−1 ≡PdH
˜αt−1,˜st=1 W H
˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜stW I
˜stst, where
the triangle in (c) represents the tensor of rank 3 deﬁned by δjkl which is equal to 1
if j = k = l and is 0 otherwise. The structure of the building block in (c) arises from
the Hadamard product imposed by RAC activation function in (a). Here we denote χ
as the bond dimension of the MPS, which is equal to dH, the number of hidden units
of RACs in (a). The vertical bond in (c) has the dimension dI, identical to that of the
word vector embedding Φ.
which is the element-wise multiplication f (i)
RAC(a, b) ≡a(i) · b(i).
Recurrent neural
networks with RAC activation function, known as Recurrent Arithmetic Circuits
(RACs), have recently received increasing attention and share computational paradigm
similar to the Multiplicative Recurrent Neural Networks [30, 31, 32, 33].
More
importantly, references [15, 14] show that a single-layer RAC can be mapped to the
dual Matrix Product State (MPS), taking the inspiration from the Tensor Train (TT)
decomposition of [34].
By studying RACs, the analysis of learning in RNNs for
temporal data can thus be performed from many-body quantum physics perspectives.
For instance, one can compute the entanglement entropy of the dual MPS, which is a
measure of the amount of temporal correlation that can be supported by the network
[15, 14].
The larger the entanglement entropy means that the output of network
computation crucially depends on the temporal data in the further past, enabling the
network to have a longer-range memory.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
10
The tensor network diagrams in ﬁgure 2 summarize the equivalence between the
computation of the standard RNNs-based sentiment analysis with RAC activation
function and that of the dual matrix product state. By deﬁning the tensor of rank
3 of the form
Ast
αtαt−1 ≡
dH
X
˜αt−1,˜st=1
W H
˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜stW I
˜stst,
(9)
where δjkl is 1 if j = k = l and is 0 otherwise, the state evolution by one time step
can be computed by the tensor contraction between the hidden vector ht−1, the tensor
Ast
αtαt−1, and the input word vector Φ(wt), resulting in the tensor of rank 1 describing
the hidden vector of the next time step whose component αt is given by
h(αt)
t
=
dH
X
αt−1=1
dI
X
st=1
h(αt−1)
t−1
Ast
αtαt−1Φ(st)(wt)
=
dH
X
˜αt−1,˜st=1
dH
X
αt−1=1
dI
X
st=1

W H
˜αt−1αt−1h(αt−1)
t−1

δαt ˜αt−1˜st

W I
˜ststΦ(st)(wt)

=
 W Hht−1
(αt) ·
 W IΦ(wt)
(αt)
= f (αt)
RAC(W Hht−1, W IΦ(wt)).
Therefore, given a sequence (Φ(w1), . . . , Φ(wT)) and the initialization of the hidden
vector h0 with dimension dH, the output hidden vector at time T can be computed from
the contraction between the translational invariant MPS
ΨsT ...s2s1
αT α0
≡
dH
X
α1,α2,...,αT −1=1
AsT
αT αT −1 · · · As2
α2α1As1
α1α0,
(10)
the tensor of rank T constructed from the input sequence
ΦsT ...s2s1 ≡Φ(sT )(wT) · · · Φ(s2)(w2)Φ(s1)(w1),
(11)
and the initial hidden vector h0 as follows
h(αT )
T
=
dH
X
α0=1
dI
X
s1,s2,...,sT =1
(ΦsT ...s2s1)
 ΨsT ...s2s1
αT α0

h(α0)
0
.
(12)
The last equality is compactly represented by the standard tensor network graphical
notation as shown in ﬁgure 2(b), whose building block is the tensor A of (9) represented
graphically in ﬁgure 2(c). For sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation, the ﬁnal
contraction (12) will then be used to compute the probability that the input sequence
w1:T has a positive sentiment through the usual sigmoid activation function as in (4).
Note that, in many-body quantum physics language, the dimension of the hidden unit
dH is in fact the bond dimension χ ≡dH of the MPS.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
11
2.4. Entanglement entropy of the MPS as a proxy for information propagation in RAC
Since the fundamental building block of the computation is the translational invariant
MPS, we can compute the entanglement entropy (EE) by partitioning the MPS into two
subsystems through the standard Schmidt-decomposition, and compute the resulting
von-Neumann entropy [35]. However, the MPS in (10) still has an open boundary. To
make the boundary close and properly compute the EE, one needs to contract the indices
α0, and αT by vectors of dimension χ = dH. In the limit T ≫1, this choice of vectors
should not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the EE if the partition is made at half of the chain. The
details on an appropriate choice of vectors for contraction to close the boundary in our
numerical experiments will be discussed in the following section. Suppose now that the
contraction has been properly made and the MPS with a close boundary is given by
˜ΨsT ...s2s1, then the corresponding quantum state of the MPS is
|˜Ψ⟩MPS =
dI
X
s1,...,sT =1
˜ΨsT ...s2s1|sT⟩⊗. . . ⊗|s2⟩⊗|s1⟩,
(13)
which has the Schmidt decomposition (singular value decomposition) for the bipartition
at the ⌈T/2⌉th bond into the left and right sectors as
|˜Ψ⟩MPS =
r
X
i=1
λi
φL
i

⊗
φR
i

,
(14)
where the Schmidt coeﬃcients λi’s are the real, non-negative singular values satisfying
Pr
i=1 λ2
i = 1, and r is the Schmidt rank (Schmidt number). The Schmidt rank r is 1
only for a product state and is greater than 1 when a state has the two subsystems that
are entangled.
The von-Neumann (entanglement) entropy is a well-deﬁned measure of entangle-
ment between the two subsystems and can be calculated as
S = −
r
X
i=1
λ2
i log2 λ2
i .
(15)
Importantly, this entanglement entropy, when translated into the recurrent neural
network language, can quantify the amount of temporal correlation between the signal
in the earlier times {h1, . . . , h⌈T/2⌉} and the signal in the later times {h⌈T/2⌉+1, . . . , hT},
also known as Start-End separation rank [36, 14]. If the entanglement entropy is zero, the
signals in the earlier and the later times are statistically independent. The prediction
task from models with vanishing EE thus has a short-term memory, neglecting the
knowledge in the past t < ⌈T/2⌉. One then would expect the models with larger EE
to be more desirable in encapsulating long-range sequence correlations. We shall then
intuitively interpret the EE computed from (15) as the proxy for information propagation
in the RACs networks. RACs that possess low EE might have a low expressiveness
(high bias in statistical learning theory framework), and thus are unable to eﬃciently
approximate data distribution with long-range statistical correlations.
It’s well known that an MPS obeys the area law of entanglement entropy, which
constrains the upper bound on EE as S = O(log2(χ)) [37]. In fact, the state with the
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
12
maximum entropy in (15) is attained with the value log2(χ) when all the Schmidt
coeﬃcients are identically 1/√χ with the Schmidt rank r = χ.‡
Since the upper
bound is independent of the system size T, temporal data with long-range statistical
correlation might not be eﬃciently approximated by an MPS (or, equivalently, single-
layer RACs) variational ansatz. This result seems to warrant a no-go statement for
using MPS to model sequential data with long-range correlation. Alternative models
that can incorporate long-range correlation, such as Deep RACs, have been theoretically
analyzed, though no experimental results on these network performance on realistic
temporal data sets have been reported [14, 15, 36].
However, thus far, the analysis on the expressive power of single-layer RACs
concerns only that of the recurrent units, not of the combined system that includes
a representation Φ of the input embedding.
In practice, even in simple RNNs,
incorporating trainable word embedding function Φ into the model can tremendously
increase the prediction accuracy. In the following section, we shall investigate, in realistic
sequence modeling settings, whether low EE of models alone suﬃces to enforce a no-go
theorem for such models. The answer is an aﬃrmative no, and single-layer RACs are
still useful in realistic sequence modeling tasks.
3. Sentiment analysis by single-layer RACs with an entanglement entropy
below the area law: numerical experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst provide the details of our numerical experiments to analyze the
behaviors of single-layer RACs for sentiment analysis in realistic movie reviews data
sets. Then, we discuss the importance of additive biases in RAC activation function,
and elucidate how to convert RACs with additive biases into MPS for the purpose
of entanglement entropy analysis. We then report the behaviors of single-layer RACs
together with their entanglement entropy.
First, we show that when a pre-trained
word vector embedding Φ is ﬁxed, the prediction accuracies strongly correlate with
the amount of information propagation within RACs as measured by the entanglement
entropy. Interestingly, the high prediction accuracies saturate when the entanglement
entropy saturates, enabling one to determine the minimal model (model with the
smallest bond dimension χ∗that saturates the entanglement entropy) that can best
approximate the statistics of sequential data. This entanglement entropy saturation is
a reﬂection of the convergence of entanglement spectrum to the limiting entanglement
spectrum that we numerically report. Second, when the embedding layer is trained along
with RACs, there is an intriguing interplay between RACs and the embedding layer such
that, even when the entanglement entropy drops, the prediction accuracy is boosted.
Contrary to a common belief that long-range information propagation in the network
is the main source of RNN’s expressiveness, we show that, when the bond dimension is
large, RACs harness its high expressiveness from meaningful word embeddings.
‡ The discrete distribution Pi that maximizes the Shannon’s entropy −Pm
i=1 Pi log2 Pi is the uniform
distribution Pi = 1/m.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
13
3.1. Details of the numerical experiments
In the main text, we use the IMDb movies and critic reviews data set, which is one of the
standard data sets for sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation [38]. The training
set and the test set contain M = 40,000 and 10,000 diﬀerent samples respectively. Both
sets are approximately balanced: the ratio of positive to negative reviews in the training
and the test set are given by, respectively, 20,027:19,973 and 4,913:5,027. The length of
each review is set to T = 50 and the dictionary size is N = 10, 000. We also perform
sentiment analysis on the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) data set using the same methodology
which leads to similar conclusions as the ones presented in this section. The details and
the results for RT data sets are shown in the Appendix.
To train the model, we implement single-layer RACs using Keras [39] which is a
high-level API of TensorFlow. Batch training is deployed with 200 epochs with the
batch size of 128. An early stopping is applied to terminate the training process if the
change in the cost function after 4 epochs is smaller than 0.001. The cost function is
optimized using Adam optimizer. The optimization process is repeated 50 times, each
with a random initialization of the variational parameters, and the averaged prediction
accuracies for the training and the test data set are obtained for each number of hidden
neurons dH.
3.2. Entanglement entropy of single-layer RACs with additive biases
It is important to note that for RACs not to suﬀer from the vanishing or exploding
gradient problem during model training§, we found that it is crucial to add trainable
bias vectors bH, bI ∈Rχ to the aggregated inputs of the RAC activation function. In
particular, to achieve model trainability in practice requires the time evolution of the
form ht ≡fRAC(W IΦ(wt) + bI, W Hht−1 + bH). Fortunately, recasting the recurrent
computation with additive bias vectors as the MPS structure only requires a minor
modiﬁcation to the prescriptions in the previous section, which we now discuss.
Deﬁne the new input and hidden weight matrices as
˜W I ≡
"
W I
bI
0 . . . 0
1
#
|
{z
}
dI+1
o
χ + 1,
˜W H ≡
"
W H
bH
0 . . . 0
1
#
|
{z
}
χ+1
o
χ + 1.
(16)
Deﬁne also the new word vector embedding and the new hidden vector
˜Φ(wt) ≡
"
Φ(wt)
1
#
,
˜ht ≡
"
ht
1
#
.
(17)
§ Since RACs iteratively multiply signals, backpropagation during gradient computation can lead to the
iterated product of very small numbers or very large numbers for poorly initialized training parameters,
leading to vanishing or exploding gradients problem respectively. Adding a trainable bias is a way to
control the scale of multiplicative iteration and help mitigate the vanishing or exploding gradients
problem.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
14
Figure 3.
(a) The modiﬁed translational invariant MPS in a close boundary for
calculating the entanglement entropy of RACs with additive biases bI, bH. (b) The
tensor ˜Ast
αtαt−1 is deﬁned according to (20), which consists of the contraction between
δjkl and the modiﬁed weight matrices ˜W H, ˜W I of (16).
These deﬁnitions give
˜W I ˜Φ(wt) =
"
W IΦ(wt) + bI
1
#
,
˜W H ˜ht =
"
W Hht + bH
1
#
.
(18)
Therefore,
˜ht =

˜W H ˜ht−1

⊙

˜W I ˜Φ(wt)

=
"
fRAC(W Hht−1 + bH, W IΦ(wt) + bI)
1
#
.(19)
The last equality states that the time evolution from RAC with the bias vectors of the
original problem can be encoded into the time evolution from standard RAC (without
additive biases) in one higher dimension, resulting in the translational invariant MPS
with the following tensor as a building block
˜Ast
αtαt−1 ≡
χ+1
X
˜αt−1,˜st=1
˜W H
˜αt−1αt−1δαt ˜αt−1˜st ˜W I
˜stst,
(20)
where the input index st now takes the value from {1, . . . , χ + 1}.
After we obtain all the variational parameters including bI, bH at the end of a
training procedure with Adam optimizer, ˜Ast
αtαt−1 that deﬁnes the MPS/TT with an
open boundary can be constructed. The entanglement entropy is computed according
to section 2.4, where we close the left and the right boundary by the contraction with
the boundary vectors ˜ωL, ˜ωR ∈Rχ+1 deﬁned by
˜ωL ≡˜h0 =
"
0
1
#
,
˜ωR ≡
"
1
1
#
.
(21)
˜ωL is chosen as the left boundary vector because the initial hidden vector h0 fed into
vanilla RNNs is typically chosen to be a zero vector, whereas ˜ωR is chosen as the right
boundary vector to ensure that all the output components are taken into account. But,
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
15
Figure 4. The behaviors of trained RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis
of the IMDb data set, when the ﬁxed pre-trained word embedding has dimension
dI = 4.
(Left) the prediction accuracies saturate when the entanglement entropy
(EE) saturates. The critical bond dimension χ∗≈20, at which the EE is maximal,
enables one to infer a minimal single-layer RACs model for IMDb sentiment analysis.
The average maximum entanglement entropy ¯Smax, which is below the upper bound
from the area law, is attained when χ ≳χ∗.
(Right) above the critical bond
dimension, the Schmidt coeﬃcients collapse onto the limiting entanglement spectrum
¯λ∗i that sets the slowest exponential decay rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients.
Here,
the average maximum Schmidt coeﬃcients for χ = 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 are ¯λmax(χ) ≈
0.75, 0.63, 0.58, 0.51, 0.51, 0.52, respectively.
The average are taken over 50 trained
models; each begins with a random initialization of RACs with additive biases. The
error bars for λi are not shown for the clarity of presentation.
in the large T limit, these choices should not signiﬁcantly change the entanglement
entropy when the bipartition is taken at the bond ⌈T/2⌉, which are far away from the
boundary.
3.3. RACs with a pre-trained embedding layer
To isolate the interaction between RACs and the embedding layer, we pre-train the word
embedding Φ (recall section 2.2) independently from RACs. First, we train Φ on the
IMDb training data with a ﬂatten layer publicly available in Keras, while the output
is still the sigmoid function discussed earlier. The ﬂatten layer contains no trainable
parameters and as a result the classiﬁcation accuracy is optimized based solely on the
trainable word embedding. After we train the embedding layer for 100 epochs with
the early stopping criterion explained in section 3.1, we arrive at a pre-trained Φ that
is not speciﬁcally optimized for RACs, thereby isolating the expressiveness that could
arise from the interaction between RACs and the embedding layer. After we obtain
this pre-trained embedding layer Φ, Φ is ﬁxed and training optimizes only weights and
biases of RACs.
Figure
5 (left) shows the prediction accuracies and the entanglement entropy
as a function of the bond dimension χ for embedding dimension dI = 4. It can be
seen that from bond dimension 1 to approximately 20, the training accuracy increases
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
16
monotonically from 87.1% to 91.5% while the test accuracy increases from 84.7% to
86.3%.
Both quantities saturate at χ ≈20 ≡χ∗.
The entanglement entropy also
increases rapidly before the onset of the accuracy saturation, then for χ > χ∗it saturates
at the (average) maximum value of ¯Smax ≈2.53. The results suggest a critical model
size χ∗such that RACs expressiveness is maximal. Above this critical size both the
prediction accuracies and the entanglement entropy saturate. For practical purposes,
this critical size χ∗is valuable for identifying a minimal single-layer RACs model that
can best estimate the statistics of IMDb training data set.
For the IMDb data set, the minimal model size for single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed
pre-trained embedding with dI = 4 is χ∗≈20. We also observe similar behaviors on the
saturation of prediction accuracies that correspond to the saturation of entanglement
entropy for larger pre-trained embeddings with dI = 8, 16, 32 with the average maximum
entanglement entropy of ¯Smax ≈3.87, 4.86, 5.09, respectively.
For larger embedding
dimensions, not only the maximum entanglement entropy increases, the critical bond
dimensions and the saturated prediction accuracies also increase (not shown here due
to redundancy of the plots.) These results are not speciﬁc to the IMDb data set, as
we observe similar trends in single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed pre-trained embedding in a
smaller RT movie review data set as well. The results for the RT data set is provided
in the Appendix∥.
To understand how the entanglement entropy becomes saturated above a critical
bond dimension χ∗, we investigate the behaviors of the average Schmidt coeﬃcients for
the model size from χ = 5 to χ = 40. Interestingly, ﬁgure 5(right) reveals that above
the critical model size, the larger values of the entanglement spectrum (the function
deﬁned by the Schmidt coeﬃcients indexed in a descending order) all collapse onto a
limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗
i , which exhibits the slowest possible exponential decay
rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients.Thus this limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗
i deﬁnes the
average maximum entanglement entropy achievable by our MPS ansatz for this data
set, whose value is given by
¯Smax = −
χ∗
X
i=1
¯λ∗2
i log2 ¯λ∗2
i .
(22)
This unique explainability of RACs allows us to infer a minimal recurrent neural
networks-based model with the minimal number of hidden neurons d∗
H + 1 = χ∗for a
given task, which is not possible with standard RNNs. From statistical learning theory
point of view, the limiting function ¯λ∗i determines the bias (in the bias-variance tradeoﬀ
sense) of single-layer RACs, which constrains the information propagation capacity as
measured by the average maximum entanglement entropy (22). It is interesting to note
that the maximum entanglement entropy is below the upper bound from the area law
of log2(χ), as ¯Smax ≈1.17 < 4.32 ≈log2(χ = 20). Hence, a realistic sequence modeling
task such as sentiment analysis can still achieve high prediction accuracies using easily
∥For the embedding dimension 4, the critical bond dimension for RT movie data set is χ∗≈40, beyond
which the entanglement entropy very slowly increases and plateaus out at the maximum value of 1.
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
17
Figure 5. The behaviors of RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis of the
IMDb data set, when the word embedding of dimension dI = 4 is trained together
with RACs. (Left) the prediction accuracies slowly increase when the entanglement
entropy (EE) drops down from the maximum value ¯Smax ≈1.17 at χ ≈5 to the
saturated value 0.8 ¯Smax at χ ≈20, after which the accuracies also saturate.
The
saturated EE here is much smaller than that of the ﬁxed embedding case, suggesting
that the expressivity is harnessed from a more meaningful representation Φ. (Right)
The cosine similarity between the two word embedding computed from (7) reveals
that indeed the expressivity is boosted via meaningful word embeddings, which arise
in larger single-layer RACs.
trainable RACs, even when the maximum information propagation is bounded above.
In fact, the embedding layer Φ plays a crucial role in attaining high expressive power,
as we show next.
3.4. The interplay between RACs and the word embedding
To analyze the interplay between the recurrent units in RACs and the embedding layer
Φ, we now train both components simultaneously. The prediction accuracy and the
entanglement entropy as a function of the bond dimension is depicted in ﬁgure 5(left).
It can be seen that the training and the test accuracy rapidly increases to 98.3% and
90%, respectively, at χ = 5. The training accuracy then saturates and ﬂuctuates mildly
around 98.5% for χ > 5, while the test accuracy slowly increases for χ ∈[5, 20], after
which it saturates at around 90.5% accuracy. Despite being simple, our model is ranked
21 (out of 35) in top-performing models (measured by test accuracy) for IMDb sentiment
analysis [40].
The best performing model [41] achieving the test accuracy of 97.2%
also uses simple neural network architecture but with the improved quality of the word
embeddings. Interestingly, unlike in the ﬁxed word embedding case where the maximum
of entanglement entropy (EE) is attained at its saturation, here the EE attains its
maximum at χ ≈5 at the value of ¯Smax ≈1.17 before dropping down and saturating
at 0.8 ¯Smax when χ ≈20, after which it ﬂuctuates mildly around the saturated value.
Although the EE drops after its peak value, the prediction accuracies counter-
intuitively increase. Also, compared to the ﬁxed embedding case, ¯Smax here is smaller
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
18
and the prediction accuracies, especially the training accuracy, are higher.
These
behaviors also arise in larger word embedding size of dI = 8, 16, 32, though the maximum
entanglement entropy at the peak are larger and occurs at a larger bond dimension for a
larger model (The plots are not shown here due to redundancy). The larger model also
attains higher saturated prediction accuracies. These results suggest that information
propagation or long-range temporal correlation in sequence modeling is not the main
source of expressiveness in estimating the distribution P(σ|w1:T) in sentiment analysis
tasks. In fact, the drop in the EE as the accuracies increase suggests that single-layer
RACs must have gained the expressivity through the word embedding Φ.
To test the hypothesis, we plot the cosine similarity (7) between embedding vectors
of two opposite words that most frequently appear and tends to have a strong inﬂuence
on the review sentiment, i.e. ‘boring’ and ‘interesting’, ‘worst’ and ‘best’, depicted in
ﬁgure 5(right). We see that the cosine similarity drops monotonically with the bond
dimension and saturates at χ ≈5. This might suggest that for χ < 5, the prediction
accuracy stems mostly from the temporal correlation in RACs, while at χ ≥5, the
word embedding layer better learns word semantics and start to contribute to higher
prediction accuracy.
4. Discussion and outlook
We have recasted single-layer recurrent arithmetic circuits (RACs) with additive biases
as the dual matrix product states for the entanglement entropy analysis of a real-world
sequence modeling task, the sentiment analysis of large realistic movie review data
sets. The results elucidate that, although the entanglement entropy of the models is
bounded above, single-layer RACs can harness their expressive power from trainable
word embedding Φ, achieving considerably high prediction accuracies.
Even for a
ﬁxed word embedding, single-layer RACs can already achieve high prediction accuracies
that saturate when the entanglement entropy saturates at its maximum value ¯Smax.
This ¯Smax allows one to identify the minimal bond dimension χ∗that RACs can best
approximate the sentiment distribution of data sequence P(σ|w1:T). This ¯Smax is also
below the upper bound of the area law for entanglement entropy of a matrix product
state.
Therefore, for sentiment analysis tasks, a low entanglement entropy is not a
warrant to disregard simple yet easily trainable models such as single-layer RACs.
Importantly, the crucial interplay between information propagation in the recurrent
networks (as reﬂected by the entanglement entropy) and the meaningful word embedding
Φ enables single-layer RACs to very well estimate the sentiment distribution of word
sequence P(σ|w1:T). Our analysis also quantitatively reveals the nature of movie review
sentiment analysis that NLP practitioners are intuitively aware of; reading only a few
statements that contain meaningful keywords might be an eﬃcient strategy to correctly
classify the sentiment of a long review.
Despite the simplicity of our single-layer architecture with low-dimensional word
embeddings, we still achieve the test accuracy of 90.5% for the sentiment analysis of the
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
19
IMDb data set, placing our minimal model in the list of top-performing models [40].
Some top-performing models utilize powerful modern neural network architectures
such as graph neural networks [42] or transformers [43, 44].
All of which still lack
explainability.
It is interesting to note that some simple models, such as classic
LSTM architectures (with high quality word embeddings) [45, 46], are also in the top-
performing list. Remarkably, the best performing model utilizes a very simple neural
architecture with the emphasis on constructing highest quality word embeddings [41].
This observation agrees with our quantitative evidence that long-range information
propagation is not the main source for RNNs’ successes in sentiment analysis, but high
model expressiveness can be attained from the subtle interplay between the information
propagation and the quality of word vector embeddings.
It would be interesting to generalize the current analysis to deep (multi-layer)
RACs models [36] to see the interplay between long-range information propagation in
the recurrent networks and the meaningful word embedding in other realistic natural
language processing tasks, such as sequence to sequence modeling. Perhaps one could
also ﬁnd a minimal deep RACs model that reproduces the power-law decay in the mutual
information between characters, which is a feature of classical English texts [47, 48].
Recently, variants of standard many-body quantum states have been analyzed as highly
expressive variational ansatz to estimate probability distribution [13, 19, 49]; it’d also be
interesting to implement such models for realistic natural language processing tasks and
investigate how word embedding could help boost models prediction accuracy. Lastly,
regarding the limiting entanglement spectrum that sets the maximum entanglement
entropy of single-layer RACs, theoretical understanding of such entanglement spectrum
may hint at the minimum bias (in the bias-variance tradeoﬀsense) attainable by RACs
to estimate a data distribution, which could provide a guideline to systematically
study the expressive power of recurrent neural networks from statistical learning theory
viewpoints.
Acknowledgments
This research has received funding support from the National Science, Research and
Innovation Fund (NSRF) via the Program Management Unit for Human Resources
& Institutional Development, Research and Innovation [grant number B05F640051],
and from Thailand Science Research and Innovation Fund Chulalongkorn University
[CU FRB65 ind (5) 110 23 40].
J.Tangpanitanon, and P. Bhadola are supported by
Blueqat Inc.
We acknowledge the National Science and Technology Development
Agency, National e-Science Infrastructure Consortium, Chulalongkorn University and
the Chulalongkorn Academic Advancement into Its 2nd Century Project (Thailand) for
providing computing infrastructure that has contributed to the research results reported
within this paper (URL:www.e-science.in.th.) We also thank V. Ngampruetikorn for a
useful discussion, A. T. Rutherford and C. Polpanumas for providing helpful feedbacks
on the manuscript, and K. Phornsiricharoenphant for providing technical supports on
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
20
computational hardware used in this work.
References
[1] Verstraete F and Cirac J I 2006 Phys. Rev. B 73(9) 094423 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevB.73.094423
[2] Verstraete F and Cirac I 2004 Renormalization algorithms for quantum-many body systems in two
and higher dimensions
[3] Vidal G 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(22) 220405 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.99.220405
[4] Orus R 2019 Nature Reviews Physics 1 538–550 (Preprint 1812.04011)
[5] Goodfellow I J, Bengio Y and Courville A 2016 Deep Learning (Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press)
http://www.deeplearningbook.org
[6] Melko R G, Carleo G, Carrasquilla J and Cirac J I 2019 Nature Physics 15 887–892 URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-019-0545-1
[7] Torlai G and Melko R G 2020 Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11 325–344 (Preprint
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031119-050651) URL https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031119-050651
[8] Carleo G and Troyer M 2017 Science 355 602–606
[9] Carrasquilla J and Melko R G 2017 Nature Physics 13 431–434 URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
nphys4035
[10] Stoudenmire E and Schwab D J 2016 Supervised learning with tensor networks Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems vol 29 ed Lee D, Sugiyama M, Luxburg U, Guyon
I and Garnett R (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2016/file/5314b9674c86e3f9d1ba25ef9bb32895-Paper.pdf
[11] Stoudenmire E 2018 Quantum Science and Technology 3
[12] Liu D, Ran S J, Wittek P, Peng C, Garcia R B, Su G and Lewenstein M 2019 New Journal of
Physics 21 073059 (Preprint 1710.04833)
[13] Glasser I, Pancotti N and Cirac J I 2020 IEEE Access 8 68169–68182
[14] Levine Y, Sharir O, Cohen N and Shashua A 2019 Physical Review Letters 122 ISSN 0031-9007
[15] Levine Y, Yakira D, Cohen N and Shashua A 2018 Deep learning and quantum entanglement:
Fundamental connections with implications to network design 6th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018,
Conference Track Proceedings (OpenReview.net) URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
SywXXwJAb
[16] Wolf M M, Verstraete F, Hastings M B and Cirac J I 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(7) 070502 URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.070502
[17] Bradley T D, Stoudenmire E M and Terilla J 2020 Machine Learning: Science and Technology 1
035008
[18] Stokes J and Terilla J 2019 Entropy 21 1236 (Preprint 1902.06888)
[19] Miller J, Rabusseau G and Terilla J 2021 Tensor networks for probabilistic sequence modeling
Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 130) ed Banerjee A and Fukumizu K (PMLR)
pp 3079–3087 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/miller21a.html
[20] Guo C, Jie Z, Lu W and Poletti D 2018 Physical Review E 98 042114 ISSN 2470-0045 (Preprint
1803.10908)
[21] Zhang L, Zhang P, Ma X, Gu S, Su Z and Song D 2019 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 33 7450–7458 URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/
view/4735
[22] Jurafsky D and Martin J H 2009 Speech and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (USA: Prentice-
Hall, Inc.) ISBN 0131873210
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
21
[23] 1989 The Oxford English Dictionary 2nd ed (Oxford University Press)
[24] Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado G S and Dean J 2013 Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems vol 26 ed Burges C J C, Bottou L, Welling M, Ghahramani Z and Weinberger
K Q (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/file/
9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf
[25] Pennington J, Socher R and Manning C D 2014 Glove: Global vectors for word representation
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP 2014, October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest
Group of the ACL ed Moschitti A, Pang B and Daelemans W (ACL) pp 1532–1543 URL
https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/d14-1162
[26] Mehta P, Bukov M, Wang C H, Day A G, Richardson C, Fisher C K and Schwab D J
2019 Physics Reports 810 1–124 ISSN 0370-1573 a high-bias, low-variance introduction to
Machine Learning for physicists URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0370157319300766
[27] Murphy K P 2013 Machine learning : a probabilistic perspective (Cambridge, Mass. [u.a.]: MIT
Press)
[28] Bishop C M 2007 Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics)
(Springer) ISBN 0387310738
[29] Peters M E, Neumann M, Iyyer M, Gardner M, Clark C, Lee K and Zettlemoyer L 2018 Deep
contextualized word representations Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) (New Orleans, Louisiana: Association for Computational Linguistics)
pp 2227–2237 URL https://aclanthology.org/N18-1202
[30] Wu Y, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Bengio Y and Salakhutdinov R R 2016 On multiplicative integration
with recurrent neural networks Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 ed Lee
D D, Sugiyama M, Luxburg U V, Guyon I and Garnett R (Curran Associates, Inc.) pp 2856–2864
[31] Sutskever I, Martens J and Hinton G E 2011 Generating text with recurrent neural networks ICML
pp 1017–1024 URL https://icml.cc/2011/papers/524_icmlpaper.pdf
[32] Poon H and Domingos P 2011 Sum-product networks:
A new deep architecture 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops) pp 689–690
[33] Delalleau O and Bengio Y 2011 Shallow vs. deep sum-product networks Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems vol 24 ed Shawe-Taylor J, Zemel R, Bartlett P, Pereira F and
Weinberger K Q (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2011/file/8e6b42f1644ecb1327dc03ab345e618b-Paper.pdf
[34] Oseledets I V 2011 SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 33 2295–2317 (Preprint https:
//doi.org/10.1137/090752286) URL https://doi.org/10.1137/090752286
[35] Ekert A and Knight P L 1995 American Journal of Physics 63 415–423 URL https://doi.org/
10.1119/1.17904
[36] Levine Y, Sharir O and Shashua A 2018 Beneﬁts of depth for long-term memory of recurrent
networks URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJ3d2Ax0-
[37] Eisert J, Cramer M and Plenio M B 2010 Rev. Mod. Phys. 82(1) 277–306 URL https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.277
[38] Maas A L, Daly R E, Pham P T, Huang D, Ng A Y and Potts C 2011 Learning word
vectors for sentiment analysis Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Portland, Oregon, USA:
Association for Computational Linguistics) pp 142–150 URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/P11-1015
[39] Chollet F et al. 2015 Keras URL https://github.com/fchollet/keras
[40] Papers with code - imdb benchmark (sentiment analysis) https://paperswithcode.com/sota/
sentiment-analysis-on-imdb accessed: 2022-03-22
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
22
[41] Thongtan T and Phienthrakul T 2019 Sentiment classiﬁcation using document embeddings
trained with cosine similarity Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop (Florence, Italy: Association for
Computational Linguistics) pp 407–414 URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-2057
[42] Haonan L, Huang S H, Ye T and Xiuyan G 2019 Graph star net for generalized multi-task learning
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.12330
[43] Yang Z, Dai Z, Yang Y, Carbonell J, Salakhutdinov R R and Le Q V 2019 Xlnet: Generalized
autoregressive
pretraining
for
language
understanding Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems vol 32 ed Wallach H, Larochelle H, Beygelzimer A, d Alch´e-Buc F, Fox
E and Garnett R (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2019/file/dc6a7e655d7e5840e66733e9ee67cc69-Paper.pdf
[44] Wang S, Fang H, Khabsa M, Mao H and Ma H 2021 Entailment as few-shot learner URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14690
[45] Sachan D S, Zaheer M and Salakhutdinov R 2019 Revisiting lstm networks for semi-supervised text
classiﬁcation via mixed objective function Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19 (AAAI Press) ISBN 978-1-57735-809-1 URL https://doi.org/
10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33016940
[46] Howard J and Ruder S 2018 Universal language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) (Melbourne, Australia: Association for Computational Linguistics) pp 328–339 URL
https://aclanthology.org/P18-1031
[47] Lin H and Tegmark M 2017 Entropy 19 299
[48] Lu S, Kanasz-Nagy M, Kukuljan I and Cirac I 2021 arXiv:2103.06872 (quant-ph)
[49] Glasser I, Sweke R, Pancotti N, Eisert J and Cirac I 2019 Expressive power of tensor-network
factorizations for probabilistic modeling Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
vol 32 (Curran Associates, Inc.) URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
b86e8d03fe992d1b0e19656875ee557c-Paper.pdf
[50] Pang B and Lee L 2005 Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization
with respect to rating scales Proceedings of the ACL
[51] Papers with code - mr benchmark (sentiment analysis) https://paperswithcode.com/sota/
sentiment-analysis-on-mr accessed: 2022-03-22
[52] Wu F, Souza A, Zhang T, Fifty C, Yu T and Weinberger K 2019 Simplifying graph convolutional
networks Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research vol 97) ed Chaudhuri K and Salakhutdinov R (PMLR) pp 6861–6871
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/wu19e.html
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
23
Figure A1. The behaviors of trained RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis
of the Rotten Tomatoes data set, when the ﬁxed pre-trained word embedding has
dimension dI = 4. (Left) the prediction accuracies saturate when the entanglement
entropy (EE) very slowly increases to saturation.
The critical bond dimension
χ∗≈40, after which the EE very slowly increases and eventually saturates, enables
one to infer a minimal single-layer RACs model for this data set.
The average
maximum entanglement entropy ¯Smax, which is below the upper bound from the
area law, is attained when χ ≳χ∗.
(Right) above the critical bond dimension,
the Schmidt coeﬃcients almost collapse onto the limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗i
that sets the slowest exponential decay rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients.
Here, the
average maximum Schmidt coeﬃcients for χ = 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 are ¯λmax(χ) ≈
0.69, 0.48, 0.37, 0.30, 0.28, 0.27, 0.25, respectively. The average are taken over 50 trained
models; each begins with a random initialization of RACs with additive biases. The
error bars for λi are not shown for the clarity of presentation.
Appendix A. Sentiment analysis results for the Rotten Tomatoes movie
review data set
To show that our conclusions apply to other data set, here we report similar results for
sentiment analysis of the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) movie review data set. RT movie review
data set is a smaller standard data set for sentiment analysis using binary classiﬁcation
[50]. The training set and the test set contain M = 8,400 and 2,662 diﬀerent samples
respectively. Both sets are balanced such that each set contains an equal number of
positive and negative reviews. The length of each review is set to T = 20 and the
dictionary size is N = 3, 000. Similar training procedure to those in the main text is
applied. The batch size, however, is set to 32 for this smaller data set.
Figure A1(left) shows the prediction accuracy and the entanglement entropy as
a function of the bond dimension χ for embedding dimension dI = 4.
It can be
seen that from bond dimension 1 to approximately 40, the training accuracy increases
monotonically from 82.2% to 99.3% while the test accuracy drops from 71.8% to 69.1%.
Both quantities saturate at χ ≈40 ≡χ∗. The increase in the training accuracy and the
decrease in the test accuracy as the number of model parameters increases suggests that
the model is overﬁtting, which can perhaps be alleviated by adding Dropout though it’s
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
24
not clear whether RACs with Dropout can be mapped to MPS. On the other hand,
the entanglement entropy increases rapidly before the onset of the prediction accuracy
saturation at χ∗, beyond which it almost plateaus out at large χ. The results suggest
a critical model size χ∗such that RACs expressiveness is maximal. Above this critical
size the prediction accuracies saturate, and the entanglement entropy increases very
slowly or plateaus out. Similar to the IMDb data set, this critical size χ∗is valuable for
identifying a minimal model that can achieve highest training accuracies for this class
of model architecture.
For RT data set, the minimal model size for single-layer RACs with a ﬁxed pre-
trained embedding with dI = 4 is χ∗≈40. We also observe similar behaviors on the
saturation of prediction accuracies that correspond to the saturation of entanglement
entropy for larger pre-trained embeddings with dI = 8, 16, 32 with the average maximum
entanglement entropy of ¯Smax ≈3.90, 4.14, 4.38, respectively.
For larger embedding
dimensions, not only the maximum entanglement entropy increases, the critical bond
dimensions and the saturated prediction accuracies are also larger (not shown here due
to redundancy of the plots.)
Fig. A1(right) reveals that above the critical model size χ∗, the Schmidt coeﬃcients
(indexed in a descending order) are converging towards the limiting ¯λ∗
i , which, similar
to the IMDb data set in the main text, constrains the slowest possible exponential
decay rate of the Schmidt coeﬃcients. This limiting entanglement spectrum ¯λ∗
i should
constrain the average maximum entanglement entropy according to (22) and also deﬁnes
the bias (in the bias-variance tradeoﬀsense) in the RACs architecture for sentiment
analysis modeling.
Similar to the IMDb data set, we also note that the maximum
entanglement entropy is below the upper bound from the area law of log2(χ), as
¯Smax ≈1.20 < 5.32 ≈log2(χ = 40).
To analyze the interplay between RACs and the embedding layer, we now train both
components simultaneously.
The prediction accuracy and the entanglement entropy
as a function of the bond dimension is depicted in Fig.A2(left). It can be seen that
the training accuracy increases monotonically to saturation with a 99.10% accuracy at
χ ≈5, while the test accuracy rapidly increases to 67% at χ = 5 then gradually increases
to saturation with a 70% accuracy at χ ≈20. On the other hand, the entanglement
entropy displays a peak at χ ≈5 before dropping rather steadily to saturation at
≈0.8 ¯Smax at χ ≈20, after which it ﬂuctuates mildly around the saturated value. The
test accuracy in our simple setting is comparable to the last entry in the state-of-the-art
list for Rotten Tomatoes sentiment analysis [51], which achieves 76% test accuracy using
graph convolutional neural network architecture [52].
Similar to IMDb data set in the main text, the EE drops after its peak value, while
the prediction accuracies increase. These behaviors also arise in larger word embedding
sizes, though the maximum entanglement entropy at the peak are larger (dI = 8, 16, 32,
¯Smax ≈1.68, 2.08, 2.51,) and occurs at a larger bond dimension for a larger model (plots
are not shown here due to redundancy.)
The decay in the EE that corresponds to
the increase in the prediction accuracies can be attributed to a more meaningful word
Explainable Natural Language Processing with Matrix Product States
25
Figure A2. The behaviors of RACs with additive biases for sentiment analysis of
the Rotten Tomatoes data set, when the word embedding of dimension dI = 4 is
trained together with RACs. (Left) the prediction accuracies slowly increase when the
entanglement entropy (EE) drops down from the maximum value ¯Smax ≈1.20 at χ ≈5
to the saturated value 0.8 ¯Smax at χ ≈20, after which the accuracies also saturate. The
saturated EE here is much smaller than that of the ﬁxed embedding case, suggesting
that the expressivity is harnessed from a more meaningful representation Φ. (Right)
The cosine similarity between the two word embedding computed from (7) reveals
that indeed the expressivity is boosted via meaningful word embeddings, which arise
in larger single-layer RACs.
embedding Φ, as shown in the cosine similarity plots between embedding vectors of the
two opposite words, depicted in Fig. A2(right).
