Title: DICoE@FinSim-3: Financial Hypernym Detection using Augmented Terms and Distance-based Features
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14906v1
--------------------------------------------------

DICoE@FinSim-3: Financial Hypernym Detection using Augmented Terms and
Distance-based Features
Lefteris Loukas1,2 , Konstantinos Bougiatiotis1 , Manos Fergadiotis1,2 , Dimitris
Mavroeidis1 , Elias Zavitsanos1
1Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications,
National Centre for Scientiﬁc Research “Demokritos”, Greece
2 Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
{eloukas, bogas.ko, mfergadiotis, dmavroeidis, izavits}@iit.demokritos.gr
Abstract
We present the submission of team DICOE for FIN-
SIM-3, the 3rd Shared Task on Learning Seman-
tic Similarities for the Financial Domain. The task
provides a set of terms in the ﬁnancial domain and
requires to classify them into the most relevant hy-
pernym from a ﬁnancial ontology. After augment-
ing the terms with their Investopedia deﬁnitions,
our system employs a Logistic Regression classiﬁer
over ﬁnancial word embeddings and a mix of hand-
crafted and distance-based features. Also, for the
ﬁrst time in this task, we employ different replace-
ment methods for out-of-vocabulary terms, lead-
ing to improved performance.
Finally, we have
also experimented with word representations gen-
erated from various ﬁnancial corpora. Our best-
performing submission ranked 4th on the task’s
leaderboard.
1
Introduction
Taxonomies constitute the backbone of many knowledge rep-
resentation schemas, especially in the context of the Seman-
tic web and ontologies. Such hierarchies model among oth-
ers the hypernymy relation, a signiﬁcant semantic relation be-
tween concepts. It is an asymmetric relation between two
concepts, a hyponym (subordinate) and a hypernym (super-
ordinate), as in “car-vehicle”, where the hyponym necessarily
implies the hypernym, but not vice versa.
In the context of hypernym detection, the shared task
on Learning Semantic Similarities for the Financial Domain
(FINSIM-3) focuses on the evaluation of semantic representa-
tions by assessing the classiﬁcation of a given list of terms
from the ﬁnancial domain against a domain ontology. A list
of carefully selected terms from the ﬁnancial domain is pro-
vided, such as “European depositary receipt”, “Interest rate
swaps”, and others, and the task is to design a system that
can classify them into the most relevant hypernym (or top-
level) concept in an external ontology. The referenced ontol-
ogy is the Financial Industry Business Ontology (FIBO).1 For
1Visit https://spec.edmcouncil.org/ﬁbo/ontology for more infor-
mation.
instance, given the set of concepts “Bonds”, “Unclassiﬁed”,
“Share”, “Loan”, the most relevant hypernym of “European
depositary receipt” is “Share”. Figure 1 illustrates hypernym
examples based on small parts of the FIBO ontology.
Figure 1: Examples of hypernym relations from the FIBO ontology.
Interestingly, “Bond coupon” is a kind of “Bond”, but “Bond option”
is a kind of “Option”.
In this paper, we present our solution to the FINSIM-3 task.
Our system starts by augmenting all given terms with their
Investopedia deﬁnitions. Then, we employ a Logistic Regres-
sion classiﬁer over ﬁnancial word embeddings and a mix of
hand-crafted and distance-based features. Moreover, for the
ﬁrst time in this task, we explore various replacement meth-
ods for out-of-vocabulary (OOV) terms, leading to improved
performance in our experiments. Our best-performing sub-
mission ranked 4th on the task’s leaderboard.
In what follows, Section 2 gives a brief overview of the re-
lated work in the context of the previous FINSIM tasks. Sec-
tion 3 presents the data that are provided in this task. Then,
Section 4 presents our solution to the task, while Section 5
provides empirical evaluation results. Finally, Section 6 sum-
marizes the paper and presents future directions.
2
Related work
Hypernym modeling: Unsupervised hypernym modeling
and classiﬁcation mainly rely on measures assuming a dis-
arXiv:2109.14906v1  [cs.CL]  30 Sep 2021
tributional inclusion. This means that if a term c is seman-
tically narrower than term p, then a number of distributional
features of c should also be included in the feature vector of
p [Lenci and Benotto, 2012]. Similarly, the work in [San-
tus et al., 2014] is based on the distributional informativeness
hypothesis, which assumes that hypernyms tend to be less
informative than hyponyms. Such distributional approaches
rely on vector semantics and represent words as vectors.
Supervised methods are mainly based on word embeddings
to represent words as low dimensional vectors in a latent
space. Hypernym/hyponym pairs are encoded as combina-
tions of two-word vectors, and hypernym relation classiﬁca-
tion is usually performed by training a classiﬁer given the
latter combinations of vectors as input [Baroni et al., 2012;
Roller et al., 2014; Weeds et al., 2014]. Other approaches
rely on pre-extracted taxonomic relation data to create word
embeddings that are later used as input to a Support Vector
Machine (SVM) to learn the hypernym relation [Tuan et al.,
2016; Yu et al., 2015].
In the context of FINSIM-3, we approach the task as a clas-
siﬁcation problem, aiming to classify input terms to their cor-
rect hypernym.
We follow a supervised distributional ap-
proach without explicitly modeling hypernym relations or
other ontological relations.
FINSIM:
The ﬁrst task to propose hypernym categoriza-
tion in the ﬁnancial domain was FINSIM-1 [Maarouf et al.,
2020], having a total tagset of 8 FIBO classes/hypernyms.
The 1st-year winner system [Keswani et al., 2020] combined
rules and a Naive Bayes classiﬁer over word2vec embeddings
[Mikolov et al., 2013], overperforming BERT [Devlin et al.,
2019] embeddings. The runner-up system [Saini, 2020] aug-
mented all terms with their Investopedia deﬁnition and used
a linear SVM over some hand-crafted and bi-gram TF-IDF
features.
One year later, FINSIM-2 [Mansar et al., 2021] held place,
expanding the tagset to 10 ﬁnancial hypernyms. The FINSIM-
2 winners [Chersoni and Huang, 2021] used a Logistic Re-
gression classiﬁer over word embeddings, semantic and string
similarities, along with BERT-derived masking probabilities
to classify each term to a hypernym. The second-place sys-
tem [Pei and Zhang, 2021] also used a Logistic Regression
classiﬁer over ﬁne-tuned word embeddings derived from var-
ious ﬁnancial text corpora.
Our system augments all terms with their Investopedia
deﬁnitions, following [Saini, 2020], and incorporates hand-
crafted and distance-based features. However, in contrast to
previous works, we also experiment with different OOV re-
placement methods for unknown terms to deal with the many
words in the dataset that are not contained in the vocabulary
of the pre-trained word embeddings.
3
Data
In this section, we brieﬂy present the data provided by the
task organizers, which include the training dataset, the FIBO
ontology, the prospectus corpus, and the word embeddings.
Dataset: The dataset consists of one-word or multi-word
concepts from the ﬁnancial domain and their labels.
It is
Table 1: Class distribution in the training set.
Class
Count
Equity Index
286
Regulatory Agency
205
Credit Index
129
Central Securities Depository
107
Debt pricing and yields
58
Bonds
55
Swap
36
Stock Corporation
25
Option
24
Funds
22
Future
19
Credit Events
18
Stocks
17
MMIs
17
Parametric schedules
15
Forward
9
Securities restrictions
8
separated into training and test sets, with the former being
released a month before the test set.
The training set comprises 1050 examples with their corre-
sponding labels. The unique labels are 17 in total, and their
frequencies in the training data are provided in Table 1 in
descending order. The most frequent label is Equity Index,
which appears in 27% of the training examples, while the
rarest labels are Forward and Securities restrictions. Both
of them appear less than 10 times in the training data.
FIBO Ontology: The Financial Industry Business Ontology
(FIBO) is a pioneering effort to formalize the semantics of the
ﬁnancial domain using a large number of ontologies. At the
time of this writing, FIBO is still a work in progress. How-
ever, it already deﬁnes large sets of concepts that are of inter-
est in ﬁnancial business applications and how these concepts
relate to one another.
For each concept, FIBO provides additional textual infor-
mation, including a deﬁnition, a generated description, labels,
titles, and in many cases, a small abstract. We combine the
FIBO textual information with the prospectus corpus (see be-
low) for training custom embeddings. In particular, we tra-
verse the ontologies and concepts related to the labels in the
training set, and we fetch the corresponding textual informa-
tion. This way, we augment the prospectus corpus with ad-
ditional concept-speciﬁc documents from the ontology that
include small snippets, descriptions, and deﬁnitions.
Prospectus corpus: A corpus of documents is also provided
in the English language for training word embeddings. The
corpus has been compiled from various websites, comprising
ﬁnancial prospectuses, and it consists of approximately 14M
tokens. Those ﬁles are given in pdf format. We have used this
corpus and text parts of the FIBO ontology to train custom
word embeddings.
Word embeddings: Finally, two sets of pre-trained word em-
beddings are also provided in the context of the task. Both
sets are based on the Word2Vec model and trained in an inter-
nal ﬁnancial corpus by the organizers, which comprises key
investor information documents and ﬁnancial prospectuses.
The difference between the two word embeddings is the num-
ber of dimensions of the vectors and the vocabulary size. The
ﬁrst comprises 100-dimensional vectors and 17328 words,
while the second has 300 dimensions and 34437 words.
4
System description
Our system extends baseline 2, which is a Logistic Regression
classiﬁer over the word2vec embeddings from the FINSIM-3
organizers. Figure 2 illustrates the pipeline of our system. Af-
ter augmenting all terms with their Investopedia deﬁnitions,
we concatenate and scale the OOV-aware embeddings with
the hand-crafted and distance features. We then use a Logis-
tic Regression classiﬁer over these features.
Figure 2: The pipeline of our best system.
In the following subsections, we present how we worked
towards building our pipeline.
4.1
Feature Engineering
First, we created a set of hand-crafted features that are indica-
tive of speciﬁc classes. In order to gain insights on terms that
could be indicative of each class, we did a preliminary error
analysis using the provided baseline 2 system as a predictor.
We devised 7 simple boolean hand-crafted features that de-
noted the existence of a speciﬁc string in the term. These
strings were common in miss-classiﬁed terms of the baseline
model while also being highly indicative of the true class of
the term. For example, the occurrence of the string “Inc.”
was very common in errors of the baseline, while at the same
time, almost all terms having this string belonged to the Stock
Corporation class.
Moreover, speciﬁc classes such as Credit Index have a lot
of upper-case letters or unusual patterns. To capture these
intricacies, we have also added 3 features that correspond to
the number of characters in the term, the number of upper-
case letters, and the ratio of upper-case to lower-case letters.
We ended up with 10 such hand-crafted features.
Furthermore, in order to represent the latent space distance
between the terms and the classes, we calculated the cosine
distance between the term’s embedding and each class’ em-
bedding, adding 17 features in total.2 Last but not least, we
calculated the Levenshtein distances between the term and
each class label, adding another 17 features. After concate-
nating all of the features, we scale them to a uniform range of
[-1, 1].
4.2
Out-of-Vocabulary Words
Inside the 1050 training terms, we found at least 214 words
that were out of vocabulary, using the 300-dimensional or-
ganizers’ embeddings. Such words were mainly instances of
credit indexes and regulatory agencies. Since terms contain
a single word or a small number of words, we identiﬁed the
need to deal with OOV occurrences instead of using zero em-
beddings. For example, the word ”asiacorporate” and ”t-bill”
are OOV and they are represented by zero embeddings. Ide-
ally, we would like to match them correctly to the most simi-
lar in-vocabulary words “corporate” and “treasury-bill” in or-
der to retrieve the best vector representations available to help
the classiﬁcation process.
First, we tried replacing each OOV word with its closest
in-vocabulary word in terms of Levenshtein distance, which
helped performance. Then, we replaced this relatively sim-
ple mechanism by utilizing the Magnitude toolkit [Patel et
al., 2018]. Magnitude works as a wrapper for already-trained
word2vec models.
It allows advanced OOV lookup as it
combines different character n-grams, string similarities, and
morphology-aware matching.
4.3
In-domain representations
We use the 300-dimensional embeddings provided by the or-
ganizers for the word vector representations since they per-
form better in the development set than the 100-dimensional
ones.
We also experimented with a wide variety of other domain-
speciﬁc word representations. First, we trained our ﬁnan-
cial word2vec embeddings (d=200) on the prospectus cor-
pus and the FIBO ontology provided. We extracted the text
from the prospectuses PDF ﬁles using the provided pdf-to-
text toolkit3. However, they proved to be less beneﬁcial than
the provided embeddings.
Furthermore, we extracted the embedding layer of FIN-
BERT [Yang et al., 2020], a ﬁnancial BERT, and converted
it to word2vec format. To our surprise, the provided em-
beddings outperformed the FINBERT embeddings. The pro-
vided embeddings also outperformed our custom word2vec
and BERT embeddings, trained on ﬁnancial documents from
the Securities & Exchange Commission.
2The vector representation for multi-token terms/classes is the
sum of each token’s vector representation. We also tried the cen-
troids of the embeddings which reduced the performance.
3Consult https://poppler.freedesktop.org/ for more information.
4.4
Augmentation with Investopedia Terms
During the later stages of our experimentation, we no-
ticed that many of the misclassiﬁcations were attributed to
acronyms (e.g.
”FRN”) or common words being present
(”Long call/put”). In order to alleviate this problem and pro-
vide more context for all terms, we utilized Investopedia4 as a
dictionary of deﬁnitions for each term. To do this, we built a
scrapper that pinpoints the closest match of a given term that
has a deﬁnition in the terms dictionary of the website. The
scrapper ﬁrst tries to ﬁnd exact matches of the query term in
the dictionary of the website. If this fails, we utilize the search
functionality of the site to identify the closest matching term.
Having found a corresponding match (exact or approximate),
we fetch the deﬁnition of the matched term and keep only the
ﬁrst sentence of the deﬁnition, as it usually is in the format:
”[Term] is a ..”, where [Term] denotes the matched term for
the given query term.
This process is followed both for augmenting the initial
training data and the ﬁnal test terms, as it can be easily in-
corporated at inference time. Following the above process,
approximately
70% of both the train and test terms were
augmented. In case the augmentation process did not retrieve
any deﬁnition for a given term (this was common for Credit
Indexes for example), the term was left as is.
4.5
Classiﬁer tuning
Apart from Logistic Regression, we also evaluated a battery
of different classiﬁers implemented in the scikit-learn library,
like the Naive Bayes Classiﬁer, Decision Trees, linear SVMs,
Multi-Layer Perceptron, XGBoost, and RUSBoost [Seiffert et
al., 2008], without any improvement in performance. Indica-
tively, classiﬁers based on trees (Decision Trees, XGBoost,
RUSBoost) scored the lowest, possibly due to the extensive
feature space.
Thus, we chose to continue with the simple -yet powerful-
Logistic Regression classiﬁer, where we tuned the regulariza-
tion strength hyperparameter C. We deﬁned a search space of
{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0}. We found that C=0.1 is
the best option in terms of mean rank and accuracy based on
a stratiﬁed 5-fold cross-validation setting.
5
Experimentation
5.1
Metrics
We evaluate our performance using accuracy, mean rank and
macro-average F1 score, as shown in equations 1, 2 and 3.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(1)
MeanRank = 1
n ∗
n
X
i=1
ranki
(2)
MacroF1 = 1
n ∗
n
X
i=0
F1i
(3)
In the context of the shared task, apart from accuracy, we
also had to generate all labels in ranked order and measure
4https://www.investopedia.com/
Table 2: Experimental results based on stratiﬁed 5-fold cross valida-
tion. Results are shown using a tuned Logistic Regression Classiﬁer
(C=0.1).
Model
Mean Rank
Accuracy
Macro F1
BL
1.196
87.6
80.0
BL.HF
1.166
90.0
82.0
BL.HF.OOVl
1.156
90.5
83.0
BL.HF.OOVl.D
1.148
90.7
84.0
BL.HF.OOVl.D2
1.147
90.8
83.8
BL.HF.OOVm.D2
1.144
91.2
84.1
BL.HF.OOVm.D2.+
1.132
91.5
85.0
the mean rank. For each term xi with a label yi from the n
samples in the test set, the expected prediction is a top-3 list
of labels ranked from most to least likely to be equal to the
ground truth. In equation 2, ranki is the rank of the correct
label in the top-3 prediction list. If the ground truth does not
appear in the top-3 then ranki is equal to 4.
5.2
Results
Table 2 presents the experimental results of our system’s vari-
ations. We used the Logistic Regression classiﬁer in a strat-
iﬁed 5-fold cross-validation setting. Since the training set
is small and imbalanced we selected that setting in order to
ensure that all classes will be represented in each fold. We
provide empirical results using the best hyperparameters af-
ter tuning (see Subsection 4.5). In particular, the following
variations were evaluated:
• BL: The baseline model. Logistic Regression classiﬁer
with the given input embeddings as features.
• BL.HF: BL with additional hand-crafted features (Sub-
section 4.1).
• BL.HF.OOVl: BL.HF plus the Levenhstein-based OOV
words handling (Subsection 4.2).
• BL.HF.OOVl.D: BL.HF.OOVl plus additional features
based on the cosine distance between term and class em-
beddings (Subsection 4.1).
• BL.HF.OOVl.D2: BL.HF.OOVl plus the character dis-
tance between terms and classes (Subsection 4.1).
• BL.HF.OOVm.D2: BL.HF plus the Magnitude-based
OOV words handling (Subsection 4.2). This variation
constitutes the ﬁrst submission of our system (DICOE
1) to the shared task.
• BL.HF.OOVm.D2.+: This is BL.HF.OOVm.D2 using
Investopedia-based augmented terms (Subsection 4.4).
This variation constitutes the second submission of our
system (DICOE 2) to the shared task.
Table 2 shows that incorporating the hand-crafted features
improves the baseline by 2.4% in terms of accuracy. The
mean rank also improves from 1.196 to 1.166, suggesting
that simple substring binary features may indicate the speciﬁc
class of each term. Then, we ﬁrst leverage the Levenshtein
distance to replace each OOV word found in the terms with
its closest in-vocabulary word. This boosts accuracy by 0.5%,
while the mean rank is reduced to 1.156. Thus, handling OOV
words with replacements allows us to retrieve better vector
representations than zero embeddings.
Our next improve-
ment combines the Levenshtein character distance between
the term’s words and the class labels, as well as the cosine
distance between their representations in the latent space, im-
proving accuracy to 90.8% and mean rank to 1.147.
Next, we combine all of the above and replace the
simple Levenshtein OOV mechanism with the Magnitude
toolkit [Patel et al., 2018].
This advanced OOV lookup
method scored 91.2% in terms of accuracy and 1.144 in terms
of mean rank and represents our ﬁrst submission to the FIN-
SIM-3 shared task (see BL.HF.OOVl.D2 in Table 2).
Our ﬁnal system extends the ﬁrst submission by augment-
ing the ﬁnancial terms with their Investopedia deﬁnitions
(Section 4.4) in order to provide more context for the clas-
siﬁcation. This was our best system and scored a 1.132 mean
rank, 91.5% accuracy, and 85.0% Macro F1 Score in the 5-
fold cross validation (see BL.HF.OOVm.D2+ in Table 2).
6
Conclusions and Future Work
We presented DICOE team’s submissions to FINSIM-3. Our
Investopedia-augmented system ranked 4th on the leader-
board. We leveraged hand-crafted and distance-based fea-
tures which led to signiﬁcant improvements over the baseline.
To our surprise, external and modern ﬁnancial word represen-
tations, such as FINBERT, did not contribute positively to the
results. Moreover, for the ﬁrst time in this shared task, we
introduced the application of OOV word replacement meth-
ods. Using OOV replacements, we can successfully retrieve
correct vector representations for unknown tokens that share
the same morphology with in-vocabulary words.
In future work, we plan to investigate other ways of aug-
menting terms with their deﬁnitions and broad context, as
well as creating new external ﬁnancial resources for experi-
mentation. An additional future direction is the direct model-
ing of the hypernym relation using pairs of tokens and labels
to explicitly learn that type of relation.
References
[Baroni et al., 2012] Marco
Baroni,
Raffaella
Bernardi,
Ngoc-Quynh Do, and Chung chieh Shan.
Entailment
above the word level in distributional semantics. In 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (EACL), pages 23–32, Avi-
gnon, France, 2012.
[Chersoni and Huang, 2021] Emmanuele Chersoni and Chu-
Ren Huang. PolyU-CBS at the FinSim-2 Task: Combin-
ing Distributional, String-Based and Transformers-Based
Features for Hypernymy Detection in the Financial Do-
main, page 316–319. New York, NY, USA, 2021.
[Devlin et al., 2019] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Ken-
ton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, June 2019.
[Keswani et al., 2020] Vishal Keswani, Sakshi Singh, and
Ashutosh Modi. IITK at the FinSim task: Hypernym de-
tection in ﬁnancial domain via context-free and contextu-
alized word embeddings. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language
Processing, pages 87–92, Kyoto, Japan, 5 January 2020.
[Lenci and Benotto, 2012] Alessandro
Lenci
and
Giulia
Benotto. Identifying hypernyms in distributional seman-
tic spaces. In SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics, Proceedings of the
Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se-
mEval), pages 75–79, Montreal, Canada, 2012.
[Maarouf et al., 2020] Ismail El Maarouf, Youness Mansar,
Virginie Mouilleron, and Dialekti Valsamou-Stanislawski.
The FinSim 2020 shared task: Learning semantic repre-
sentations for the ﬁnancial domain. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural
Language Processing, pages 81–86, Kyoto, Japan, 5 Jan-
uary 2020.
[Mansar et al., 2021] Youness Mansar, Juyeon Kang, and
Isma¨ıl El Maarouf. The ﬁnsim-2 2021 shared task: Learn-
ing semantic similarities for the ﬁnancial domain. In Jure
Leskovec, Marko Grobelnik, Marc Najork, Jie Tang, and
Leila Zia, editors, Companion of The Web Conference
2021, Virtual Event / Ljubljana, Slovenia, April 19-23,
2021, pages 288–292. ACM / IW3C2, 2021.
[Mikolov et al., 2013] Tom´as Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient estimation of word rep-
resentations in vector space. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann
LeCun, editors, 1st International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2013, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA,
May 2-4, 2013, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2013.
[Patel et al., 2018] Ajay Patel,
Alexander Sands,
Chris
Callison-Burch, and Marianna Apidianaki.
Magnitude:
A fast, efﬁcient universal vector embedding utility pack-
age.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Sys-
tem Demonstrations, pages 120–126, Brussels, Belgium,
November 2018.
[Pei and Zhang, 2021] Yulong Pei and Qian Zhang. GOAT
at the FinSim-2 Task: Learning Word Representations of
Financial Data with Customized Corpus, page 307–310.
New York, NY, USA, 2021.
[Roller et al., 2014] Stephen Roller, Katrin Erk, and Gemma
Boleda. Inclusive yet selective: Supervised distributional
hypernymy detection. In 25th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 1025–1036,
Dublin, Ireland, 2014.
[Saini, 2020] Anuj Saini. Anuj@FINSIM-Learning Seman-
tic Representation of Financial Domain with Investopedia.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Financial Tech-
nology and Natural Language Processing, pages 93–97,
Kyoto, Japan, 5 2020.
[Santus et al., 2014] Enrico Santus, Alessandro Lenci, Qin
Lu, , and Sabine Schulte Im Walde. Chasing hypernyms
in vector spaces with entropy. In 14th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL), pages 38–42, Gothenburg, Sweden,
2014.
[Seiffert et al., 2008] Chris Seiffert, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar,
Jason Van Hulse, and Amri Napolitano. Rusboost: Im-
proving classiﬁcation performance when training data is
skewed. In 2008 19th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition, pages 1–4, 2008.
[Tuan et al., 2016] Luu Anh Tuan, Yi Tay, Siu Cheung Hui,
and See Kiong Ng. Learning term embeddings for tax-
onomic relation identiﬁcation using dynamic weighting
neural network. In In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 403–413,
Austin, Texas, 2016.
[Weeds et al., 2014] Julie Weeds, Daoud Clarke, Jeremy
Refﬁn, David J. Weir, and Bill Keller. Learning to dis-
tinguish hypernyms and co-hyponyms. In 25th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics (COL-
ING), pages 2249–2259, Dublin, Ireland, 2014.
[Yang et al., 2020] Yi Yang, Mark Christopher Siy UY, and
Allen Huang. Finbert: A pretrained language model for
ﬁnancial communications. arXiv, abs/2006.08097, 2020.
[Yu et al., 2015] Zheng Yu, Haixun Wang, Xuemin Lin, and
Min Wang.
Learning term embeddings for hypernymy
identiﬁcation. In 24th International Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 1390–1397, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 2015.
