Title: Modular Mechanistic Networks: On Bridging Mechanistic and Phenomenological Models with Deep Neural Networks in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.09844v2
--------------------------------------------------

Modular Mechanistic Networks: On Bridging
Mechanistic and Phenomenological Models with
Deep Neural Networks in Natural Language
Processing
Simon Dobnik
CLASP and FLOV
University of Gotenburg, Sweden
simon.dobnik@gu.se
John D. Kelleher
ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology
Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland
john.d.kelleher@dit.ie
Abstract
Natural language processing (NLP) can be done using either top-down
(theory driven) and bottom-up (data driven) approaches, which we call mech-
anistic and phenomenological respectively. The approaches are frequently
considered to stand in opposition to each other. Examining some recent ap-
proaches in deep learning we argue that deep neural networks incorporate
both perspectives and, furthermore, that leveraging this aspect of deep learn-
ing may help in solving complex problems within language technology, such
as modelling language and perception in the domain of spatial cognition.
1
Introduction
There are two distinct methodologies to build computational models of language
or of world in general. The ﬁrst approach can be characterised as qualitative, sym-
bolic and driven by domain theory (we will call this a top-down or mechanistic
approach), whereas the second approach may be characterised as quantitative, nu-
meric and driven by data and computational learning theory (we will call this the
bottom-up or phenomenological approach). In this context we are borrowing the
terminology of phenomenological model from the literature on the Philosophy of
Science where the term phenomenological model is sometimes used to describe
models that are independent of theory (see for example [45]), but more generally is
used to describe models that focus on the observable properties (phenomena) of a
domain (rather than explaining the hidden mechanisms relating these phenomena)
1
arXiv:1807.09844v2  [cs.CL]  23 Mar 2019
[21]. For this paper we use the term phenomenological model to characterise mod-
els which are primarily driven by ﬁtting to observable relationships between phe-
nomena in a domain, as represented by correlations between features in a dataset
sampled from the domain; as opposed to models that are derived from a domain
theory of the interactions between domain features. The focus of this paper is to
examine and frame the potentially synergistic relationship between these distinct
analytic methods for natural language processing (NLP) in the light of recent ad-
vances in deep neural networks (DNNs) and deep learning.
In historic terms this discussion is recurrent throughout the history of NLP.
For example, early approaches such as [51, 1] are mechanistic in nature as they
are based on logic and other formal approaches such as features structures and
uniﬁcation which are tools that allow formalisation of domain theories. With the
availability of large corpora in mid-1990s there was a shift to data-driven phe-
nomenological approaches with a focus on statistical machine learning methods
[43, 55]. This inspired several discussions on the relation between the two ap-
proaches (e.g., [22, 25]). We share the view of some that both approaches are in
fact in a complimentary distribution with each other as shown in Table 1 (adapted
from a slide by Stephen Pulman). Mechanistic approaches provide deep coverage
but of a limited domain; outside a domain they prove brittle and therefore limited.
On the other hand, phenomenological approaches are wide-coverage and robust to
variation found in data but provide a shallow representation of language.
tech/cov
wide
narrow
deep
our goal
symbolic
shallow
data-based
useless
Table 1: Properties of mechanistic and phenomenological approaches in NLP
Our desiderata is a wide-coverage system with deep analyses. It was consid-
ered that this could be achieved by a hybrid model but working out such a model
has proven not a trivial task. Systems that used both approaches treated them nor-
mally as independent black-boxes organised in layers (e.g. [37]). However, the
marked recent advances in the NLP based on deep (!) neural networks have made
the question of how these two methodologies should be used, related and integrated
in NLP research apposite.
The choice of a method depends on the goal of the task for which it is used.
One goal for processing natural language is to develop useful applications that help
humans in their daily life, for example machine translation and speech recognition.
In application scenarios where a rough analysis is acceptable (e.g., a translation
that provides the gist of the message) and large annotated and structured corpora
are available, machine learning is the methodology of choice to address this goal.
However, where precise analysis is required or where there is a scarcity of data, a
machine learning approach may not be suitable. Furthermore, if the goal of pro-
2
cessing language is rather motivated by the desire to better understand its cognitive
foundations, than a machine learning methodology, particularly one based on an
unconstrained, fully connected deep neural network, is not appropriate. The crit-
icisms of unconstrained neural network based models (typically characterised by
fully-connected feed-forward multi-layer networks) in cognitive science has a long
history (see [44] inter alia) and often focuses on (i) the difﬁcultly in analysing in
a domain-theoretic sense how the model works, and (ii) the, somewhat ironic, sci-
entiﬁc short-coming that neural networks are such powerful and general learning
mechanisms that demonstrating the ability of a network to learn a particular map-
ping or a function is scientiﬁcally useless from a cognitive science perspective. In
particular, as Massaro [44] argues, a neural network model is so adaptable that
given the appropriate dataset and sufﬁcient time and computing power it is likely
to be able to learn mappings that not only support a cognitive theory but also ones
that contradict that theory. One approach to address this problem is to introduce
domain relevant structural constraints into the model via the network architecture,
early approaches include [18, 19, 46]. Indeed, we argue in this paper that one of
the important and somewhat overlooked factors driving the success of research in
deep learning is the speciﬁcity and modularity of deep learning architectures to the
tasks they are applied too.
Contribution:
In this paper we evaluate the relation between mechanistic and
phenomenological models and argue that although it appears that the former have
lost their signiﬁcance in computational linguistics and its applications they are still
very much present in the form of formal language modelling that underlines most
of the current work with machine learning. Moreover, we highlight that many of
the recent advances in deep learning for NLP are not based on unconstrained neural
networks but rather that these networks have task speciﬁc architectures that encode
domain-theoretic considerations. In this light, the relationship between mechanis-
tic and phenomenological models can be viewed as potentially more synergistic.
Given that many logical theories are deﬁned in terms of functions and composi-
tional operations and neural networks learn and compose functions, a logic-based
domain theory of linguistic performance can naturally inform the structural design
of deep learning architectures and thereby merge the beneﬁts of both in terms of
model interpretability and performance.
Overview:
In Section 2, we discuss recent developments in deep learning ap-
proaches in NLP and situate them within the current debate; then, in Section 3, we
use the computational modelling of spatial language as an NLP case study to frame
the possible synergies between formal models and machine learning and set out our
thoughts for potential approaches to developing a more synergistic understanding
of the formal models and machine learning for NLP research. In Section 4 we give
our concluding thoughts.
3
2
Deep Learning: A New Synthesis?
In recent years deep learning (DL) models have improved or in some cases markedly
improved the state of the art across a range of NLP tasks. Some of the drivers of DL
success include: (i) the availability of large datasets, (ii) more powerful computers,
and (iii) the power of learning and adaptability of connectionist neural networks.
However, another and less obvious driver of DL is the fact that (iv) DL network
models often have architectures that are speciﬁcally tailored or structured to the
needs of a speciﬁc domain or task. This fact becomes obvious when one consid-
ers the variety of DL architectures that have been proposed in the literature. For
example, a schematic overview of neural network architectures can be found at at:
http://www.asimovinstitute.org/neural-network-zoo/ [56].
2.1
Modularity in Deep Learning Architectures
There are a large-number of network design parameters that may be driven by ex-
perimental results rather than domain theory. For example, (i) the size of the net-
work, (ii) the depth of the layers, (iii) the size of the matrices passed between the
layers, (iv) activation functions and (v) optimiser are all network parameters that
are often determined through an empirical trial-and-error process that is informed
by designer intuition [26]. However, the diversity of current network architectures
extends beyond differences in these parameters and this diversity of network archi-
tecture is not a given. For example, given the ﬂexibility of neural networks, one
approach to accommodating structure into the processing of a network is to apply
minimal constraints on the architecture and to rely on the ability of the learning
algorithm to induce the relevant structure constraints by adjusting the network’s
weights.
On the other hand, it has, however, long been known that pre-structuring a
neural network by the careful design of its architecture to ﬁt the requirements of the
task results in better generalisation of the model beyond the training dataset [39].
Understood in this context, DL is assisted (or supervised!) by the task designer
in terms of a priori background knowledge who decides what kind of networks
they are going to build, the number of layers, what kind of layers, the connectivity
between the layers and other parameters. DL is most frequently not using fully
connected layers, instead several kinds of layered networks have been developed
tailored to the task. In this respect DL models capture top-down domain informed
speciﬁcation that we have seen with the rule-based NLP systems. This ﬂexibility
of neural networks is ensured by their modular design which takes as a basis a
single perceptron unit which can be thought of encoding a simple concept. When
several units are organised and connected into larger collections of units, these
may be given interpretations that we give to symbolic representations in rule-based
systems. The level of conceptual supervision may thus vary from no-supervision
when fully connected layers are used, to weak supervision that primes the networks
to learn particular structures, to strong supervision where the structure is given and
4
only parameters of this structure are trained.
An example of weak supervision are Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) that
capture sequence learning required for language models. The design of current
state-of-the-art RNN language models is informed by linguistic phenomena such as
short- and long-distance dependencies between linguistic units. In order to improve
the ability of RNNs to model long-distance dependencies, contemporary RNN lan-
guage models use Long-Short Memory Units (LSTM) or Gated Recurrent Units
(GRUs) which may be further augmented with attention mechanisms [49]. The
inputs and outputs of such networks can be either characters or words, the latter
represented as word embeddings in vector spaces.
Another example of weakly supervised neural networks, in the sense that their
design is informed by a domain, are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) which
have their origin in image processing [39]. In CNNs the convolutions are meant
as ﬁlters that encode a region of pixels into a single neural unit which learns to
respond to the occurrence of a pixel pattern in the region speciﬁc visual feature.
Importantly, the weights associated with a speciﬁc convolution are shared across
a group of neurons such that together the group of neurons check for the occur-
rence of the visual features across the full surface of the image. Additionally, as
objects or entities may occur in different parts of image, to decrease the effects of
spatial continuum, operations such as pooling are used that encode convolved rep-
resentations from various parts of the image. In analogy to learning visual features,
CNNs have also been used for language modelling to capture different patterns of
characters in strings [35].
Specialised networks may be treated as modules which are sequenced after
each other. For example, the current Neural Machine Translation (NMT) archi-
tecture is the encoder-decoder [54, 3, 41, 27]. This architecture uses one RNN,
known as the encoder, to fully process the input sentence and generate its vector
based representation. This is passed to a second RNN, the decoder, which im-
plements a language model of the target language which generates the translation
word by word. Domain theoretic considerations have affected the design how the
two language modelling networks are connected in a number of ways. For ex-
ample, an understanding that different languages have different word orders lead
to enabling the decoder to look both back and forward along the input sentence
during translation. This is implemented by fully processing the input sequence
with the ﬁrst RNN before translation is generated by the second RNN. However,
the understanding of the need for local dependencies between different sections
of the translation and somewhat a contrary requirement to the need for a poten-
tially global perspective on the input has resulted in the development of attention
mechanisms within the NMT framework. This means that DL network architec-
tures modules are not only sequenced but they are also stacked. A variant of the
NMT encoder-decoder architecture that replaces the encoder RNN with a CNN
has revolutionised the ﬁeld of image captioning [57]. Figure 1 gives a schematic
representation of such image captioning systems. The CNN module learns to rep-
resent images as vector representations of visual features and the RNN module is
5
Figure 1: A schematic representation of DL image captioning architectures
a language model whose output is conditioned on the visual representations. We
have already mentioned that CNNs are also used to generate word representations.
These representations are then passed to an RNN model to predict the next word
in the context of preceding words in the sequence (see [35]). The advantage of
using a CNN module to learn word representation is that it enables the system to
capture spelling variation of morphologically-rich languages or texts from social
media that does not use standard spelling of words. This and also the preceding
examples therefore illustrate how different levels of linguistic representations are
modelled in modular DL architectures.
In summary, the design of a DL architectures, where DL networks are treated
as composable modules, can constrain and guide a number of factors that are im-
portant in representing language and other modalities, in particular the hierarchical
composition of features and the sequencing of the representations. Importantly,
the neural representations that are used in these cases are inspired by rich work on
top-down rule-based mechanistic natural language processing.
2.2
Phenomenological versus Mechanistic Models
The ability to treat neural networks as composable modules within an overall sys-
tem architecture is a powerful one. This is because during training it is possible
to back-propagate the error through each of the system’s modules (networks) and
train them in consort while permitting each module to learn its distinctive task in
parallel with the other modules in the network. However, the power of this ap-
proach has led to some research being based on a relatively shallow understanding
of domain theory and most of the work being spent on ﬁtting the hyper-parameters
of the training algorithm through a grid-search driven by experimental performance
on gold-standard datasets. The domain theory is only used to inform the broad out-
lines of the system architecture. Using image-captioning as an example, and at the
risk of presenting a caricature, this approach may be described as: “we are doing
image-captioning so we need a CNN to encode the image and an RNN to generate
the language and we will let the learning algorithm sort out the rest of the details”.
This theory free, or at least, theory light approach to NLP research is primarily
driven by performance on gold-standard datasets and lamentably frequently the
analysis of the systems is limited to the presentation of system results relative to a
state-of-the-art leader-board with relatively little reﬂection on the how the structure
6
of the model reﬂects theoretic considerations. This focus on performance in terms
of accurately modelling the empirical relationship between inputs and outputs and
where the trained model is treated as a black box aligns with what we describe as
the phenomenological tradition in machine learning. This can be contrasted with
an alternative tradition within machine learning which is sometimes described as
being based on mechanistic models. Mechanistic models presuppose a domain
theory and the model is essentially a computational implementation of this domain
theory. To illustrate this difference, contrast for example the approach to training a
support vector machine classiﬁer where multiple kernels are tested until one with
high performance on a dataset is found versus the approach to deﬁning the topology
of a Bayesian network in such a way that it mirrors a theory informed model of
the causal relationships between relevant variables in the domain [32]. Once the
theoretical model has been implemented, the free parameters of the model can then
be empirically ﬁt to the data.
Consequently, mechanistic models are informed by both top-down theoretical
considerations of a task designer but they are also sensitive to bottom-up empirical
considerations, the training data. Mechanistic models have several advantages,
for example: they can be used to test a domain theory. If the model is accurate,
this provides evidence that the theory is correct. Assuming the theory is correct,
they are likely to outperform phenomenological models in contexts where data is
limited.1 The top top-down approach provides background knowledge that restricts
the size of the training search space.
Traditionally, neural networks have been considered the paradigmatic exam-
ple of a phenomenological model. However, viewing neural networks as compo-
nent modules within a larger deep-learning systems opens the door to sophisticated
mechanistic deep-learning models. Such an approach to network design is, how-
ever, dependent on the system designer being informed by domain theory and is
therefore strongly supervised in terms of background knowledge. An example of
modular networks where each module is some conﬁguration of neural units that are
tailored to optimise parameters of a particular task is described in [2] who work in
the domain of question answering. The architecture learns how to map questions
and visual or database representations to textual answers. In order to answer a
question, the network learns a network layout of modules that are responsible for
the individual steps required to answer the question. For example, to answer “What
colour is the bird” the network applies the attention module to ﬁnd the object from
the question, followed by a module that identiﬁes the colour of the attended re-
gion in the image. The possible sequences of modules are constrained by being
represented as typed functions: in fact the modules translate to typed functional
applications through which compositionality of linguistic meaning is ensured as in
formal semantics [4]. The system learns (using reinforcement learning) a layout
model which predicts the sequence of modules to produce an answer for a question
sentence and an execution module which learns how to ground a network layout
1See discussion on generative versus discriminative models in [32].
7
in the image or database representation. An extension of this work is described in
[24] where both procedures rely on less background knowledge. For example, the
system does not use a dependency parser to parse the input sentence but an LSTM
language module and the modules use a more generic architecture.
The modular networks are in line with the structured connectionism of [18]
and constrained connectionism of Regier [46] “in which complex domain-speciﬁc
structures are built into the network, constraining its operation in clearly under-
standable and analysable ways” [46, p. 2]. Regiers’s presentation of constrained
connectionism is based on a case study on learning spatial relations and events. The
case study describes the design and training of a neural network that receives short
movies of 2 two-dimensional objects, a static rectangle and a circle which is either
static or moving, as input and the model learns to predict the correct spatial term to
describe the position and movement of the circle relative to the rectangle. For ex-
ample, a static circle might be described as above the rectangle, whereas a moving
circle might move out from under the rectangle. A crucial aspect of this case study
for Regier’s argument is that the neural network’s architecture is constrained in so
far as it incorporates a number of structural devices that are motivated by neuro-
logical and psychological evidence concerning the human visual system, including
motion buffers, angle and orientation computations components, and boundary and
feature maps for objects in the input. Following [46], in the next section we will
take spatial language as an NLP case-study and discuss how domain theory can be
used to extend current deep-learning systems so as to move them further towards
the mechanistic pole within the phenomenological versus mechanistic spectrum.
3
Spatial Language
Our focus is computational modelling of spatial language, such as the chair is to
the left and close to the table or go down the corridor until the large painting
on your right, then turn left, which requires integration of different sources of
knowledge that affect its semantics, including: (i) scene geometry, (ii) perspective
and perceptual context, (iii) world knowledge about dynamic kinematic routines
of objects, and (iv) interaction between agents through language and dialogue and
with the environment through perception. Below we describe these properties in
more detail:
Scene geometry is described within a two-dimensional or three-dimensional co-
ordinate frame in which we can represent locations of objects as geometric shapes
as well as angles and distances between them. Over a given area we can identify
different degrees of applicability of a spatial description, for example with spatial
templates [40, 11]. A spatial template may be inﬂuenced by perceptual context
through the presence of other objects in the scene known as distractors [31, 7],
occlusion [34, 33], and attention [47].
Directionals such as to the left of require a model of perspective or assignment
of a frame of reference [42] which includes a viewpoint parameter. The viewpoint
8
may be deﬁned linguistically from your view or from there but it is frequently left
out. Ambiguity with respect to the intended perspective of a reference can affect
the grounding of spatial terms in surprising ways [5, 28]. However, frequently the
intended perspective can be either inferred from the perceptual context (if only one
interpretation is possible, see for example the discussion on contrastive versus rel-
ative meanings in [30]) or it may be linguistically negotiated and aligned between
conversational partners in dialogue [17, 14, 13].
As mentioned earlier, spatial descriptions do not refer to the actual objects in
space but to conceptual geometric representations of these objects, which may be
points, lines, areas and volumes. The representation depends on how we view the
scene, for example under the water (water ≈surface) and in the water (water ≈
volume). The inﬂuence of world knowledge goes beyond object conceptualisation.
Some prepositions are more sensitive to the way the objects interact with each
(their dynamic kinematic routines) while other are more sensitive to the way the
objects relate geometrically [10].
Finally, because situated agents are located within dynamic linguistic and per-
ceptual environments they must continuously adapt their understanding and rep-
resentations relative to these context. On the language side they must maintain
language coordination with dialogue partners [6, 20, 50, 12]. A good example of
adaptation of contextual meaning through linguistic interaction is the coordinated
assignment of frame of reference mentioned earlier.
In summary, the meaning of spatial descriptions is dynamic, dependent on sev-
eral sources of contextually provided knowledge which provide a challenge for
its computational modelling because of its contextual underspeciﬁcation and be-
cause it is difﬁcult to provide and integrate that kind of knowledge. On the other
hand, a computational system taking into account these meaning components in
context would be able to understand and generate better, more human-like, spatial
descriptions and engage in more efﬁcient communication in the domain of situated
agents and humans. Furthermore, it could exploit the synergies between different
knowledge sources to compensate missing knowledge in one source from another
[53, 52, 50].
3.1
Modular Mechanistic (Neural) Models of Spatial Language
The discussion in the preceding section highlighted the numerous factors that im-
pinge on the semantics of spatial language. It is this multiplicity of factors that
make spatial language such a useful case study for this paper, the complexity of the
problem invites a modular approach where the solution can be built in a piecewise
manner and then integrated. One challenge to this approach to spatial language is
the lack of an overarching theory explaining how these different factors should be
integrated, examples of candidate theories that could act as a starting point here
include [23] and [8].
At the same time there are a number of examples of neural models in the litera-
ture that could provide a basis for the design of speciﬁc modules. We have already
9
discussed [46] which captured geometric factors and paths of motion. Another
example of a mechanistic neural model of spatial descriptions is described in [9].
Their system processes dynamic visual scenes containing three objects: a teapot
pouring water into a cup and the network learns to optimise, for each temporal
snapshot of a scene, the appropriateness score of a spatial description obtained in
subject experiments. The idea behind these experiments is that descriptions such
as over and above are sensitive to a different degree to geometric and functional
properties of a scene, the latter arising from the interactions between objects as
mentioned earlier. The model is split into three modules: (i) a vision processing
module that deals with detection of objects from image sequences that show the
interaction of objects, the tea pot, the water and the cup, using an attention mech-
anism, (ii) an Elman recurrent network that learns the dynamics of the attended
objects in the scene over time, and (iii) a dual feed-forward vision and language
network to which representations from the hidden layer of the Elman network are
fed and which learns how to predict the appropriateness score of each descrip-
tion for each temporal conﬁguration of objects. Each module of this network is
dedicated to a particular task: (i) to recognition of objects, (ii) to follow motion of
attended objects in time and (iii) to integration of the attended object locations with
language to predict the appropriateness score, factors that have been identiﬁed to
be relevant for computational modelling of spatial language and cognition through
previous experimental work [10]. The example shows the effectiveness of repre-
senting networks as modules and their possibility of joint training where individual
modules constrain each other.
The model could be extended in several ways. For example, contemporary
CNNs and RNNs could be used which have become standard in neural modelling
of vision and language due to their state-of-the-art performance. Secondly, the
approach is trained on a small dataset of artiﬁcially generated images of a single
interactive conﬁguration of three objects.2 An open question is how the model
scales on a large corpus of image descriptions [36] where considerable noise is
added. There will be several objects, their appearance and location may be dis-
torted by the angle at which the image is taken, there are no complete temporal
sequences of objects and the corpora typically does not contain human judgement
scores on how appropriate a description is given an image. Finally, Coventry et.
al.’s model integrates three modalities used in spatial cognition, but as we have seen
there are several others [9]. An important aspect is grounded linguistic interaction
and adaptation between agents. For example, [38] describe a system where two
networks are trained to perform referential games (dialogue games performed over
some visual scene) between two agents. In this context, the agents develop their
own language interactively. An open research question is whether parameters such
frame of reference intended by the speaker of a description could also be learned
this way. Note that this is not always overtly speciﬁed, e.g. from my left.
2To be fair to the authors, their intention was not to build an image captioning system but to show
that modular networks can optimise human experimental judgements.
10
Sometimes a mechanistic design of the network architecture constrains what a
model can learn in undesirable ways. For example, Kelleher & Dobnik argue that
contemporary image captioning networks as in Figure 1 have been conﬁgured in a
way that they capture visual properties of objects rather than spatial relations be-
tween them [29]. Consequently, within the captions generated by these systems the
relation between the preposition and the object is not grounded in geometric repre-
sentation of space but only in the linguistic sequences through the decoder language
model where the co-occurrence of particular words in a sequence is estimated.
[16, 15] show that a language model is predictive of functional relations between
objects that spatial relations are also sensitive to but in this case the geometric di-
mension is missing. This indicates that the architecture of these image-captioning
systems, although modular, ignores important domain theoretic considerations and
hence are best understood as close to the phenomenological (black-box) than the
mechanistic (grey-box) network design philosophy this paper advocates.
In summary, it follows that an appropriate computational model of spatial lan-
guage should consist of several connected modalities (for which individual neural
network architectures are speciﬁed) but also of a general network that connects
these modalities, thus akin to the specialised regions and their interconnections in
the brain [48]. The challenge of creating and training such a system is obviously
signiﬁcant, however one feature of neural network training that may make this
task easier is that it is possible to back-propagate through a pre-trained network.
This opens the possibility of pre-training networks as modules (sometimes even on
different datasets) that carry out speciﬁc theory-informed tasks and then training
larger systems that represent the full-theory by including these pre-trained modules
components within the system and training other modules and/or integration layers
while keeping the weights of the pre-trained modules frozen during training.
4
Conclusion and Future Research
DNNs provide a platform for machine learning that permits great ﬂexibility in com-
bining top-down speciﬁcation (in terms of hand-designed structures and rules) and
data driven approaches. Designers can tailor the network structures to each in-
dividual learning problem and therefore effectively reach the goal of combining
mechanistic and phenomenological approaches: a problem that has been investi-
gated in NLP for several decades. The strength of DNNs is in the compositionality
of perceptrons or neural units, and indeed networks themselves, which represent
individual classiﬁcation functions that can be combined in novel ways. This was
not possible with other approaches in machine learning to the same degree with a
consequences that these worked more as black boxes. Finally, although we are not
advocating that there is a direct similarity between DNNs and human cognition, it
is nonetheless the case that DNNs are inspired by neurons and connectionist or-
ganisation of human brain and hence at some high abstract level they share some
similarities, for example basic classiﬁcation units combine to larger structures, the
11
structures get specialised to modules to perform certain tasks, and training and clas-
siﬁcation is performed across several modules. Therefore, this might be a possible
explanation that DNNs have been so successful in computational modelling of lan-
guage and vision, the surface manifestations of the underlying human cognition, as
at some abstract level they represent a similar architecture to human cognition.
Acknowledgements
The research of Dobnik was supported by a grant from the Swedish Research
Council (VR project 2014-39) for the establishment of the Centre for Linguistic
Theory and Studies in Probability (CLASP) at Department of Philosophy, Linguis-
tics and Theory of Science (FLoV), University of Gothenburg.
The research of Kelleher was supported by the ADAPT Research Centre. The
ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology is funded under the SFI Research
Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is co-funded under the European Re-
gional Development Funds.
References
[1] Hiyan Alshawi. The Core Language Engine. ACL-MIT Press series in natural
language processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1992.
[2] Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Learning to
compose neural networks for question answering. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT 2016, pages 1545–1554, San Diego, California, June 12-17 2016. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
[3] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
arXiv:1409.0473v7
[Cs.CL], pages 1–15, 2014.
[4] Patrick Blackburn and Johan Bos. Representation and inference for natu-
ral language. A ﬁrst course in computational semantics. CSLI Publications,
2005.
[5] L.A. Carlson-Radvansky and G.D. Logan. The inﬂuence of reference frame
selection on spatial template construction. Journal of Memory and Langauge,
37:411–437, 1997.
[6] Herbert H. Clark. Using language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996.
[7] Fintan Costello and John D. Kelleher. Spatial prepositions in context: The
semantics of Near in the presense of distractor objects. In Proceedings of the
3rd ACL-Sigsem Workshop on Prepositions, pages 1–8, 2006.
12
[8] Kenny Coventry and Simon Garrod. Spatial prepositions and the functional
geometric framework. Towards a classiﬁcation of extra-geometric inﬂuences.,
volume 2. Oxford University Press, 2005.
[9] Kenny R. Coventry, Angelo Cangelosi, Rohanna Rajapakse, Alison Bacon,
Stephen Newstead, Dan Joyce, and Lynn V. Richards. Spatial prepositions
and vague quantiﬁers: Implementing the functional geometric framework. In
Christian Freksa, Markus Knauff, Bernd Krieg-Br¨uckner, Bernhard Nebel,
and Thomas Barkowsky, editors, Spatial Cognition IV. Reasoning, Action,
Interaction, volume 3343 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 98–
110. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
[10] Kenny R. Coventry, Merc`e Prat-Sala, and Lynn Richards. The interplay be-
tween geometry and function in the apprehension of Over, Under, Above and
Below. Journal of Memory and Language, 44(3):376–398, 2001.
[11] Simon Dobnik and Amelie ˚Astbom. (Perceptual) grounding as interaction.
In Volha Petukhova and Ye Tian, editors, Proceedings of Saardial – Semdial
2017: The 21st Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue,
pages 17–26, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany, August 15–17 2017.
[12] Simon Dobnik and Erik de Graaf. KILLE: a framework for situated agents
for learning language through interaction.
In J¨org Tiedemann and Nina
Tahmasebi, editors, Proceedings of the 21st Nordic Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (NoDaLiDa), pages 162–171, Gothenburg, Sweden,
22–24 May 2017. Northern European Association for Language Technology
(NEALT), Association for Computational Linguistics.
[13] Simon Dobnik, Christine Howes, Kim Demaret, and John D. Kelleher. To-
wards a computational model of frame of reference alignment in Swedish
dialogue. In Johanna Bj¨orklund and Sara Stymne, editors, Proceedings of the
Sixth Swedish language technology conference (SLTC), pages 1–3, Ume˚a,
17–18 November 2016. Ume˚a University.
[14] Simon Dobnik, Christine Howes, and John D. Kelleher. Changing perspec-
tive: Local alignment of reference frames in dialogue. In Christine Howes
and Staffan Larsson, editors, Proceedings of goDIAL – Semdial 2015: The
19th Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, pages 24–32,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 24–26th August 2015.
[15] Simon Dobnik and John Kelleher. Exploration of functional semantics of
prepositions from corpora of descriptions of visual scenes. In Proceedings of
the Third V&L Net Workshop on Vision and Language, pages 33–37, Dublin,
Ireland, August 2014. Dublin City University and the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
13
[16] Simon Dobnik and John D. Kelleher.
Towards an automatic identiﬁca-
tion of functional and geometric spatial prepositions.
In Proceedings of
PRE-CogSsci 2013: Production of referring expressions - bridging the gap
between cognitive and computational approaches to reference, pages 1–6,
Berlin, Germany, 31 July 2013.
[17] Simon Dobnik, John D. Kelleher, and Christos Koniaris. Priming and align-
ment of frame of reference in situated conversation. In Verena Rieser and
Philippe Muller, editors, Proceedings of DialWatt – Semdial 2014: The 18th
Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, pages 43–52, Edin-
burgh, 1–3 September 2014.
[18] J. A. Feldman, M. A. Fanty, and N. H. Goodard. Computing with structured
neural networks. Computer, 21(3):91–103, March 1988.
[19] Jerome A. Feldman. Structured neural networks in nature and in computer
science. In Rolf Eckmiller and Christoph v.d. Malsburg, editors, Neural Com-
puters, pages 17–21. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1989.
[20] Raquel Fern´andez, Staffan Larsson, Robin Cooper, Jonathan Ginzburg, and
David Schlangen. Reciprocal learning via dialogue interaction: Challenges
and prospects.
In Proceedings of the IJCAI 2011 Workshop on Agents
Learning Interactively from Human Teachers (ALIHT), Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain, 2011.
[21] Roman Frigg and Stephan Hartmann.
Models in science.
In Edward N.
Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edi-
tion). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2017.
[22] Gerald Gazdar. Paradigm merger in natural language processing. In Ian Wand
and Robin Milner, editors, Computing Tomorrow, pages 88–109. Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY, USA, 1996.
[23] Annette Herskovits. Language and Spatial Cognition. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA, 1987.
[24] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Judy Hoffman,
Fei-Fei Li, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross B. Girshick. Inferring and execut-
ing programs for visual reasoning. arXiv:1705.03633v1 [cs.CV], pages 1–13,
2017.
[25] Karen I. B. Sp¨arck Jones, Gerald J. M. Gazdar, and Roger M. Needham. In-
troduction: combining formal theories and statistical data in natural language
processing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 358(1769):1227–1238,
2000.
14
[26] Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, and Yonghui
Wu.
Exploring the limits of language modeling.
arXiv:1602.02410v2
[cs.CL], pages 1–11, 2016.
[27] John D. Kelleher.
Fundamentals of machine learning for neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Translating Europen Forum 2016: Focus-
ing on Translation Technologies. European Commission Directorate-General
for Translation, 2016.
[28] John D. Kelleher and Fintan J. Costello. Cognitive representations of pro-
jective prepositions. In Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM workshop
on the linguistic dimensions of prepositions and their use in computational
linguistics formalisms and applications, pages 119–127, University of Essex,
Colchester, United Kingdom, 2005. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
[29] John D. Kelleher and Simon Dobnik.
What is not where: the challenge
of integrating spatial representations into deep learning architectures.
In
CLASP Papers in Computational Linguistics: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Logic and Machine Learning in Natural Language (LaML 2017),
volume 1, pages 41–52, Gothenburg, Sweden, 12–13 June 2017.
[30] John D. Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. A context-dependent algorithm
for generating locative expressions in physically situated environments. In
Graham Wilcock, Kristiina Jokinen, Chris Mellish, and Ehud Reiter, editors,
Proceedings of the Tenth European Workshop on Natural Language Genera-
tion (ENLG-05), pages 1–7, Aberdeen, Scotland, August 8–10 2005. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
[31] John D. Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. A context-dependent model of
proximity in physically situated environments. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond ACL-SIGSEM workshop on the linguistic dimensions of prepositions and
their use in computational linguistics formalisms and applications, Univer-
sity of Essex, Colchester, United Kingdom, 2005. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
[32] John D Kelleher, Brian Mac Namee, and Aoife D’Arcy. Fundamentals of
machine learning for predictive data analytics: algorithms, worked examples,
and case studies. MIT Press, 2015.
[33] John D. Kelleher, Robert Ross, Colm Sloan, and Brian Mac Namee. The
effect of occlusion on the semantics of projective spatial terms: a case study
in grounding language in perception. Cognitive Processing, 12(1):95–108,
February 2011.
15
[34] John D. Kelleher and Josef van Genabith. A computational model of the ref-
erential semantics of projective prepositions. In P. Saint-Dizier, editor, Syn-
tax and Semantics of Prepositions, Speech and Language Processing. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2006.
[35] Yoon Kim, Yacine Jernite, David Sontag, and Alexander M. Rush. Character-
aware neural language models. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-16), pages 2741–2749, Phoenix, Ari-
zona USA, February 12–17 2016.
[36] Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua
Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma,
Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual genome: Connecting language and
vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International Journal
of Computer Vision, 123(1):32–73, May 2017.
[37] Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, Hendrik Zender, Patric Jensfelt, and Henrik I. Chris-
tensen. Situated dialogue and spatial organization: what, where... and why?
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 4(1):125–138, 2007.
[38] Angeliki
Lazaridou,
Alexander
Peysakhovich,
and
Marco
Baroni.
Multi-agent
cooperation
and
the
emergence
of
(natural)
language.
arXiv:1612.07182v2 [cs.CL], pages 1–11, 2016.
[39] Yann LeCun. Generalization and network design strategies. Technical re-
port CRG-TR-89-4, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
June 1989.
[40] Gordon D. Logan and Daniel D. Sadler. A computational analysis of the
apprehension of spatial relations. In Paul Bloom, Mary A. Peterson, Lynn
Nadel, and Merrill F. Garrett, editors, Language and Space, pages 493–530.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.
[41] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning. Effective ap-
proaches to attention-based neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP
2015), pages 1412–1421, Lisbon, Portugal, September 17–21 2015.
[42] Didier Maillat. The semantics and pragmatics of directionals: a case study
in English and French. PhD thesis, University of Oxford: Committee for
Comparative Philology and General Linguistics, Oxford, United Kingdom,
May 2003.
[43] Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Sch¨utze. Foundations of statistical nat-
ural language processing. The MIT Press, 1999.
[44] Dominic Massaro. Some criticisms of connectionist models of human per-
formance. Journal of Memory and Language, 27:213–234, 1988.
16
[45] Ernan McMullin. What do physical models tell us?
In Bob van Rootse-
laar and Johan Frederik Staal, editors, Logic, Methodology and Science III:
Proceedings of the Third International Congress for Logic, Methodology and
Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam 1967, pages 385–396. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, 1968.
[46] Terry Regier.
The human semantic potential: Spatial language and con-
strained connectionism. MIT Press, 1996.
[47] Terry Regier and Laura A. Carlson. Grounding spatial language in percep-
tion: an empirical and computational investigation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(2):273–298, 2001.
[48] Ardi Roelofs. A dorsal-pathway account of aphasic language production: The
WEAVER++/ARC model. Cortex, 59:33–48, 2014.
[49] Giancarlo Salton, Robert Ross, and John D. Kelleher. Attentive language
models. In Proceedings of the 8th International Joing Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP), pages 441–450, Taipei, Taiwan, November
27 – December 1 2017.
[50] Niels Schutte, Brian Mac Namee, and John D. Kelleher. Robot perception
errors and human resolution strategies in situated human–robot dialogue. Ad-
vanced Robotics, 31(5):243–257, 2017.
[51] Stuart Shieber. An Introduction to Uniﬁcation-Based Approaches to Gram-
mar. CSLI Publications, Stanford, 1986.
[52] Danijel Skoˇcaj, Matej Kristan, Alen Vreˇcko, Marko Mahniˇc, Miroslav
Jan´ıˇcek, Geert-Jan M. Kruijff, Marc Hanheide, Nick Hawes, Thomas Keller,
Michael Zillich, and Kai Zhou. A system for interactive learning in dialogue
with a tutor. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems IROS 2011, San Francisco, CA, USA, 25-30 September 2011.
[53] Luc Steels and Martin Loetzsch. Perspective alignment in spatial language. In
Kenny R. Coventry, Thora Tenbrink, and John. A. Bateman, editors, Spatial
Language and Dialogue. Oxford University Press, 2009.
[54] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to sequence learn-
ing with neural networks. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27 (NIPS 2014), pages 3104–3112. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2014.
[55] Peter D Turney, Patrick Pantel, et al.
From frequency to meaning: Vec-
tor space models of semantics. Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research,
37(1):141–188, 2010.
17
[56] Fjodor van Veen. The neural network ZOO. The Asimov Institute Blog posted
on September 14, September 14 2016.
[57] Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Richard Zemel, and Yoshua Bengio. Show, attend and tell: Neural image
caption generation with visual attention. arXiv:1502.03044v3 [cs.LG], pages
1–22, February 11 2015.
18
