Title: L3Cube-MahaNLP: Marathi Natural Language Processing Datasets, Models, and Library
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14728v2
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2205.14728v2  [cs.CL]  31 May 2022
L3Cube-MahaNLP: Marathi Natural Language
Processing Datasets, Models, and Library⋆
Raviraj Joshi
1 Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamilnadu India
2 L3Cube Pune
ravirajoshi@gmail.com
Abstract. Despite being the third most popular language in India, the
Marathi language lacks useful NLP resources. Moreover, popular NLP
libraries do not have support for the Marathi language. With L3Cube-
MahaNLP, we aim to build resources and a library for Marathi natu-
ral language processing. We present datasets and models for supervised
tasks like sentiment analysis, named entity recognition, and hate speech
detection. We have also published a monolingual Marathi corpus for un-
supervised language modeling tasks. Overall we present MahaCorpus,
MahaSent, MahaNER, and MahaHate datasets and their corresponding
MahaBERT models ﬁne-tuned on these datasets. We aim to move ahead
of benchmark datasets and prepare useful resources for Marathi. The re-
sources are available at https://github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP.
Keywords: Marathi Natural Language Processing · Marathi Datasets ·
BERT · Sentiment Analysis · NER · Hate Speech Detection · Transformer
Models
1
Introduction
Text-based natural language processing (NLP) has become mainstream with
libraries like NLTK and Spacy [12,5]. These libraries support basic rule-based
features like tokenization, stemming, lemmatization, etc., and more complex ma-
chine learning-based features like classiﬁcation, named entity recognition, parts
of speech (POS) tagging, etc. The Transformers library [19] provides APIs to
support state-of-the-art PyTorch or TensorFlow models for advanced tasks like
summarization, machine translation, question answering, sentence similarity, etc
[14]. While production-ready libraries and models have been available for En-
glish same is not true for low resource languages. In this work, we speciﬁcally
focus on the Indian low resource language Marathi.
Marathi is the third most popular language in India spoken by around 83 mil-
lion people [7]. The language is native to the state of Maharashtra and is the most
spoken language after Hindi and Bengali [6][1]. Despite Maharashtra being the
⋆Supported by L3Cube Pune
2
R. Joshi et al.
educational and industrial hub of India, Marathi NLP has not received enough
attention from academia or industry. We found that Marathi lacks behind in the
most basic form of NLP resources like monolingual text corpus. With L3Cube-
MahaNLP we aim to build more useful resources for the Marathi language. Our
vision is to make Marathi a resource-rich language and develop a dedicated li-
brary with focused contributions. Although recently resources have been Indic
languages still Marathi stands behind languages like Hindi and Bengali. We aim
to make dedicated contributions to the low-resource Marathi language in terms
of datasets and models for various NLP tasks. Another objective of this work is
to move away from small benchmark datasets which may help advance the state
of the art but are not normally useful in production. This is the ﬁrst work to
build production-quality datasets and models for the Marathi language. All the
resources are publicly shared on github3.
2
Features
Currently, L3Cube-MahaNLP supports tasks like tokenization, word vectors,
monolingual BERT models, sentiment analysis, named entity recognition, next
token prediction, and hate speech detection. We release datasets and models for
these tasks on github and model repository respectively. We are in the process
of wrapping these models under python API’s that can be consumed directly. As
of now, the models can be accessed using the hugging face API’s. The diﬀerent
tasks, datasets, and models are described below.
– MahaCorpus [7]4: MahaCorpus is a Marathi monolingual corpus with 24.8M
sentences and 289M tokens. Combined with other publicly available resources
we have a total of 752M tokens. The dataset has been scraped from the in-
ternet using news and non-news sources. The major chunk of the dataset
comes from news sources with 212M tokens and the remaining 76.4M tokens
come from non-news literature work. Both the sources have been released
separately to enable further research in an individual area. The monolingual
data set can be used to train models using unsupervised language modeling
tasks.
– MahaBERT [7]5678: The BERT represents a deep bi-directional Trans-
former based model trained using a large unlabelled corpus. These pre-
trained models have been shown to produce state-of-the-art results on a vari-
ety of downstream tasks. There are diﬀerent variations of BERT models like
base-BERT, AlBERT and RoBERTa which are also considered in this work.
From the multilingual perspective, there are three main models which can
3 https://github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP
4 https://github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP
5 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-bert
6 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-roberta
7 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-albert
8 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-albert-v2
L3Cube-MahaNLP: Marathi Natural Language Processing
3
also be used with the Marathi language. These include multilingual-BERT
[4], XLM-R based on RoBERTa [3], and IndicBERT [8] based on AlBERT.
The L3Cube-MahaCorpus along with other publicly available Marathi cor-
pus is used to train these three variations of BERT using MLM objective.
These variations are based on base-BERT, AlBERT, and RoBERTa archi-
tecture and are termed as MahaBERT, MahaAlBERT, and MahaRoBERTa
respectively. These monolingual models perform better than their multi-
lingual counterparts on Marathi downstream tasks.
– MahaGPT [7]9: GPT2 is a generative transformer model trained using
causal language modeling (CLM) objective [15]. It is also a class of self-
supervised models trained to predict the next work on the unsupervised
data. MahaGPT is GPT2 model trained on full Marathi Corpus. The model
can be used for next word prediction tasks or auto-completion tasks. The
model can also be used to generate full sentences from the initial text.
– MahaFT [7]10: Pre-trained word embeddings are commonly used to ini-
tialize the embedding layer of the neural networks. These can also be used
for similarity-based tasks. These distributed representations are trained on
large unlabeled corpus and are useful for many downstream tasks. The Fast-
Text word embeddings are popular for morphologically rich languages [2]. It
represents the word as a bag of character n-grams thus avoiding any out of
vocabulary word. We release MahaFT pre-trained fast text word vectors on
full Marathi corpus. The word embeddings are shown to work better than
the existing word vectors available for Marathi.
– MahaSent [10]11: MahaSent is the ﬁrst major Marathi Sentiment Analysis
Dataset. The sentiment analysis task consists of Marathi tweets categorized
as positive, negative, and neutral. The dataset consists of 12114 train, 2250
test, and 1500 validation examples. We also release the BERT model ﬁne-
tuned on this dataset that can be directly used to predict sentiment labels.
The models released support two-way classiﬁcation (positive and negative)
and three-way classiﬁcation (positive, negative, and neutral).
– MahaNER [13]12: MahaNER is the ﬁrst major gold standard named entity
recognition dataset in Marathi. It contains 25,000 manually tagged sentences
categorized according to the eight entity classes. These entities annotated in
the dataset include names of locations, organizations, people, and numeric
quantities like time, measure, and other entities like dates and designations.
The dataset is released in IOB and non-IOB notations. The dataset is divided
into 21500, 2000, and 1500 train, test, and validation samples respectively.
The BERT model for this token classiﬁcation task is released publicly on the
model hub.
9 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-gpt
10 https://github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP
11 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/MarathiSentiment
12 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/marathi-ner
4
R. Joshi et al.
– MahaHate [17]1314: MahaHate is the ﬁrst major Hate Speech Dataset in
Marathi. The dataset is curated from Twitter and annotated manually. Our
dataset consists of over 25000 distinct tweets labeled into four major classes
i.e hate, oﬀensive, profane, and not. The dataset is divided into 21500, 2000,
and 1500 train, test, and validation samples respectively. The BERT models
trained on this dataset are released publicly and can be directly utilized to
perform two-way classiﬁcation (hate and non-hate) and four-way classiﬁca-
tion (hate, oﬀensive, profane, and neutral). With the rise of hateful content
on social media platforms, the availability of such models becomes more
important for regional languages.
3
Impact
The monolingual Marathi models released in this work have been shown to work
better than the currently available alternatives. A study conducted for Marathi
named entity recognition highlights the importance of our models and datasets
[11]. A similar study for Marathi text classiﬁcation and speciﬁcally hate speech
detection was conducted in [18]. The MahaBERT models have been shown to
work well on sentence classiﬁcation and token classiﬁcation tasks. Some of the
other works done as a part of this project include [9][16].
4
Conclusion
We present L3Cube-MahaNLP, a host of Marathi datasets, models, and library.
We highlight the lack of resources for the Marathi language and built some
most basic resources. The diﬀerent datasets built as a part of this work include
L3Cube-MahaCorpus, MahaSent, MahaNER, and MahaHate. We also release
transformer models trained on these datasets on the model hub.
In the future, we want to further expand on datasets, and models and focus
more on Marathi natural language generation tasks. We will wrap all the models
under a pip package which can currently be accessed using hugging face API.
Acknowledgements
Multiple L3Cube-Pune student groups have contributed to this work. We thank
all the students for their dedicated contributions.
References
1. Alam, T., Khan, A., Alam, F.: Bangla text classiﬁcation using transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2011.04446 (2020)
13 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/mahahate-bert
14 https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune/mahahate-multi-roberta
L3Cube-MahaNLP: Marathi Natural Language Processing
5
2. Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., Mikolov, T.: Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics 5, 135–146 (2017)
3. Conneau, A., Khandelwal, K., Goyal, N., Chaudhary, V., Wenzek, G., Guzm´an,
F., Grave, E., Ott, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V.: Unsupervised cross-lingual
representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116 (2019)
4. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers).
pp. 4171–4186 (2019)
5. Honnibal, M., Montani, I.: Natural language understanding with bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. Unpublished soft-
ware application. https://spacy. io (2017)
6. Joshi, R., Goel, P., Joshi, R.: Deep learning for hindi text classiﬁcation: A com-
parison. In: International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction.
pp. 94–101. Springer (2019)
7. Joshi, R.: L3cube-mahacorpus and mahabert: Marathi monolingual corpus,
marathi bert language models, and resources. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01159
(2022)
8. Kakwani, D., Kunchukuttan, A., Golla, S., Gokul, N., Bhattacharyya, A., Khapra,
M.M., Kumar, P.: inlpsuite: Monolingual corpora, evaluation benchmarks and pre-
trained multilingual language models for indian languages. In: Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Findings.
pp. 4948–4961 (2020)
9. Kulkarni, A., Mandhane, M., Likhitkar, M., Kshirsagar, G., Jagdale, J., Joshi, R.:
Experimental evaluation of deep learning models for marathi text classiﬁcation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04899 (2021)
10. Kulkarni,
A.,
Mandhane,
M.,
Likhitkar,
M.,
Kshirsagar,
G.,
Joshi,
R.:
L3cubemahasent: A marathi tweet-based sentiment analysis dataset. In: Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sen-
timent and Social Media Analysis. pp. 213–220 (2021)
11. Litake, O., Sabane, M., Patil, P., Ranade, A., Joshi, R.: Mono vs multilingual
bert: A case study in hindi and marathi named entity recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12907 (2022)
12. Loper, E., Bird, S.: Nltk: the natural language toolkit. In: Proceedings of the ACL-
02 Workshop on Eﬀective tools and methodologies for teaching natural language
processing and computational linguistics-Volume 1. pp. 63–70 (2002)
13. Patil, P., Ranade, A., Sabane, M., Litake, O., Joshi, R.: L3cube-mahaner:
A marathi named entity recognition dataset and bert models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.06029 (2022)
14. Qiu, X., Sun, T., Xu, Y., Shao, Y., Dai, N., Huang, X.: Pre-trained models for
natural language processing: A survey. Science China Technological Sciences pp.
1–26 (2020)
15. Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I., et al.: Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1(8), 9 (2019)
16. Velankar, A., Patil, H., Gore, A., Salunke, S., Joshi, R.: Hate and oﬀensive speech
detection in hindi and marathi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12200 (2021)
17. Velankar, A., Patil, H., Gore, A., Salunke, S., Joshi, R.: L3cube-mahahate: A
tweet-based marathi hate speech detection dataset and bert models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.13778 (2022)
6
R. Joshi et al.
18. Velankar, A., Patil, H., Joshi, R.: Mono vs multilingual bert for hate speech
detection and text classiﬁcation: A case study in marathi. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.08669 (2022)
19. Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P.,
Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M., et al.: Transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing. In: Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing: system demonstrations. pp. 38–45 (2020)
