Title: Gap Analysis of Natural Language Processing Systems with respect to Linguistic Modality
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.04716v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1504.04716v1  [cs.CL]  18 Apr 2015
Gap Analysis of Natural Language Processing
Systems with respect to Linguistic Modality
Vishal Shukla
Abstract
Modality is one of the important components of grammar in linguistics. It
lets speaker to express attitude towards, or give assessment or potentiality
of state of aﬀairs. It implies diﬀerent senses and thus has diﬀerent percep-
tions as per the context. This paper presents an account showing the gap
in the functionality of the current state of art Natural Language Processing
(NLP) systems. The contextual nature of linguistic modality is studied. In
this paper, the works and logical approaches employed by Natural Language
Processing systems dealing with modality are reviewed. It sees human cog-
nition and intelligence as multi-layered approach that can be implemented
by intelligent systems for learning. Lastly, current ﬂow of research going on
within this ﬁeld is talked providing futurology.
Keywords:
modality, NLP, gap, shortcomings, multi-layered, learning
1. Introduction
Research in NLP is gaining interest as its applications are becoming more
signiﬁcant. Natural language is highly ambiguous and understanding it ef-
fectively can be considered as a primary concern. Modality in language is
associated with contextual understanding and implied perceptions. Deﬁning
modality from a computational linguistics perspective is somewhat diﬃcult
because several concepts are used to refer to phenomena that are related to
modality, depending on the task at hand and the speciﬁc singularities that
V. Shukla
Systems Engineer
Infosys, Bangalore, India.
Contact no.: +91-97394 99580
E-mail: vishal shukla04@infosys.com
the speaker addresses. There are diﬀerent senses that can be articulated by
modality. Understanding precise sense conveyed is important.
The major tasks involved in dealing with modality in text are: detecting
the occurrence of modality, categorizing the type of modality and perceiving
the sense conveyed through it. Parsers and language processing tools iden-
tiﬁes the occurrence of modals by Part of Speech (POS) tagging. Talking
about type of modality, in the literature, standard classiﬁcation of types is
not available as various types are deﬁned. But we consider the classiﬁcation
broadly as in two types: epistemic and deontic. According to Palmer (2014),
epistemic is used by the speakers to express their judgment about the factual
status of the proposition. Whereas deontic modality is concerned with the
speakers directive attitude towards an action to be carried out. It relates
to obligation or permission and to conditional factors that are external to
the relevant individual. The senses of necessity and possibility are incorpo-
rated by epistemic type while those of permission and obligation by deontic.
Modality type categorization and the sense recognition has been carried out
by annotation approaches.
This paper will closely observe the methods applied for the abovemen-
tioned tasks and also review the works in the subject ﬁeld.
It will then
highlight shortcomings of the state of art natural language systems in con-
text to linguistic modality that forming the gap in their functionality. Latter
sections will be covering the directions for the scope of improvement in the
same context.
2. Context Review
As tagging and annotating are the two key aspects, lets summarize them
regarding to the language processing. The process of tagging involves assign-
ing tags to each word in the corpus corresponding to the part of speech that
it embodies. The Part of Speech tagging is an essential subtask in language
processing and is very useful for subsequent phases like syntactic parsing.
The tags into which a token can possibly classiﬁed depends on the tagset
adopted for this task. That is, it depends upon the Treebank taken into use
which deﬁnes the directory of the tags.
Annotation, on the other hand, uses machine learning approach. It uses
pre-annotated corpus to learn and annotate plain text.
The annotations
made are markups usually representing extended features. The extended fea-
tures may include polarity, certainty, subjectivity, sense and type of modality,
2
event mentions, etc. POS tagging is also carried out with machine learn-
ing methods in a similar way as annotation (Manning and Sch¨utze, 1999;
Ratnaparkhi et al, 1996; Toutanova and Manning, 2000).
2.1. Detecting occurrence
A number of diﬀerent expressions in language can have modal meanings.
Von Fintel (2006) discusses on a subset of variety of modal expressions. Tak-
ing into account the tagging output of Stanford NLP parser of few sample
sentences with diﬀerent expressions, some points will be highlighted.
In case of modal auxiliaries used, the parser tags the same with MD i.e.
modal.
1. Sandy must be home.
Sandy/NNP
must/MD
be/VB
home/NN
./.
Thus any explicit occurrence of modal auxiliaries such as must, should/shall,
might, may, could/can will be detected well and clear.
Whereas semi-modals like has to, need to, ought to follow diﬀerent treat-
ment. Sometimes ought to is considered as modal and sometimes as semi-
modal because of diﬀerence in its syntax. Anyhow it is tagged as a modal.
Rest of the semi-modals are not tagged as modal; but auxiliary verbs and
structure of sentence can be identiﬁed by parsers.
2. Sandy has to be home.
Sandy/NNP
has/VBZ
to/TO
be/VB
home/NN
./.
3. Sandy ought to be home.
Sandy/NNP
ought/MD
to/TO
be/VB
home/NN
./.
Apart from modal auxiliaries and semi-modals, modal meaning can also
be conveyed using adverbs (perhaps, probably, etc.), nouns (possibility, ne-
cessity, etc.), adjectives (bound, certain, etc.), and also conditional constructs
(if.. then..).
3
4. It is far from necessary that Sandy is home.
It/PRP
is/VBZ
far/RB
from/IN
necessary/JJ
that/IN
Sandy/NNP
is/VBZ
home/NN
./.
5. There is a slight possibility that Sandy is home.
There/EX
is/VBZ
a/DT
slight/JJ
possibility/NN
that/IN
Sandy/NNP
is/VBZ
home/NN
./.
6. Perhaps Sandy is home.
Perhaps/RB
Sandy/NNP
is/VBZ
home/NN
./.
7. If the light is on, Sandy is home.
If/IN
the/DT
light/NN
is/VBZ
on/IN
,/,
Sandy/NNP
is/VBZ
home/NN
./.
Although, the advances in calibration of parsers has improved the ability
to tag words accurately, but above certain point, the mechanism seem to
become insuﬃcient to gather underlying information that is not superﬁcial
or apparent.
2.2. Type Categorization and Sense Perception
Categorization of type of modality in text and the identiﬁcation of sense
conveyed can be done by developing annotation schemes. There are works
that accommodate annotating of those features, but not necessarily they are
organized with study of languages perspective; which makes it diﬃcult to
summarize and separate out the relevant points of interest. Upon review-
ing the literature, it can be seen that various annotating schemes has been
constructed over time for marking annotations of diﬀerent components.
Baker et al (2012) described a modality/negation (MN) annotation scheme
which isolates three components of modality and negation: a trigger (that is
source of modality or negation), a target (action associated with modality or
negation) and a holder (the experiencer of modality). Moreover they have
constructed MN lexicon and two automated MN taggers using the annotation
scheme.
Ruppenhofer and Rehbein (2012) presents annotation scheme that anno-
tates type of English modals in MPQA corpus. The modal verbs targeted
4
were can/could, may/might, must, ought, shall/should. The annotation in-
volved categorization of the modals in to six types: epistemic, deontic, dy-
namic, optative, concessive, conditional.
Pakray et al (2012) experimented on QA4MRE data sets to identify modal-
ity and negation in text and assign labels mod, neg, neg-mod, none for oc-
currences of modal, negation, modality and negation, and absence of both
modality and negation respectively. And the detected modals were catego-
rized into epistemic and deontic.
Hendrickx et al (2012) presents a scheme for annotation of modality in
Portuguese, using MMAX2 tool. The components annotated were: trigger
(the element conveying the modal value), target (the expression in the scope
of the trigger), source of the event mention (speaker or writer), and source
of the modality (agent or experiencer). Also, for trigger, two attributes were
speciﬁed: modal value and polarity. They stated thirteen diﬀerent types into
which the modal value could be categorized.
Rubinstein et al (2013) proposed ﬁne-grained annotation approach utiliz-
ing MPQA corpus and MMAX2 tool. It was said to be ﬁne-grained as it ex-
tends some of the previous works with a number of novel features to improve
detection and interpretation of modals in text. The features annotated were:
modality type, polarity, propositional arguments, source, background, modi-
ﬁed element, degree indicator, outscoping quantiﬁer and lemma. The types
into which modality was categorized are: ﬁne grained types: epistemic, cir-
cumstantial, ability, deontic, bouletic, teleological, and bouletic/teleological;
and the coarse grained types: epistemic or circumstantial, ability or circum-
stantial, and priority.
On surveying other studies carried out using annotations, apparently it
seems that more and more attributes were annotated to make text under-
standing precise. Certain works moved in the direction of subjectivity anal-
ysis; some in certainty analysis; whereas others focused on time, events and
temporal analysis; all of them being implicitly useful in the study of type
and/or sense understanding of modality.
Diﬀerent types of subjectivity is implied in discourse by diﬀerent types,
epistemic and deontic modals. The relationship between subjectivity and
modality is elaborately discussed in Sanders and Spooren (1997).
Rubin et al.
(2004; 2006) presented a certainty categorization model
based on four hypothesized dimensions and tested the model on a sample of
news articles. Rubin (2010) identiﬁes that certainty can be seen as a variety
of epistemic modality expressed in form of markers like probably, perhaps,
5
undoubtedly, etc.
Nissim et al (2013) proposed modality annotation model that they say
to be two layered. Factuality and speakers attitude being two components
marked, they also plan to make the model more coherent by annotating
strength of modality.
Matsuyoshi et al (2010) clearly draws attention to the point that recent
developments in language processing has improved precision but is insuf-
ﬁcient for applications such as information extraction, question answering
and recognizing textual entailment. Such applications require more informa-
tion such as modality, polarity, and other associated information collectively
referred as extended modality. Matsuyoshi proposes an annotation scheme
that represents extended modality and consists of seven components: source,
time, conditional, primary modality type, actuality, evaluation, and focus.
Utilizing the work, they also constructed an annotated corpus in Japanese.
Emphasizing upon event modality, Saur´ı et al. (2006a) says that modality
is an important component of discourse together with other levels of infor-
mation such as argument structure and temporal information. That made
an apparent need for a more sophisticated approach that is sensitive to such
additional information. They worked on annotation scheme that annotates
event modality and also identifying its scope using TimeML. Saur´ı (2006b)
has also worked on SlinkET attempting the construction of modal parser for
events. Pustejovsky et al. (2003) built the TimeBank corpus which is an-
notated with information like modals, events, times, relation between events
and temporal expressions. Saur´ı and Pustejovsky (2009) built the FactBank
on the basis of TimeBank, where events are assigned with diﬀerent degrees of
factuality according to their source-introducing predicates (SIPS) and source.
Diﬀerent degrees of factuality are determined by diﬀerent degrees of certainty
and polarity axes. Degrees of certainty include certain, probable, possible and
unknown. Whereas polarity axis contained positive, negative and underspec-
iﬁed.
3. Gap and Futurology
Linguistic modality is one of the components of discourse that is asso-
ciated with context, sense and meaning, mental and real spaces, and force
dynamics.
Also there is no proper well deﬁned classiﬁcation of diﬀerent types and
senses of modality in linguistic literature. This lack of taxonomy has con-
6
trived enormous confusions regarding types and senses. Considering the fact
that the section is complex and modality in discourse has many aspects as-
sociated with it, and its wider scope, even language scientists can contribute
towards it.
First point noted is that diﬀerent kinds of expressions can be used to
convey modal meanings. And we saw that the tagging approach is limited
to tag modals explicit use in text. Moreover, taggers don't put any further
light on the type and sense of the modality. Though attempts have made on
type and sense classiﬁcation using annotation methods, but due to ﬂexibility
of meanings, it is diﬃcult to standardize. Flexibility of meaning means the
modal verb has diﬀerent meaning according to context. Modality in language
has contextual meanings and implied perceptions. And mechanisms fail to
identify perspective, aspect and contextuality.
Another drawback is dependency in both methods; tagging as well as
annotating. The process of tagging is dependent on the tagset and the an-
notation scheme is limited by its own training corpus. Although this lexicon
dependency of the available approaches are useful for preliminary passes of
processing but not an eﬀective way for understanding natural language which
includes cognition and perception.
At this point, inspiring from human information processing mechanisms
would be seen appropriate. In this context understanding of human cognitive
process can deﬁnitely enlighten the path of development to make our systems
artiﬁcially intelligent. Computational models of cognition, creative insight,
skill acquisition and the design of instructional software, as well as other top-
ics in higher cognition needs to be reconsidered. It is noteworthy to see the
humans perceptive systems, visual or speech/audio, etc., both are essentially
layered and hierarchical in structure. Thus, it is natural to believe that the
state-of-the-art can be advanced in processing these types of natural lan-
guage if structurally eﬃcient and eﬀective learning model can be developed.
The layered structure of human learning shown in Kaplan & Sadock’s Com-
prehensive Textbook of Psychiatry (Sadock, 2000, ﬁg. 24-1) is instrumental
in visualization of complexity and multi-stage structure involved. Moreover,
the interconnection and synergy between the layers is equally vital.
Real systems are dynamic in nature and reform continuous shift that
produce perceptual diﬀerence. If the shift is in upward direction (in hierar-
chical multi-layered model) that results in high dimensionality in nature of
expression. Thus the expression becomes nonspeciﬁc and losses subjectiv-
ity. Nonspeciﬁc discourse are too complex to interpret and to reach to any
7
conclusion is very diﬃcult. From viewing the software dealing with language
processing looks in direction and trends accordance to the subject Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) and Robotics that attempts to mimic the dynamic and be-
havioral output from human. In context of natural language processing with
special reference to modality processing noticeable development observed in
static format of expressions and expression of contextuality also attempted
within one document as in MMAX2 from German NLP group.
Neural network hidden layer processing and continuous modiﬁcation were
successfully executed in mechanical output in ﬁeld of machine learning. The
directions were explored with annotated titles like deep learning and lay-
ered approach handling are most popular among research works in language
processing.
As per the objectives of a system, some key features that should be consid-
ered such as; relevant well-structured knowledge base with improved feature
space should be formed upon each processing. And this knowledge base must
be dynamically updated (active learning that means continuous updatation
of the knowledge base by each layer of the model) so that it can eﬀectively
be useful in applications of the system.
Machine learning has been a dominant tool in NLP for many years. How-
ever, the use of traditional machine learning in NLP has been mostly lim-
ited to numerical optimization of weights for human designed representations
and features from the text data. The goal of representation learning is to
automatically develop features or representations from the raw text material
appropriate for a wide range of NLP tasks.
Deep learning is gaining popularity very recently as it provides levels of
abstraction. The multi-layered architecture formed due to the levels ensure
natural progression from low level to high level structure as seen in natural
complexity. Deep learning works on the principle of formation of learning
representations.
The essence of deep learning is to automate the process
of discovering eﬀective features or representations for any machine learning
task, including automatically transferring knowledge from one task to an-
other concurrently. In regard to NLP, deep learning develops and makes use
an important concept called embedding, which refers to the representation
of symbolic information in natural language text at word-level, phrase-level,
and even sentence-level in terms of continuous-valued vectors.
Another concept of multi-task learning has also shown improvements in
learning approaches. Multi-task learning is a machine learning approach that
learns to solve several related problems at the same time, using a shared
8
representation. It can be regarded as one of the two major classes of transfer
learning or learning with knowledge transfer, which focuses on generalizations
across distributions, domains, or tasks. The other major class of transfer
learning is adaptive learning, where knowledge transfer is carried out in a
sequential manner, typically from a source task to a target task.
3.1. Recent works with deep architectures in NLP
Variety of deep architectures like neural networks, deep belief networks
and others has shown signiﬁcant performance in various applications of lan-
guage processing including other ﬁelds.
Collobert et al (2011) provide a comprehensive review on ways of apply-
ing uniﬁed neural network architectures and related deep learning algorithms
to solve NLP problems from scratch, meaning that no traditional NLP meth-
ods are used to extract features. The recent work by Mikolov et al (2013a)
derives word embeddings by simplifying the Neural Network Language Model
(NNLM). It is found that the NNLM can be successfully trained in two
steps. Yet another deep learning approach to machine translation appeared
in Mikolov et al (2013b).
One most interesting NLP task recently tackled by deep learning meth-
ods is that of knowledge base (ontology) completion, which is instrumental in
question-answering and many other NLP applications. An early work in this
space came from Bordes et al (2011), where a process is introduced to auto-
matically learn structured distributed embeddings of knowledge bases. The
proposed representations in the continuous-valued vector space are compact
and can be eﬃciently learned from large-scale data of entities and relations.
A specialized neural network architecture is used. In the follow-up work that
focuses on multi-relational data (Bordes et al, 2014), the semantic matching
energy model is proposed to learn vector representations for both entities
and relations.
Other recent works Socher et al (2013) and Bowman (2013), adopts an
approach, based on the use of neural tensor networks, to attack the problem
of reasoning over a large joint knowledge graph for relation classiﬁcation.
The knowledge graph is represented as triples of a relation between two en-
tities, and the authors aim to develop a neural network model suitable for
inference over such relationships. The model they presented is a neural ten-
sor network, with one layer only but it would be encouraged to work further
on multi-layered network models. The network is used to represent entities
9
in ﬁxed-dimensional vectors, which are created separately by averaging pre-
trained word embedding vectors. It then learns the tensor with the newly
added relationship element that describes the interactions among all the la-
tent components in each of the relationships. Experimentally, Socher et al.,
shows that this tensor model can eﬀectively classify unseen relationships in
WordNet and FreeBase. Thus, models built on tensors can contribute upto
certain extent for reasoning over relationships between entities enhancing
knowledge bases for improved performance. Works utilizing Recursive Neu-
ral Networks (RNN) for syntactic parsing and word representations has been
performed in Luong et al (2013); Socher et al (2010). Deep neural networks
have been popular and are well performing as they are intrinsically multi-
layered in structure.
Deep learning is a hot area of research and there is still much potential
for signiﬁcant advances. It can be said that the paradigm of deep learning
architectures can improve the results of our models upto quite a certain ex-
tent; but there is still a limit to it considering the whole problem statement.
This is because the deep neural networks are yet a kind of black box model
in terms of functionality. By revising models and designs enhancement in
performance of deep learning algorithms can surely be made as per speciﬁc
application domain but there would be a bound to the possible improvements
and the available approaches wouldnt provide enough means to the desired
level of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Approaches that are multi-layered and prefer-
ably white box models would be essentially important for organization and
control of intermediate layers functionalities.
As mentioned above, not only for application in NLP but for any ap-
plication that deals with dynamics of real world conditions, development
of complex system using combination of several simple modular and multi-
layered hierarchal architectures with the key features will be helpful. And
hopefully such models can attain better linguistic understanding accuracy
that would be contributory to the application expertise.
References
Baker K, Bloodgood M, Dorr BJ, Callison-Burch C, Filardo NW, Piatko C,
Levin L, Miller S (2012) Modality and negation in simt use of modality and
negation in semantically-informed syntactic mt. Computational Linguistics
38(2):411–438
10
Bordes A, Weston J, Collobert R, Bengio Y, et al (2011) Learning structured
embeddings of knowledge bases. In: AAAI
Bordes A, Glorot X, Weston J, Bengio Y (2014) A semantic matching en-
ergy function for learning with multi-relational data. Machine Learning
94(2):233–259
Bowman SR (2013) Can recursive neural tensor networks learn logical rea-
soning? arXiv preprint arXiv:13126192
Collobert R, Weston J, Bottou L, Karlen M, Kavukcuoglu K, Kuksa P (2011)
Natural language processing (almost) from scratch. The Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 12:2493–2537
Hendrickx I, Mendes A, Mencarelli S (2012) Modality in text: a proposal for
corpus annotation. In: LREC, pp 1805–1812
Luong MT, Socher R, Manning C (2013) Better word representations with
recursive neural networks for morphology. CoNLL-2013 104
Manning CD, Sch¨utze H (1999) Foundations of statistical natural language
processing. MIT press
Matsuyoshi S, Eguchi M, Sao C, Murakami K, Inui K, Matsumoto Y (2010)
Annotating event mentions in text with modality, focus, and source infor-
mation. In: LREC
Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J (2013a) Eﬃcient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:13013781
Mikolov T, Le QV, Sutskever I (2013b) Exploiting similarities among lan-
guages for machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:13094168
Nissim M, Pietrandrea P, Sanso A, Mauri C (2013) Cross-linguistic anno-
tation of modality: a data-driven hierarchical model. In: Workshop on
Interoperable Semantic Annotation, p 7
Pakray P, Bhaskar P, Banerjee S, Bandyopadhyay S, Gelbukh AF (2012) An
automatic system for modality and negation detection. In: CLEF (Online
Working Notes/Labs/Workshop), Citeseer
Palmer FR (2014) Modality and the English modals. Routledge
11
Pustejovsky J, Hanks P, Sauri R, See A, Gaizauskas R, Setzer A, Radev
D, Sundheim B, Day D, Ferro L, et al (2003) The timebank corpus. In:
Corpus linguistics, vol 2003, p 40
Ratnaparkhi A, et al (1996) A maximum entropy model for part-of-speech
tagging. In: Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, Philadelphia, PA, vol 1, pp 133–142
Rubin VL (2010) Epistemic modality: From uncertainty to certainty in the
context of information seeking as interactions with texts. Information Pro-
cessing & Management 46(5):533–540
Rubin VL, Kando N, Liddy ED (2004) Certainty categorization model. In:
AAAI spring symposium: Exploring attitude and aﬀect in text: Theories
and applications, Stanford, CA
Rubin VL, Liddy ED, Kando N (2006) Certainty identiﬁcation in texts: Cat-
egorization model and manual tagging results. In: Computing attitude and
aﬀect in text: Theory and applications, Springer, pp 61–76
Rubinstein A, Harner H, Krawczyk E, Simonson D, Katz G, Portner P (2013)
Toward ﬁne-grained annotation of modality in text. In: Proceedings of the
Tenth International Conference for Computational Semantics (IWCS 2013)
Ruppenhofer J, Rehbein I (2012) Yes we can!?
annotating the senses of
english modal verbs. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pp 24–26
Sadock BJ (2000) Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry
(2 Volume Set). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Sanders J, Spooren W (1997) Perspective, sulijectivity, and modality from
a cognitive. inguis ic point of view. Discourse and perspective in cognitive
linguistics 151:85
Saur´ı R, Pustejovsky J (2009) Factbank: A corpus annotated with event
factuality. Language resources and evaluation 43(3):227–268
Saur´ı R, Verhagen M, Pustejovsky J (2006a) Annotating and recognizing
event modality in text. In: Proceedings of 19th International FLAIRS
Conference
12
Saur´ı R, Verhagen M, Pustejovsky J (2006b) Slinket: a partial modal parser
for events. In: In Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, LREC
2006, Citeseer
Socher R, Manning CD, Ng AY (2010) Learning continuous phrase represen-
tations and syntactic parsing with recursive neural networks. In: Proceed-
ings of the NIPS-2010 Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning
Workshop, pp 1–9
Socher R, Chen D, Manning CD, Ng A (2013) Reasoning with neural tensor
networks for knowledge base completion. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp 926–934
Toutanova K, Manning CD (2000) Enriching the knowledge sources used in a
maximum entropy part-of-speech tagger. In: Proceedings of the 2000 Joint
SIGDAT conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing
and very large corpora: held in conjunction with the 38th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics-Volume 13, Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp 63–70
Von Fintel K (2006) Modality and language
13
