Title: Analyzing Sustainability Reports Using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.08073v2
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2011.08073v2  [cs.CL]  17 Nov 2020
Analyzing Sustainability Reports Using Natural
Language Processing
Alexandra (Sasha) Luccioni
Université de Montréal + Mila
Emily (Emi) Baylor
McGill University
Nicolas Duchene
Université de Montréal
Abstract
Climate change is a far-reaching, global phenomenon that will impact many as-
pects of our society, including the global stock market [1]. In recent years, com-
panies have increasingly been aiming to both mitigate their environmental impact
and adapt to the changing climate context. This is reported via increasingly ex-
haustive reports, which cover many types of climate risks and exposures under
the umbrella of Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG). However, given
this abundance of data, sustainability analysts are obliged to comb through hun-
dreds of pages of reports in order to ﬁnd relevant information. We leveraged re-
cent progress in Natural Language Processing (NLP) to create a custom model,
ClimateQA, which allows the analysis of ﬁnancial reports in order to identify
climate-relevant sections based on a question answering approach. We present
this tool and the methodology that we used to develop it in the present article.
1
Introduction
In the coming years and decades, climate change will have a major impact on many global systems
and structures, from agriculture to transportation and urban planning, affecting individual and col-
lective behavior [2]. Its impact on the global stock market alone will be extensive, with damages
estimated to be in the trillions of dollars [1]. However, it is difﬁcult to predict exactly how and
where climate change will impact ﬁnancial assets, largely due to the lack of quantitative data on the
subject. Nonetheless, gathering data regarding the risks and exposure that climate change poses to
speciﬁc companies, as well as organizations’ efforts to address and mitigate this risk, is a key part
of this effort of predicting the extent of climate change impacts on the stock market. This data is
often in textual format, buried in hundreds of pages of ﬁnancial documents which must be manually
analyzed, requiring signiﬁcant time and effort.
Disclosing climate change risks and liabilities currently consists of a mix of mandatory and voluntary
initiatives, resulting in disclosures that are often very heterogeneous and lack structure with regards
to the subjects they cover, the metrics they use and the extent to which climate risk is quantiﬁed.
To improve the state of voluntary climate disclosing and to encourage companies to increase their
climate transparency, the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) was founded
in 2015. In 2017, the TCFD released a set of recommendations to help structure and formalize
companies’ sustainability and climate risk reporting [3]. One of the key proposals that they made
was a set of 14 questions to guide sustainability reporting, covering many different topics, from
quantifying greenhouse gas emissions to ensuring the proper identiﬁcation of climate-related risks
and/or opportunities by the board of directors. In recent years, the TCFD questions are extensively
used to guide the analysis of climate risk disclosures, with analysts using them to assess the extent
and type of climate exposure of companies.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.
The TCFD itself also uses the 14 questions to publish their yearly status reports on the progress of
sustainability reporting. In 2019, they estimated that out of the 1000 companies whose reports they
analyzed, only 29% made relevant climate disclosures, stating that they were “concerned that not
enough companies are disclosing decision-useful climate-related ﬁnancial information" [4]. How-
ever, this ﬁgure is hard to calculate since it is based on a subset of the total number of companies and
since the current approach used to analyse the reports is based on keyword search for analyst-deﬁned
terms. This suggests that much of the available data regarding ﬁnancial climate disclosures is under-
utilized or simply ignored. In recent years, a few proposals have also been made regarding using
NLP for analyzing sustainability reporting, signifying that this ﬁeld is gathering momentum [5, 6].
The goal of our research project is to use Natural Language Processing (NLP) to create a tool al-
lowing more efﬁcient analysis of ﬁnancial reports, reducing the time and effort required to identify
climate-relevant disclosures.
2
Model and Approach
Transformer models [7] have had substantial success in many NLP tasks, from question answer-
ing [8] to machine translation [9] and natural language inference (NLI) [10]. In recent years, differ-
ent variations of original architectures such as BERT [11] have also been used for domain-speciﬁc
applications, from biomedical text mining [12] to sentiment analysis [13], and have already been
trained on ﬁnancial documents [14]. We adopted this Transformer-based approach to develop Cli-
mateQA, our tool for extracting climate-relevant passages in ﬁnancial documents; we will describe
our approach in more detail below.
2.1
Pretraining on Unlabelled Data
Progress in NLP applications in ﬁnance has proven to be challenging notably because of the special-
ized language used: terms such as ‘bull’ and ‘short’ do not have the same meanings in ﬁnance as
in general discourse 1 , whereas technical terms such as ‘liquidity’ or ‘Keynesian’ may not even be
present in training corpora. In fact, research in ﬁnancial NLP has found that using general-purpose
NLP models trained on corpora such as Wikipedia and the Common Crawl fail to capture domain-
speciﬁc terms and concepts which are critical for a coherent representation of the ﬁnancial lexicon,
and are therefore difﬁcult to use out-of-the-box for ﬁnancial tasks [14].
To address this issue, we scraped 2,249 publicly available ﬁnancial and sustainability reports from
sources such as EDGAR and the Global Reporting Initiative databases. These documents covered
over 10 years of reports from a variety of publicly-traded companies, in sectors ranging from banking
to agriculture. We extracted the raw text from the PDFs of the reports using the Tika package and
used the raw text output to pre-train a word embedding model on the documents. Our hope in
doing so was to reﬂect the context-speciﬁc nature of ﬁnancial discourse, and to better represent the
vocabulary used in sustainability reports.
2.2
Fine-tuning on Labeled Data
Given the prevalence of the TCFD questions and the diversity of subjects that they cover, we used
them to guide the analysis of sustainability reports. More speciﬁcally, we framed our task as one of
question answering: given one of the 14 TCFD questions and a set of candidate sentences extracted
from a ﬁnancial report, we trained a model to determine whether or not a given sentence is an answer
to one of the questions (see Table 1 for examples of TCFD questions and answers).
In order to gather labeled data, we reached out to a team of sustainability analysts, who were able
to provide us with a small set of ﬁnancial reports from previous years, hand-labeled using the 14
TCFD questions. Based on these reports, we constructed our training set for the question answering
task: positive examples consisted of pairs of questions and sentences which contained the answers
to the questions, whereas negative examples were generated by pairing the remaining sentences with
the questions that they did not answer. We split this randomly by company into three sets (training,
development and test) and took stratiﬁed random samples of each set, separating the documents on a
per-company basis. Our ClimateQA model was therefore trained on 15,000 negative examples and
1A ‘bull’ market is one that is on the rise; to ‘short’ a stock means investing in such a way that the investor
will proﬁt if the value of the stock falls.
2
Table 1: Examples of Question-Answer pairs from our corpus
TCFD Question
Answer Passage
Does the organization describe the board’s
(or board committee’s) oversight of
climate-related risks and/or opportunities?
The Company’s Audit Committee has the delegated
risk management oversight responsibility and
receives updates on the risk management processes
and key risk factors on a quarterly basis.
Does the organization describe the
climate-related risks or opportunities
the organization has identiﬁed?
The availability and price of these commodities are
subject to factors such as changes in weather
conditions, plantings, and government policies
1,500 positive examples, whereas the development set comprised of 7,500 negative examples and
750 positive examples, while the test set had 1,200 negative and 400 positive examples.
3
Results
3.1
Comparing Large and Base Models
To ensure the best performance of our model, we decided to use the RoBERTa (Robustly optimized
BERT approach) architecture, whose performance was found to be either matching or exceeding
that of the original BERT architecture on a variety of tasks [15], trained on a masked language
model task on data from Wikipedia and the Common Crawl. However, there are in fact two dif-
ferent versions of the RoBERTa architecture: RoBERTa-Large, which has 355M parameters, and
RoBERTa-Base, which has only 125M. In traditional NLP applications, RoBERTa-Large is often
the preferred version of BERT due to it being considered larger and more accurate [15]. However,
more parameters comes with signiﬁcantly higher memory requirements and a longer training time
– in our case, RoBERTa-Large took almost 12 hours to train on a 12 GB GPU, whereas RoBERTa-
Base took less than 5 hours. We therefore compared the performance of both models based on their
F1 score, given the large class imbalance of our data. A metric we were also particularly interested
in was the difference between the validation and test scores, since this is a good indicator of our
model’s capacity to generalize. As can be seen in Table 2 while RoBERTa-Large does slightly better
than RoBERTa-Base across the board, the differences are minor, between 0.5 and 2.5%. Given the
major difference between the two models in terms of memory constraints and training time, and the
importance of energy efﬁciency in choosing neural network architectures [16], we decided to use
RoBERTa-Base for further hyper-parameter tuning and online deployment.
Table 2: Comparing RoBERTa-Large and RoBERTa-Base
Train F1
Validation F1
Test F1
Val-Test
Difference
RoBERTa-Large
99.9%
92.2%
85.5%
-6.7%
RoBERTa-Base
99.9%
91.7%
82%
-9.7%
3.2
Analyzing Results by Sector and by Question
Both the labelled and unlabelled datasets that we trained ClimateQA on were from a variety of sec-
tors, which made them differ slightly in the terminology used and the types of disclosures made.
For instance, the climate change-related risks identiﬁed by insurance companies was mostly due to
physical risk (e.g. due to coastal properties being damaged by repeated ﬂooding), whereas those
identiﬁed in the energy sector can be linked to market or legislative risk (e.g. for oil and gas compa-
nies impacted by higher taxation rates or customers switching to renewable energy). We therefore
analyzed our results by sector to get a better idea of which sectors had the best performance. We
found that the Energy sector had the best results, most likely due to the homogeneity of the compa-
nies in the labeled data we received – most of it was from oil and gas companies who disclosed very
similar risks and opportunities and often used extensive boilerplate language. Overall, the general-
ization capacity of ClimateQA in respect to the different sectors was good across the board, with
an average 13.3% difference between validation and test scores, which is to be expected since they
consisted of different companies.
3
Table 3: ClimateQA results by sector
Validation
F1 Score
Test F1
Score
Val - Test
Difference
Agriculture, Food & Forests
89.4%
72.1%
-17.2%
Energy
94.2%
89.8%
-4.4%
Banks
91.9%
86.6%
-5.3%
Transportation
86.9%
72.5%
-14.4%
Insurance
92.9%
78.7%
-14.2%
Materials & Buildings
91.8%
67.6%
-24.2%
Average across sectors
91.7%
82.0%
-9.7%
We also looked at ClimateQA’s performance on each of the 14 TCFD questions (a detailed per-
question analysis is presented in Appendix 1). This comparison is difﬁcult to do systematically,
because some questions are answered much more frequently than others. For instance, Question 1
(“Does the organization describe the board’s oversight of climate-related risks and/or opportuni-
ties?") is answered by all companies in our dataset, whereas Question 12 (“Does the organization
disclose Scope 1 and Scope 2, and, if appropriate Scope 3 GHG emissions?") is answered much
less frequently, with only 8% of companies providing answers. Nonetheless, there are some obser-
vations can be made, for instance the fact that Question 4 (“Does the organization describe time
frames associated with its climate-related risks or opportunities?") shows the worst performance;
we believe that this is due to its genericity, since time frames can be anything from numbers, e.g.
‘by 2025’, to time horizons, e.g. ‘within the next ﬁve years. Furthermore, Question 10 (“Does the
organization describe how processes for identifying, assessing, and managing climate-related risks
are integrated into the organization’s overall risk management?") has the most signiﬁcant differ-
ences between validation and test data, up to 51%. We believe that this is due to the speciﬁcity and
diversity of answers, since these processes that may vary very much depending on the size and type
of company that is involved. Nonetheless, it is interesting to observe which questions were easier to
generalize for the ClimateQA model, and which needed more data to attain better performance.
4
The Final Tool and Next Steps
While the NLP research involved in our project was an interesting and worthwhile endeavor in
itself, our end goal was always to create a user-friendly sustainability report tool that could easily
be used by analysts. This is why we have spent a signiﬁcant amount of time and effort deploying
our ClimateQA model. To this end, the model is hosted on the Microsoft Azure cloud solution (see
Appendix 2 for high-level architecture), allowing users to interact with a web application without
needing ML expertise. Via the website, a user is able to upload PDF ﬁles to be analyzed and receive
a batch ID which they can subsequently use to check if they have been processed. In terms of the
processing pipeline, once the PDF ﬁles are uploaded by the user, they are sent to an Azure blob
storage; this triggers an Azure ML pipeline composed of three steps: (1) Extraction of the raw
text from the PDF, (2) Parsing and splitting the text into a TSV ﬁle, and (3) Inference using the
ClimateQA model, which identiﬁes sections of the text that answer the question(s) submitted. The
results are sent to the blob storage, and the user is able to download the results of the inference in
TSV format and use them to support their analysis.
We are working on two future directions for our project: improving the model itself and improving
the user experience of the website. On the one hand, error analysis of our results has brought to light
that sentences that were part of a PDF table were often not identiﬁed by our approach. We are there-
fore currently working on improving our text extraction approach, notably by exploring commercial
PDF extraction documents to identify rows and cells within tables in the reports themselves. We are
also looking into ways of better utilizing the pre-trained word embedding models in our approach;
while our current model does well now, we believe that this would help it work even better on the
ﬁnance-speciﬁc vocabulary that is present in the reports. On the other hand, we are working on the
website so that it can display results interactively, allowing users to visualize the passages identiﬁed
by the model within the documents. This visualization tool will help democratize ClimateQA by
bridging the gap between end-users and a specialized climate ﬁnance model, all the while keeping a
simple user interface abstracting away all implementation details.
4
References
[1] Simon Dietz, Alex Bowen, Charlie Dixon, and Philip Gradwell. ‘climate value at risk’of global
ﬁnancial assets. Nature Climate Change, 6(7):676–679, 2016.
[2] David Rolnick, Priya L Donti, Lynn H Kaack, Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste,
Kris Sankaran, Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna
Waldman-Brown, et al.
Tackling climate change with machine learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05433, 2019.
[3] FSB TCFD.
Final report: recommendations of the task force on climate-related ﬁnancial
disclosures. Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures,
available at: www. fsb-tcfd. org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/FINAL-TCFD-Report-062817.
pdf (accessed 15 January 2018), 2017.
[4] TCFD. 2019 status report. https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/publications/tcfd-2019-status,
2019.
[5] Alexandra Luccioni and Hector Palacios. Using natural language processing to analyze ﬁ-
nancial climate disclosures. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Long Beach, California, 2019.
[6] Jonas Becker. Recognition and assessment of climate disclosure in annual business reports
with natural language processing. Master’s thesis, University of Frankfurt, 2019.
[7] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
[8] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu
Soricut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
[9] Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. Scaling neural machine transla-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00187, 2018.
[10] Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loic Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. Su-
pervised learning of universal sentence representations from natural language inference data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02364, 2017.
[11] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
2018.
[12] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and
Jaewoo Kang. Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical
text mining. Bioinformatics, 36(4):1234–1240, 2020.
[13] Saif M Mohammad. Sentiment analysis: Detecting valence, emotions, and other affectual
states from text. In Emotion measurement, pages 201–237. Elsevier, 2016.
[14] Dogu Araci. Finbert: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.10063, 2019.
[15] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[16] Alexandre Lacoste, Alexandra Luccioni, Victor Schmidt, and Thomas Dandres. Quantifying
the carbon emissions of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700, 2019.
5
Appendix 1
Table 4: ClimateQA results by question
TCFD Question
Validation
F1 Score
Testing
F1 Score
Val - Test
Difference
1) Does the organization describe the board’s oversight of
climate-related risks and / or opportunities?
97.78%
84.85%
-12.93%
2) Does the organization describe management’s role in
assessing and managing climate-related risks and/or opportunities?
96.60%
84.75%
-11.85%
3) Does the organization describe the climate-related risks or
opportunities the organization has identiﬁed?
90.61%
89.50%
-1.11%
4) Does the organization describe time frames (short, medium, or
long term) associated with its climate-related risks or opportunities?
75.00%
N/A
N/A
5) Does the organization describe the impact of climate-related risks
and opportunities on the organization?
90.91%
86.59%
-4.32%
6) Does the organization describe the resilience of its strategy, taking
into consideration different climate-related scenarios, including a
potential future state aligned with the Paris Agreement?
94.12%
N/A
N/A
7) Does the organization disclose the use of a 2C scenario in evaluating
strategy or ﬁnancial planning, or for other business purposes?
100.00%
100.00%
0.00%
8) Does the organization describe the organization’s processes for
identifying and/or assessing climate-related risks?
89.87%
81.08%
-8.79%
9) Does the organization describe the organization’s processes for
managing climate-related risks?
92.54%
60.00%
-32.54%
10) Does the organization describe how processes for identifying,
assessing, and managing climate-related risks are integrated into
the organization’s overall risk management?
96.15%
44.44%
-51.71%
11) Does the organization disclose the metrics it uses to assess climate-
related risks and/or opportunities?"
88.48%
90.67%
2.18%
12) Does the organization disclose Scope 1 and Scope 2, and, if
appropriate Scope 3 GHG emissions?
97.50%
94.74%
-2.76%
13) Does the organization describe the targets it uses to manage climate-
related risks and/or opportunities?
90.20%
98.31%
8.11%
14) Does the organization describe its performance related to those
targets (referenced in question 13)?
93.33%
73.08%
-20.26%
Average
92.35%
82.24%
-10.98%
6
This figure "architecture.png" is available in "png"
 format from:
http://arxiv.org/ps/2011.08073v2
