Title: Revealing Hidden Mechanisms of Cross-Country Content Moderation with Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05280v2
--------------------------------------------------

Revealing Hidden Mechanisms of Cross-Country Content Moderation with
Natural Language Processing
Neemesh Yadav*
IIIT Delhi
neemesh20529@iiitd.ac.in
Jiarui Liu*
CMU
jiarui@cmu.edu
Francesco Ortu
University of Trieste
francesco.ortu@phd.units.it
Roya Ensafi
University of Michigan
ensafi@umich.edu
Zhijing Jin
MPI & University of Toronto
zjin@cs.toronto.edu
Rada Mihalcea
University of Michigan
mihalcea@umich.edu
Abstract
The ability of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) methods to categorize text into multiple
classes has motivated their use in online con-
tent moderation tasks, such as hate speech and
fake news detection. However, there is limited
understanding of how or why these methods
make such decisions, or why certain content is
moderated in the first place. To investigate the
hidden mechanisms behind content moderation,
we explore multiple directions: 1) training clas-
sifiers to reverse-engineer content moderation
decisions across countries; 2) explaining con-
tent moderation decisions by analyzing Shapley
values and LLM-guided explanations. Our pri-
mary focus is on content moderation decisions
made across countries, using pre-existing cor-
pora sampled from the Twitter Stream Grab.
Our experiments reveal interesting patterns in
censored posts, both across countries and over
time. Through human evaluations of LLM-
generated explanations across three LLMs, we
assess the effectiveness of using LLMs in con-
tent moderation. Finally, we discuss potential
future directions, as well as the limitations and
ethical considerations of this work.1
Disclaimer: This paper contains examples that
may be considered offensive or hateful towards
certain groups.
1
Introduction
In an era where billions of users engage with digi-
tal platforms daily, content moderation serves as a
critical governance mechanism that balances free-
dom of expression with the need to mitigate harm
and maintain community standards (Grimmelmann,
2015). Platforms enforce moderation policies to
address a wide array of issues, including terror-
ism, graphic violence, hate speech, explicit content,
*Equal contribution
1Our code and data are at https://github.com/
causalNLP/censorship.
Country
Censored Post
Type
Germany
London Tube Bomber was Taken
in as a Refugee at age 15. They
are NOT Refugees they are in-
vaders Soldiers 4 Allah
Harmful
Censor-
ship
France
Give Me Your Thoughts. Mili-
tary friend believes this videos
proves there were at LEAST 2
shooters on 32nd floor
Military
Censor-
ship
India
#KashmirUnderThreat. Use of
cluster bombs targeting civilian
population at ceasefire line has
exposed India #KashmirBleeds
Political
Censor-
ship
Turkey
He is Kurdish became Christian.
That alone is reason enough 4 Ira-
nian Mullahs 2 hang him. These
idiots are same as daesh only shia
form
Religious
Censor-
ship
Russia
Watch bet on football whenever
you like it. Try #SBOBETs Vir-
tual football today bring the ac-
tion to a new level
Corporate
Censor-
ship
Table 1: Example censored tweets across five countries.
This table presents verbatim examples of social media
posts from five countries in our study, illustrating diverse
censorship rationales. The highlighted segments denote
key textual elements that are most salient for censorship
classification.
child exploitation, and fraudulent activities such as
spam and fake accounts (Boyer, 2003; Gorwa et al.,
2020; Arora et al., 2023).
However, as mega-platforms scale, concerns per-
sist regarding the transparency and accountability
of moderation practices (Suzor et al., 2019). The
challenges manifest at two levels: (1) the opac-
ity of moderation decisions, often hidden within
proprietary algorithms, platform policies, and gov-
ernment interventions (Ksenia Ermoshina and Mu-
siani, 2022; Akgül and Kırlıdo˘g, 2015), and (2) the
methodological limitations of NLP-based modera-
tion systems, which predominantly rely on surface-
level keyword detection without distinguishing be-
arXiv:2503.05280v2  [cs.CL]  10 Mar 2025
tween mention and usage (Gligoric et al., 2024).
Moreover, the lack of interpretability of black-box
models makes it difficult to verify whether con-
tent moderation decisions are justified or erroneous.
While prior work has focused on improving mod-
eration techniques, little attention has been paid
to systematically analyzing the reasoning behind
these decisions (Kolla et al., 2024; Huang, 2024a).
To address these gaps, this work pioneers a novel
investigation: deploying LLMs to audit and inter-
pret cross-national moderation patterns, like au-
tomatic investigative journalists. We conduct a
case study on Twitter posts censored in five coun-
tries—Germany, Turkey, India, France, and Rus-
sia—spanning from 2011 to 2020.
We explore two research questions:
RQ1: Can LLMs reverse-engineer moderation
decisions across different countries? We model
censorship behavior using neural classifiers of vary-
ing architectures and scales, leveraging the content
moderation dataset from Elmas et al. (2021) to pre-
dict whether a post was censored and to categorize
it into one of six predefined censorship categories.
RQ2: Can explainable AI techniques applied to
LLMs reveal the underlying mechanisms of con-
tent moderation decisions over time and across
events? We employ Shapley values (Lundberg and
Lee, 2017) to extract the most influential entities
in censored posts and use LLMs to generate inter-
pretable explanations for the content moderation
decisions (Bills et al., 2023).
Our findings reveal that LLM-based classifiers
can effectively replicate real-world content moder-
ation decisions, with notable cross-country varia-
tions, particularly in the distribution of misclassi-
fied censorship categories. Additionally, both Shap-
ley values and LLM explanations help in inferring
the censorship patterns, with their validity and ex-
plainability verified through human evaluation. A
temporal analysis also suggests that censorship pat-
terns align with major social and political events.
Finally, we discuss recent emergent censorship be-
havior in reasoning models such as DeepSeek R1
and concerns about applying LLMs to real-world
content moderation.
To summarize, the contributions of this work are
threefold:
1. We systematically reverse-engineer online con-
tent moderation decisions in five countries over
a decade using LLMs, uncovering patterns in
how content moderation varies across geopoliti-
cal contexts.
2. We enhance explainability of moderation de-
cisions by applying Shapley values and LLM-
guided reasoning, providing insights into the
factors influencing content moderation and vali-
dating their effectiveness through human evalu-
ation.
3. We discuss the broader implications and poten-
tial applications of this study for online content
moderation.
Our work is among the first to explain content
moderation decisions across countries and time,
addressing the challenges of automated content
moderation and exploring the potential of LLMs in
this domain.
2
Related Work
Online Moderation
Content moderation is cru-
cial for maintaining online discourse, encompass-
ing hate speech detection (Waseem and Hovy,
2016; Waseem et al., 2017; Founta et al., 2019), po-
litical censorship (Elmas et al., 2021), and factual
verification (Thorne et al., 2018). While investiga-
tive journalists rely on nuanced decision-making,
automated moderation systems predominantly use
keyword-based filtering (MacKinnon, 2009; Ab-
delberi et al., 2014), which often lacks contextual
depth. Large datasets (Elmas et al., 2021; Knockel
et al., 2018) provide benchmarks, but moderation
policies remain fluid.
Automated systems frequently misclassify criti-
cal content, such as calls to action in social move-
ments (Rogers et al., 2019), while users devise
creative linguistic adaptations to bypass censorship
(Ji and Knight, 2018). Traditional language models
(LMs) also struggle to distinguish between the use
and mention of keywords, sometimes incorrectly
censoring counterspeech (Gligoric et al., 2024).
With the rise of LLMs, research has examined
their effectiveness in moderation. Huang (2024b)
evaluate LLMs on broader metrics beyond accu-
racy, while Kumar et al. (2024) report that LLMs
outperform traditional classifiers in toxicity detec-
tion. However, moderation remains subjective, as
Masud et al. (2024) show that LLMs’ persona-
based attributes influence hate speech annotation.
Explainability
Explainability plays a crucial role
in AI decision-making, particularly in content mod-
eration and healthcare (Pate, 2023). Techniques
such as causal interventions analyze neuron behav-
iors (Vig et al., 2020; Dalvi et al., 2019), while inter-
mediate representation translation reveals concept
evolution across layers (nostalgebraist, 2020; Bel-
rose et al., 2023). Influence functions, LIME, and
SHAP provide model explanations without modify-
ing architectures (Koh and Liang, 2017; Lundberg
and Lee, 2017), and Bills et al. (2023) propose an
explainer model for interpreting LM decisions. Ac-
tivation Patching enables self-interpretation of LM
representations (Meng et al., 2022; Ghandeharioun
et al., 2024), while Swayamdipta et al. (2020) ex-
amine training dynamics to assess dataset impact.
In content moderation, Mathew et al. (2021) in-
troduced HateXplain, the first benchmark for ex-
plainable hate speech detection. However, prior
work does not address censorship explainability
across multiple countries and time periods. Our
study takes a novel approach by treating LLMs as
investigative journalists to analyze content modera-
tion decisions across five countries. Unlike HateX-
plain, our work (1) focuses on content moderation,
which lacks rationale-specific datasets, and (2) gen-
erates full-length explanations for censored posts.
To our knowledge, this is the first large-scale study
using LLMs for content moderation pattern analy-
sis and explanation.
Feature
Germany
France
India
Turkey
Russia
# P
39447
36197
5028
37243
4669
# W/P
21.86
22.18
23.87
18.79
21.98
Avg. Len
131.07
133.58
142.44
113.21
131.2
TTR
0.03
0.03
0.11
0.05
0.14
% / all
16%
14%
2%
15%
1.8%
Table 2: Dataset Statistics. Summary of key statistics for
the five countries in our dataset, including the number
of posts, average words per post, average length, type-
to-token ratio, and percentage of total posts.
3
Dataset Description
3.1
Data Description
We focus on data from five countries: Germany,
France, India, Turkey, and Russia. These countries
were selected for their diverse national contexts and
because they have the highest number of samples
as shown in Elmas et al. (2021), from which we
can borrow our data guidelines for streaming the
Twitter API.
Dataset Characterization.
This dataset was an
artifact of the Twitter Stream Grab, which is a 1%
subsample of all the tweets (and retweets) between
2011 and 2020 July. As reported by the authors, the
number of censored posts was reduced significantly
from the time of their own analysis as of December
2020. We used Twitter’s API to crawl the tweets2
much later than the publishing of the previous work.
Due to this, there was a subset of tweets missed due
to problems we could not control: users deleting
their tweets, tweets being blocked by the Twitter
API, etc. The dataset also contains multiple at-
tributes about the posts such as which countries
the tweet is censored in, if the poster’s profile was
censored, and its replies or retweets. The language
of all samples in the dataset is English. We create
a subset of the existing overall combined test set
after sampling 500 samples per country, exclusive
of the train set. We choose at most 500 samples in
order to make sure our country-wise classifications
are more or less fair, as the number of censored
samples is inconsistent across all 5 chosen coun-
tries. We also report our findings from the predic-
tions over these country-wise test sets. There is no
country-wise separation during the training. Note
that the country-wise sets may have some overlap
because a post can be censored in more than one
countries. Table 1 shows some excerpts taken ver-
batim from the dataset along with their country
of moderation and the explanations generated by
GPT-4o-mini.
3.2
Data Statistics
Overview
In Table 2, we present general statis-
tics of the dataset introduced earlier. The type-
token ratio (TTR) is computed as #unique words
/ total #words. A lower TTR suggests reduced
token diversity, potentially indicating repeated enti-
ties that are significant for censorship across mul-
tiple posts. Approximately 16% of the samples
were censored in Germany, 14% in France, 2% in
India, 15% in Turkey and , 2% in Russia. India and
Russia have relatively fewer posts than the other
three countries. The validation sets are about 12%
of the training set size, while the test sets comprise
approximately 8%.
Topic Categories
According to the taxonomy
provided by the RSF methodology for calculating
the Press Freedom Index and Warf (2010), we cat-
egorize censorship into six key types that account
for a significant portion of censored posts:
1. Political censorship
2We could not use the dataset released by Elmas et al.
(2021) because they only released the Twitter IDs and not the
actual post content, which is crucial for our analysis.
Germany
France
India
Turkey
Russia
Country
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% Samples
Political
Religious
Harmful
Corporate
Military
Other
(a) Category Distribution.
Germany
France
India
Turkey
Russia
Country
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% Samples
Political
Religious
Harmful
Corporate
Military
Other
(b) Misclassification Distribution. % of misclassified sam-
ples per country: Germany-6%, France-4%, India-14%,
Turkey-8%, Russia-14%.
Figure 1: Category Distribution and Misclassification Patterns Across Countries. Figure (a) illustrates how samples
are distributed across different censorship categories, providing insights into the relative prevalence of each category
within the dataset. Figure (b) depicts the classified categories for our best-performing model across countries,
showing how misclassified samples are distributed among the predefined categories. Notably, compared with the
ground truth (Figure (a)), a substantial portion of the misclassified instances fall into the Other category, suggesting
that these cases might be harder to categorize accurately, possibly due to overlapping features.
2. Religious censorship (including cultural re-
strictions and religion-based constraints)
3. Harmful content (racism, hate speech, obscen-
ity, etc.)
4. Corporate censorship (including IP laws, gam-
bling, spam)
5. Military censorship (content deemed harmful
to national security or containing confidential
military intelligence)
6. Other (to account for outliers that do not fit
into the primary categories – relatively ran-
dom, spam and other topics that LLMs cannot
associate with the other 5)
To classify censored posts from our target coun-
tries C, we use GPT-4o-mini, leveraging its strong
world knowledge and ability to model distributional
patterns across different nations. We manually eval-
uate its predictions on a random sample of 50 ex-
amples per language and find its classification per-
formance to be nearly perfect.
Figure 1a illustrates the predicted categoriza-
tions3. Interestingly, Germany and France exhibit
similar distributions, with the highest proportion
of Category 3 censorship. Russia has the highest
levels of Category 4 and 6 censorship, while India
and Turkey display similar patterns, with the most
censorship occurring under Category 1.
All analyses related to these categories are per-
3Refer to Appendix B for details on common keywords
associated with each category and the rationale behind their
selection.
formed on the validation set, as it contains a rela-
tively higher number of samples than the test set,
particularly for countries where data is already
scarce.
4
Task Formulation
In this section, we formulate two key tasks based
on our research questions: (1) reverse-engineering
content moderation decisions and (2) leveraging
LLMs to uncover hidden patterns behind these de-
cisions.
4.1
Task 1: Reverse-Engineering Content
Moderation
To achieve our goal of understanding censorship,
we start with predicting if a post was censored in
a country c ∈C. C refers to the set of test sets
{Germany, France, India, Turkey, Russia}.
Within our dataset, for each censored post, there
can be multiple labels for the country. For exam-
ple, a post can be censored in both Germany and
France.
We train a multi-label classifier using five
encoder-based language models (LMs): BERT-
Tiny (Bhargava et al., 2021), BERT Base and m-
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), XLM-RoBERTa (Con-
neau et al., 2020), and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019).
Additionally, we include two small-scale decoder-
based LLMs, Pythia (1B) (Biderman et al., 2023)
and Llama 3.2 (1B), for censorship prediction ex-
periments. These small-scale models were chosen
for their memory efficiency, making them well-
suited for resource-constrained applications. We
report the Weighted F1 metric for this task.
Beyond trained models, we also evaluate larger
state-of-the-art LLMs in a zero-shot setting with-
out training on the dataset, including Aya-23-8B
(Aryabumi et al., 2024), Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
(Dubey et al., 2024), GPT-4o-mini, and GPT-4o
(OpenAI, 2024). Table 6 lists all LLMs used for
prompting, along with their knowledge cutoffs.
We conduct classification experiments to assess
the zero-shot censorship detection performance of
these models. Additional experimental details can
be found in Appendix A.
4.2
Task 2: Explaining Content Moderation
Beyond analyzing predictions and data distribu-
tion, we also aim to explain the reasoning behind
these decisions. In this task, we leverage the pre-
dictions from Task 1 to compute Shapley values,
aiming to identify patterns across countries and
over time. Additionally, we employ LLMs to gen-
erate explanations for model censorship predictions
and manually verify their generations.
Task 2.1: Shapley Explanations.
Building on
prior work in explainability, we apply SHAP (Lund-
berg and Lee, 2017) to identify the most globally
relevant entities for each country by computing
Shapley values for token contributions to predic-
tions. To align this with our research motivation,
we conduct this analysis separately for each coun-
try’s subset. We then compare these findings with
the year-wise distribution of censorship data and
contextualize them within real-world social events.
Task 2.2: LLM-Guided Explanations.
With
the rise of LLMs and their ability to model
world knowledge efficiently, we simulate a content-
moderation setting where LLMs provide reasoning
for why a post should be moderated or censored
online. Building on recent LLM interpretability re-
search (Bills et al., 2023), we employ similar tech-
niques to extrapolate relevant entities into concise
yet “approximate” explanations for model predic-
tions (Kunz and Kuhlmann, 2024; Lee et al., 2024;
Yadav et al., 2024). These explanations offer a high-
level understanding of the topic and help evaluate
whether the LLMs listed in Table 6 can contribute
to content moderation. To generate possible ratio-
nales for censorship, we prompt three LLMs to
explain why a given post should be moderated. We
then conduct a human evaluation to assess the effec-
tiveness of these explanations across all countries.
5
Results and Findings
5.1
Results for Reproducing Content
Moderation Decisions
How Accurately Can LM Classifiers Repro-
duce Real-World Content Moderation Deci-
sions?
As discussed in §4.1, we present our re-
sults for censorship prediction in Tables 3 and 4. Ta-
ble 3 shows that even encoder-based LMs achieve
high F1 scores, with RoBERTa leading at 90.36
points, followed by Llama 3.2 at 92.94 points, and
Pythia 1B achieving the highest score of 93.39
points. We later use Pythia 1B, the best-performing
model, as the anchor model for generating Shapley
values for each token in a given text, to help identify
entities that significantly influence model predic-
tions. Table 4 demonstrates that, without training,
model performance remains low across all coun-
tries. Content moderation in Germany, France, and
Russia is more challenging to classify compared to
India and Turkey. Among the four models tested,
GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini achieve the highest clas-
sification performance, highlighting the non-trivial
nature of the task.
Do Censorship Patterns Vary across Countries?
To dive deeper into the patterns in censorship on
a geopolitical scale, we take a look at Table 3 that
shows our best-performing model’s accuracy on
samples censored in specific countries only. We
find that this is very dependent on the number
of samples and hence does not show any strong
patterns (we discuss some country-specific social
events that can affect censorship in § 5.2. How-
ever, in general it was easiest to predict censorship
in a French context in comparison to other con-
texts while being very similar to German contexts
(geopolitically speaking). We show a t-SNE visu-
alization of all censored posts in our training set
differentiated per country in Fig. 3
Where do LMs tend to fail?
To understand if
there are any general patterns in the examples
where models frequently misclassify, we look at
Figure 1b that shows the distribution of misclassi-
fied samples per category for each country. Gener-
ally speaking, the models had a hard time predict-
ing text of Type 6 (Category: Other) Censorship
across all countries, which makes sense due to the
seemingly ambiguous nature of those posts (see:
Country
Split
Encoder Language Models
Decoder Language Models
BERT-Tiny
BERT Base
XLM-R
m-BERT
RoBERTa Base
Pythia
Llama 3.2
Germany
Val.
76.91
89.89
88.21
89.39
90.93
93.81
92.76
Test
78.19
91.26
89.27
90.03
91.64
94.53
93.69
France
Val.
76.90
90.62
88.88
90.21
92.03
94.86
93.94
Test
78.35
91.73
89.87
90.77
92.67
95.51
95.19
India
Val.
0.41
79.87
75.22
79.28
80.86
87.11
78.34
Test
0.57
78.83
72.56
77.19
77.95
86.64
85.97
Turkey
Val.
73.05
89.20
86.36
88.25
88.92
92.05
91.15
Test
73.55
89.25
87.15
88.48
89.77
92.04
91.82
Russia
Val.
0.00
79.73
73.08
77.13
79.11
85.59
82.08
Test
0.00
77.19
73.33
78.26
79.93
85.50
85.61
Aggr.
Val.
69.77
89.11
86.75
88.43
89.79
91.64
93.00
Test
70.71
89.74
87.51
88.80
90.36
92.94
93.39
Table 3: Country-wise Accuracies. This table presents the accuracy scores for each model across different countries,
evaluated using weighted F1 scores on the test set. "Aggr." refers to the results on the aggregated test set, which
serves as the primary criterion for determining the overall best-performing model.
Country
Aya-23
Llama-3.1
GPT-4o-mini
GPT-4o
Germany
37.0
11.0
49.0
41.0
France
49.0
7.0
42.0
36.0
India
56.0
29.0
66.0
66.0
Turkey
62.0
36.0
77.0
80.0
Russia
34.0
8.0
34.0
44.0
Aggr.
47.6
18.2
53.6
53.4
Table 4: Country-wise accuracy of additional decoder
language models on the validation set. This table reports
accuracy scores across different countries, with results
constrained by computational limitations. For GPT-*
models, predictions are based on a subset of 500 samples
per country due to the high cost of API queries.
App. B for more information on the ‘Other’ cate-
gory). This hints towards the open-ended nature of
that category which introduces some difficulty. Sur-
prisingly, the Indian and Turkish sets had a major-
ity of Type 1 Censorship while having the highest
amount of samples in that category.
5.2
Analysis of Shapley-Based Explanations
How Do Shapley Values Help in Inferring Cen-
sorship Patterns?
Figure 5 presents the top 20
most influential entities identified by Shapley val-
ues for each country. These values help approx-
imate which social events are (1) most common
in the dataset and (2) have the strongest positive
impact on censorship predictions. Previous studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of Shapley val-
ues in identifying key training instances (Ghorbani
and Zou, 2019; Schoch et al., 2023), and we adopt
a similar approach for our task.
We observe a clear alignment between censored
content and real-world events. For instance, the
"Kavanaugh Hearings" (likely Type 1 censorship)
appear frequently in Germany and France (Fig-
ures 5a, 5b) and are associated with 2018, alongside
various racist and anti-religious entities. In Turkey,
entities related to the controversial TV series "Af-
ter Daesh" and the "Kacmaz Family" (likely Types
5 and 1, respectively) appear in the 2017 censor-
ship landscape (Figure 5c). In India (Figure 5e),
religion and politics are heavily interlinked (Aiyar,
2007; Thomas et al., 2024) and thus censorship
heavily influenced by religious topics is also polit-
ical, with frequent references to "MSG"4. Mean-
while, Figure 5d reveals strong censorship targeting
religious, political, and possibly gambling or spam-
related content (that comes under Type 6), which
is strongly condemned by the Russian state.
Do Censorship Patterns Vary over the years?
To address the question if LMs can model real-
life social events by relating them with censorship,
from simple training, we decided to look at the
number of unique tokens important for censorship
every year, for each country. We believe that the
number of unique tokens are directly proportional
to the number of censored posts – the tokens are:
1) crucial to changing the model’s prediction; and,
2) extracted directly from the posts. Simply put,
the total number of unique tokens is proportional to
the total number of tokens, which is the sum of the
4Unlike the chemical MSG, this refers to a religious group
in India that is heavily censored and scrutinized by the gov-
ernment and people for various reasons.
Country
Pref. Order
Fluency
Helpfulness
Aya-23
Llama-3.1
GPT-4o-mini
Aya-23
Llama-3.1
GPT-4o-mini
Germany
3>2>1
3.50
3.33
3.33
3.39
3.61
3.44
France
1>2>3
3.56
3.22
3.33
3.44
3.56
3.44
India
1=2>3
3.78
3.78
3.89
3.94
3.89
3.83
Turkey
1>2>3
4.06
3.78
3.94
3.94
3.83
3.89
Russia
3>1>2
3.78
3.72
4.22
3.06
3.33
3.44
Overall
1>3>2
3.74
3.57
3.74
3.55
3.64
3.61
Table 5: Human Evaluation of Model-Generated Explanations. This table presents the results of a human evaluation
conducted on the censorship explanations quality produced by three different LLMs. The evaluation was performed
on 15 randomly selected samples per country, with each sample receiving two independent annotations. We made
sure there was no annotator bias by masking the LLM names in the annotator form.
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Year
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of Unique Tokens
Germany
France
India
Turkey
Russia
Figure 2: Unique Token Distribution Over Time. The
figure illustrates the number of unique tokens that
played a crucial role in the model’s censorship pre-
dictions across different years and countries. Notably,
peaks in the distribution often coincide with political or
societal events that may have caused increased censor-
ship activity.
number of tokens in censored posts + non-censored
posts.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of ˆNy
C, where
y ∈[2011 −2020] and c ∈C. Russia and Turkey
reached a peak in 2017, whereas France and Ger-
many reached a peak in 2018, and India in 2019.
This might point to certain social events that caused
an influx of censorship to maintain online neutrality.
Our findings from the previous question strengthen
our observations here5.
5.3
Analysis of LLM-Generated Explanations
How Do Topic Categories Correlate with Cen-
sorship?
As described in §3, we prompt GPT-
4o-mini to classify censored posts into one of six
censorship categories. By examining the category
distributions in Figures 1a and 1b, we observe that
while Germany and France exhibit similar cate-
gory distributions, their underlying contexts dif-
5We want to mention that although this distribution seems
to contradict the category similarities for Turkey and India, it
is not exactly contradictory. There may not be an overlap of so-
cial events, but there might be similar censorship laws/events
taking place in the two regions at different times.
fer. For instance, detecting Type 3 censorship is
more challenging in France than in Germany, pos-
sibly due to differences in textual characteristics
and stricter online moderation laws in Germany,
such as the NetzDG law (Mchangama and Fiss,
2019; Jaki and Smedt, 2019; Paasch-Colberg et al.,
2021). A similar pattern emerges between India
and Turkey, which share comparable category dis-
tributions. However, predicting Type 1 censorship
appears more difficult in the Indian context than in
Turkey, highlighting potential differences in regu-
latory frameworks and linguistic nuances.
Can LLMs Explain Content Moderation Deci-
sions Effectively?
We explore the potential of
using LLMs within a moderation framework to as-
sist content moderators. Specifically, we generate
post-specific explanations using the LLMs listed in
Table 6 and assess their effectiveness through hu-
man evaluation on a small subset of samples from
all five countries. For this task, we conduct a small-
scale human evaluation6 on 45 samples per country
(15 samples per LLM across three LLMs). Five ex-
pert evaluators participated in the evaluation, with
two evaluators assigned per country across all met-
rics and samples. Evaluators rated the generations
based on three key metrics: LLM Preference Rat-
ing, Fluency, and Helpfulness. Table 5 presents an
overview of our results, averaged across all sam-
ples and both annotations per country. The final
row, indexed as Overall, reports the average across
all countries.
Interestingly, most annotators preferred the gen-
erations produced by Aya-23 (LLM 1) over GPT-
4o-mini (LLM 3) and Llama-3.1 (LLM 2). This
preference may be attributed to Aya-23’s enhanced
multilingual capabilities, which could improve its
6See Appendix §E for details on the complete human eval-
uation process.
ability to process multicultural content across di-
verse countries. This shows that Aya-23 can be
used as a decent helper for a content moderator!
5.4
Discussions
How Predictable and Explainable Is Censor-
ship?
While censorship appears to be predictable
(see Table 3), it remains largely unexplained. LMs
perform well in predicting censorship decisions,
yet Table 4 highlights the non-trivial nature of this
task, where even SOTA LLMs struggle to surpass
random predictions. Table 5 further demonstrates
that although LLMs can generate possible explana-
tions, they are, on average, only about 72% helpful.
No single explainability method can fully uncover
the underlying rationale behind censorship laws
in different countries. Instead, multiple findings
must be synthesized to derive meaningful obser-
vations. The apparent predictability of censorship
is obscured by the contextual variability of censor-
ship rules across countries. For instance, the same
category of censorship may be easier to predict in
France but more challenging in Germany due to
stricter regulations requiring implicit and harder-
to-detect contextual cues (Mchangama and Fiss,
2019; Jaki and Smedt, 2019; Paasch-Colberg et al.,
2021).
Does Censorship Follow Any Patterns?
Our
analysis reveals no consistent censorship pattern
across countries. However, Figure 1a shows that
certain country pairs, such as Turkey-India and
Germany-France, exhibit similar category distri-
butions. There is no clear pattern linking these
pairs unless considered within a geopolitical con-
text, suggesting a possible correlation between their
censorship policies.
In contrast, censorship patterns emerge over time
(see Figure 2). These trends can be attributed to
both global and local events (as discussed in § 4.2)
that may conflict with the moderation guidelines of
specific countries. We hypothesize that such events
lead to a surge in online content, increasing the
number of censored posts. For example, political
content faces significantly more censorship in In-
dia and Turkey, whereas harmful content is more
frequently censored in Germany and France.
Can LLMs Infer the Causes of Censorship?
We conduct multiple analyses to evaluate the abil-
ity of LLMs to infer causation behind censorship.
Our observations indicate that while LLMs effec-
tively categorize censored posts into predefined
categories, they struggle to decipher entities that
require deeper regional knowledge. For instance, in
the Indian Shapley plot, entities related to "MSG"
resemble spam-like content, making interpretation
challenging (see Figure 5e).
Figure 4 illustrates the accuracy of LLMs in cat-
egorizing censored posts. Results from human eval-
uation (Table 5) show that, on average, LLMs are
only moderately helpful, with a highest Helpful-
ness score of 3.64. This limitation arises from the
implicit and context-specific nature of censored
content, which often requires regional expertise.
Despite these challenges, LLMs remain useful
by (1) identifying underlying themes and patterns
that might be overlooked by traditional analysis
methods and (2) providing a rough understanding
of implicit censorship rules. Additionally, they
offer valuable insights for a deeper comparative
analysis of censorship regulations across different
countries.
6
Opening Directions for Future Work
Our work opens several avenues for future research,
particularly in using LLMs for content moderation,
explaining the decisions behind censorship, and
detecting censorship across both geographical and
temporal scales. Given the highly sensitive nature
of this task, ensuring that LLM-generated explana-
tions remain faithful is crucial (Turpin et al., 2023).
With the growing focus on interpretability, we an-
ticipate that future research can build upon our find-
ings using advanced techniques such as activation
patching (Meng et al., 2022) and circuit discov-
ery (Conmy et al., 2023). Furthermore, expanding
censorship analysis to more countries while bal-
ancing dataset distributions across regions could
provide deeper insights into how multilingualism
influences censorship practices.
7
Conclusion
This study analyzes content moderation mecha-
nisms across multiple countries, using LLMs for
classification and explainability. Our findings high-
light discrepancies in moderation policies, shaped
by geopolitical, temporal, and event-specific fac-
tors. Using explainability techniques like Shapley
values and LLM-guided reasoning, we identify key
censorship patterns, showing that while LLMs can
replicate moderation practices, they struggle with
nuanced, context-dependent rules. These insights
emphasize the need for greater transparency in AI-
driven moderation. Future research should focus on
improving interpretability and ensuring the respon-
sible deployment of LLMs in content governance.
Limitations
Language and Data Considerations
Our study
primarily analyzes English-language tweets, al-
lowing for a consistent cross-country compari-
son. While this approach facilitates direct analysis
across regions, it may not fully capture localized
discourse patterns in multilingual countries such
as Turkey, Russia, and India. Furthermore, the
dataset used is a 1% subsample of Twitter, which
may not fully represent the complete spectrum of
censorship activities in these regions.
Model Considerations
As with all large lan-
guage models, those used in this study are influ-
enced by the characteristics of their training data.
While our approach prioritizes fairness and accu-
racy, certain cultural or contextual variations may
affect model predictions. In particular, some ex-
pressions may be more prominently recognized
than others, reflecting broader patterns in the train-
ing data. These factors could shape model outputs
in nuanced ways, especially when identifying less
explicit forms of censored content.
Temporal Scope
Our dataset covers the period
from 2011 to 2020, providing a historical perspec-
tive on censorship trends. While this enables an
in-depth analysis of long-term patterns, it may not
capture more recent developments in moderation
practices introduced after 2020, particularly in dy-
namic political contexts.
Platform-Specific Scope
Our analysis is based
on Twitter, a platform with distinct moderation poli-
cies and user demographics. While this provides
valuable insights into censorship dynamics, differ-
ent platforms—such as Facebook, Instagram, or
regionally specific networks—may have varying
guidelines and user behaviors. As a result, findings
from this study primarily reflect patterns observed
on Twitter, with potential variations across other
platforms.
Ethical Considerations
Implications of Applying LLMs to Real-World
Content Moderation
We experimented with two
models from two leading companies, DeepSeek
and OpenAI, on a publicly available dataset about
political censorship in China across various cate-
gories, totaling 1360 queries.7 We used DeepSeek
7https://huggingface.co/datasets/promptfoo/
CCP-sensitive-prompts
R1 (Guo et al., 2025), distilled on Qwen 32B (Bai
et al., 2023) and officially released on Hugging-
Face,8 alongside GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024) for
comparison. Our results indicate that the DeepSeek
model refuses 47% of the queries, whereas the GPT
model refuses 41%. Specifically, the DeepSeek
model censors more queries related to historical po-
litical movements and riots, political parties, lead-
ership, and human rights. In contrast, GPT-4o-mini
censors more queries concerning religious freedom,
forced organ harvesting, and organized crime.
These findings reveal several important implica-
tions. First, the differences in refusal rates highlight
that LLMs, even when trained on publicly avail-
able datasets, exhibit divergent content moderation
behaviors. This suggests that moderation policies
are shaped not only by the country of origin but
also by company-specific guidelines, training data,
and alignment strategies. Such variability raises
concerns about the consistency and reliability of
LLM-based moderation across different platforms.
Second, the distinct censorship patterns observed
underscore how LLMs may inadvertently encode
biases reflecting political, cultural, or corporate pri-
orities. These biases can shape public discourse,
leading to differential access to information de-
pending on the system in use.
Nature of our work
We do not propose or intro-
duce frameworks ready for deployment, rather, we
use and analyze existing tools and datasets. The
classifiers may develop bias towards certain cul-
tures or minority groups, which we have also dis-
cussed in our results. The nature of our work is
"investigative journalism", due to which we have
to make certain hypotheses that may or may not
align with the majority views. We want to high-
light that we do not hold any bias against any group
mentioned in our work, but we simply make infer-
ences based on our experiments and data. There
is a potential bias from using only Twitter data,
particularly given our small sample size.
Usage of LLMs, Bias and Fairness
The gener-
ations of LLMs may not be faithful but aligned to
human preferences, as has been shown by previous
work (Turpin et al., 2023). LLMs are trained on
vast amounts of data, which often contain societal
biases. As a result, the models may amplify or
perpetuate stereotypes and biases against certain
8https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/
DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B
groups based on race, gender, religion, or political
affiliation. While our study focuses on detecting
censorship, it is important to acknowledge that the
models themselves may reflect the biases of the
data they are trained on, which could dispropor-
tionately affect marginalized or minority communi-
ties. We have taken steps to mitigate these biases
through careful evaluation and human oversight,
but further research is needed to refine these ap-
proaches and ensure that the models are equitable
in their decision-making processes.
Responsible Use of Censorship Detection Mod-
els
The application of NLP models in censor-
ship detection has significant ethical implications.
While automated models can assist in identifying
patterns of censorship and explaining moderation
decisions, they must not be seen as a definitive so-
lution. Censorship is a sensitive topic, particularly
in politically charged or authoritarian contexts, and
the outputs of these models could be misinterpreted
or used to justify harmful moderation practices. We
emphasize that our work should not be used as a
tool for mass surveillance or to enable repressive
censorship regimes. The responsibility for using
these tools must lie with institutions committed to
transparency, human rights, and the protection of
freedom of speech.
Data Privacy and Consent
Our research utilizes
public data from Twitter, a platform where users are
often unaware of how their content may be used for
academic or commercial research. While the data
we analyzed is publicly available, issues surround-
ing the privacy and consent of users must be consid-
ered. Twitter data can sometimes include personal,
sensitive, or contextually revealing information that
users may not intend to be used in research, par-
ticularly studies on censorship. Researchers must
be vigilant in anonymizing and safeguarding user
identities where applicable, to minimize potential
harm.
Political and Cultural Sensitivity
Censorship is
highly context-dependent, varying widely across
political regimes and cultural norms. Our analy-
sis spans five countries, each with distinct political
environments and legal frameworks surrounding
free speech. We acknowledge the sensitivity of
this topic, particularly in regions where govern-
ment control over online discourse is strong. We
do not take a political stance on any of the cases
or countries analyzed in this work, and we em-
phasize that our findings are purely academic, and
aimed at advancing the understanding of how NLP
models interact with censorship. The potential for
misuse of our findings for political purposes or to
justify further censorship remains a concern, and
we strongly discourage such applications.
Acknowledgments
This material is based in part upon work sup-
ported by the German Federal Ministry of Edu-
cation and Research (BMBF): Tübingen AI Center,
FKZ: 01IS18039B; by the Machine Learning Clus-
ter of Excellence, EXC number 2064/1 – Project
number 390727645. The usage of OpenAI credits
is largely supported by the Tübingen AI Center.
References
Chaabane Abdelberi, Terence Chen, Mathieu Cunche,
Emiliano De Cristofaro, Arik Friedman, and Mo-
hamed Ali Kâafar. 2014. Censorship in the wild:
Analyzing internet filtering in syria. In Proceedings
of the 2014 Internet Measurement Conference, IMC
2014, Vancouver, BC, Canada, November 5-7, 2014,
pages 285–298. ACM.
Mani Shankar Aiyar. 2007. Politics and religion in india.
India International Centre Quarterly, 34(1):42–50.
Mustafa Akgül and Melih Kırlıdo˘g. 2015. Internet cen-
sorship in turkey. Internet Policy Review, 4(2):1–22.
Arnav Arora, Preslav Nakov, Momchil Hardalov,
Sheikh Muhammad Sarwar, Vibha Nayak, Yoan
Dinkov, Dimitrina Zlatkova, Kyle Dent, Ameya
Bhatawdekar, Guillaume Bouchard, et al. 2023. De-
tecting harmful content on online platforms: what
platforms need vs. where research efforts go. ACM
Computing Surveys, 56(3):1–17.
Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru,
Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin, Bharat
Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Jon Ander Campos,
Yi Chern Tan, Kelly Marchisio, Max Bartolo, Se-
bastian Ruder, Acyr Locatelli, Julia Kreutzer, Nick
Frosst, Aidan Gomez, Phil Blunsom, Marzieh Fadaee,
Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. 2024.
Aya 23:
Open weight releases to further multilingual progress.
Preprint, arXiv:2405.15032.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang,
Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei
Huang, et al. 2023. Qwen technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16609.
Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Ha-
lawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella Bider-
man, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2023. Eliciting latent
predictions from transformers with the tuned lens.
Preprint, arXiv:2303.08112.
Prajjwal Bhargava, Aleksandr Drozd, and Anna Rogers.
2021. Generalization in nli: Ways (not) to go beyond
simple heuristics. Preprint, arXiv:2110.01518.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory
Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit,
USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. 2023.
Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language mod-
els across training and scaling.
In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2397–2430.
PMLR.
Steven
Bills,
Nick
Cammarata,
Dan
Moss-
ing,
Henk Tillman,
Leo Gao,
Gabriel Goh,
Ilya
Sutskever,
Jan
Leike,
Jeff
Wu,
and
William
Saunders.
2023.
Language
mod-
els can explain neurons in language models.
https://openaipublic.blob.core.windows.
net/neuron-explainer/paper/index.html.
Dominic Boyer. 2003. Censorship as a vocation: The
institutions, practices, and cultural logic of media
control in the german democratic republic. Compar-
ative Studies in Society and History, 45(3):511–545.
Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch,
Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso.
2023. Towards automated circuit discovery for mech-
anistic interpretability. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 16318–
16352. Curran Associates, Inc.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 8440–
8451, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, Hassan Sajjad, Yonatan Be-
linkov, Anthony Bau, and James Glass. 2019. What
is one grain of sand in the desert? analyzing indi-
vidual neurons in deep nlp models.
Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
33(01):6309–6317.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. CoRR, abs/1810.04805.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang,
Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev,
Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien
Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Bap-
tiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie
Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe
Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller,
Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Al-
lonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits,
David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan,
Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova,
Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic,
Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Geor-
gia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mi-
alon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen,
Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan
Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan
Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar,
Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock,
Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi,
Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu,
Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph
Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia,
Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate
Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone,
Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuen-
ley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Lau-
rens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz
Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira,
Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh,
Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham,
Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur,
Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona
Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bash-
lykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier
Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Pra-
jjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao
Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon
Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Ro-
main Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly,
Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar
Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh,
Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov,
Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy,
Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun
Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer
Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gu-
rurangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara
Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas
Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong
Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor
Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent
Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whit-
ney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiao-
qing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei
Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine
Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue
Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng
Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh,
Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam
Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva
Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesen-
berg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, An-
drei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, An-
drew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew
Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Apara-
jita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel,
Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yaz-
dan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi,
Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi
Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Han-
cock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic,
Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly
Burton, Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu
Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu,
Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Da-
mon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Tes-
tuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich,
Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Hol-
land, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Mont-
gomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood,
Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan
Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat
Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán,
Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Flo-
rez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee,
Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan,
Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Han-
wen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, He-
len Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Ibrahim
Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena
Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski,
James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya,
Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen,
Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong,
Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill,
Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres,
Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou
U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khan-
delwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik
Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun
Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang,
Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro
Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng
Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsim-
poukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew
Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim
Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Michael L.
Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir
Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Her-
moso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Mun-
ish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks,
Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick
Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev,
Ning Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg
Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem
Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pa-
van Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre
Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratan-
chandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy,
Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li, Rebekkah
Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Mah-
eswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu,
Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun
Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Verma,
Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lind-
say, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin,
Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang
Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agar-
wal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie
Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield,
Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin
Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury,
Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara
Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li,
Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria
Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal
Mangla, Vítor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru,
Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li,
Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will
Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiao-
jian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo
Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li,
Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam,
Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach
Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen,
Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. 2024. The llama 3
herd of models. Preprint, arXiv:2407.21783.
Tu˘grulcan Elmas, Rebekah Overdorf, and Karl Aberer.
2021. A dataset of state-censored tweets. Proceed-
ings of the International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media, 15(1):1009–1015.
Antigoni Maria Founta, Despoina Chatzakou, Nicolas
Kourtellis, Jeremy Blackburn, Athena Vakali, and
Ilias Leontiadis. 2019. A unified deep learning ar-
chitecture for abuse detection. In Proceedings of the
10th ACM Conference on Web Science, WebSci ’19,
page 105–114, New York, NY, USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Avi Caciularu, Adam Pearce, Lu-
cas Dixon, and Mor Geva. 2024. Patchscopes: A
unifying framework for inspecting hidden representa-
tions of language models. In Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. 2019. Data shap-
ley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 2242–2251.
Kristina Gligoric, Myra Cheng, Lucia Zheng, Esin Dur-
mus, and Dan Jurafsky. 2024. NLP systems that
can’t tell use from mention censor counterspeech,
but teaching the distinction helps. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 5942–5959, Mexico City, Mexico. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Robert Gorwa, Reuben Binns, and Christian Katzen-
bach. 2020. Algorithmic content moderation: Tech-
nical and political challenges in the automation
of platform governance.
Big Data & Society,
7(1):2053951719897945.
James Grimmelmann. 2015. The virtues of moderation.
Yale JL & Tech., 17:42.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song,
Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma,
Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1: In-
centivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforce-
ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948.
Tao Huang. 2024a.
Content moderation by llm:
From accuracy to legitimacy.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.03219.
Tao Huang. 2024b. Content moderation by llm: From
accuracy to legitimacy. Preprint, arXiv:2409.03219.
Sylvia Jaki and Tom De Smedt. 2019. Right-wing ger-
man hate speech on twitter: Analysis and automatic
detection. CoRR, abs/1910.07518.
Heng Ji and Kevin Knight. 2018. Creative language en-
coding under censorship. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Inter-
net Freedom, pages 23–33, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jeffrey Knockel, Masashi Crete-Nishihata, and Lotus
Ruan. 2018. The effect of information controls on
developers in China: An analysis of censorship in
Chinese open source projects. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Natural Language Processing
for Internet Freedom, pages 1–11, Santa Fe, New
Mexico, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. 2017. Understanding
black-box predictions via influence functions. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 1885–1894.
PMLR.
Mahi Kolla, Siddharth Salunkhe, Eshwar Chandrasekha-
ran, and Koustuv Saha. 2024. Llm-mod: Can large
language models assist content moderation?
Ex-
tended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.
Benjamin Loveluck Ksenia Ermoshina and Francesca
Musiani. 2022. A market of black boxes: The politi-
cal economy of internet surveillance and censorship
in russia. Journal of Information Technology & Poli-
tics, 19(1):18–33.
Deepak Kumar, Yousef Anees AbuHashem, and Zakir
Durumeric. 2024. Watch your language: Investigat-
ing content moderation with large language models.
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference
on Web and Social Media, 18(1):865–878.
Jenny Kunz and Marco Kuhlmann. 2024. Properties and
challenges of LLM-generated explanations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Bridging Human–
Computer Interaction and Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 13–27, Mexico City, Mexico. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Younghun Lee, Dan Goldwasser, and Laura Schwab
Reese. 2024. Towards understanding counseling con-
versations: Domain knowledge and large language
models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: EACL 2024, pages 2032–2047,
St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. CoRR, abs/1907.11692.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017.
A unified
approach to interpreting model predictions. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Rebecca MacKinnon. 2009. China’s censorship 2.0:
How companies censor bloggers.
First Monday,
14(2).
Sarah Masud, Sahajpreet Singh, Viktor Hangya, Alexan-
der Fraser, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2024. Hate
personified: Investigating the role of llms in content
moderation. Preprint, arXiv:2410.02657.
Binny Mathew, Punyajoy Saha, Seid Muhie Yimam,
Chris Biemann, Pawan Goyal, and Animesh Mukher-
jee. 2021. Hatexplain: A benchmark dataset for ex-
plainable hate speech detection. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
ume 35, pages 14867–14875.
Jacob Mchangama and Joelle Fiss. 2019. The digital
berlin wall: How germany (accidentally) created a
prototype for global online censorship. Copenhagen:
Justitia and Authors.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan
Belinkov. 2022. Locating and editing factual asso-
ciations in gpt. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 17359–17372.
Curran Associates, Inc.
nostalgebraist. 2020. interpreting gpt: the logit lens.
OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-4o.
Sünje Paasch-Colberg, Christian Strippel, Joachim
Trebbe, and Martin Emmer. 2021. From insult to
hate speech: Mapping offensive language in german
user comments on immigration. Media and Commu-
nication, 9(1):171–180.
Holly Pate. 2023. Experts discuss investigating social
media companies like facebook, twitter, and tiktok.
Global Investigative Journalism Network.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2019. Calls to action on social media: Detection,
social impact, and censorship potential. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Workshop on Natural Language
Processing for Internet Freedom: Censorship, Dis-
information, and Propaganda, pages 36–44, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Stephanie Schoch, Ritwick Mishra, and Yangfeng Ji.
2023. Data selection for fine-tuning large language
models using transferred shapley values. In Proceed-
ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Re-
search Workshop), pages 266–275, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nicolas P Suzor, Sarah Myers West, Andrew Quodling,
and Jillian York. 2019. What do we mean when we
talk about transparency? toward meaningful trans-
parency in commercial content moderation. Interna-
tional Journal of Communication, 13:18.
Swabha Swayamdipta, Roy Schwartz, Nicholas Lourie,
Yizhong Wang, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Noah A. Smith,
and Yejin Choi. 2020. Dataset cartography: Mapping
and diagnosing datasets with training dynamics. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 9275–9293, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Vineeth Thomas, Chandana Deka, Aparajitha Raja, and
Arsha V Sathyan. 2024. Examining the intervention
of religion in indian politics through hindutva under
the modi regime. Religions, 15(12).
James
Thorne,
Andreas
Vlachos,
Christos
Christodoulopoulos,
and
Arpit
Mittal.
2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERification.
In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers), pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel
Bowman. 2023. Language models don't always say
what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-
thought prompting. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 74952–
74965. Curran Associates, Inc.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov,
Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and Stu-
art Shieber. 2020. Investigating gender bias in lan-
guage models using causal mediation analysis. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 12388–12401. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Barney Warf. 2010. Geographies of global internet
censorship. GeoJournal, 76(1):1–23.
Zeerak Waseem, Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley,
and Ingmar Weber. 2017. Understanding abuse: A
typology of abusive language detection subtasks. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive Lan-
guage Online, pages 78–84, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zeerak Waseem and Dirk Hovy. 2016. Hateful symbols
or hateful people? predictive features for hate speech
detection on Twitter. In Proceedings of the NAACL
Student Research Workshop, pages 88–93, San Diego,
California. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Neemesh Yadav, Sarah Masud, Vikram Goyal, Md Shad
Akhtar, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2024. Tox-BART:
Leveraging toxicity attributes for explanation gen-
eration of implicit hate speech. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024,
pages 13967–13983, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual
meeting. Association for Computational Linguistics.
A
Experimental Details
We performed our experiments via the Huggingface
Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020). We used
open-source LLMs with a commercial license such
as Llama-3.1 and Llama-3.2, and completely open-
source LLMs such as Aya-23 and the Pythia. All
models were trained for one epoch, with a learning
rate of 1e-5, a drop-out rate of 0.1, and a batch size
of 8.
Our experiments were performed on NVIDIA
H100 and A100 clusters, and we used the OpenAI
API to query GPT-4o-mini.
LLMs used.
We used the LLMs mentioned in
Table 6, for our zero-shot censorship classifica-
tion and explainability experiments. The Llama-
3.1 series is among the best-performing medium-
scale open-source LLMs, while the Aya-23 suite
offers one of the strongest multilingual LLMs, cov-
ering 23 languages. GPT-4o-mini performs only
slightly below GPT-4o but is significantly more
cost-effective, making it an ideal choice for our
experiments.
Model
Knowledge Cutoff
Aya23-8B† (Aryabumi et al., 2024)
Unknown
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct† (Dubey et al., 2024)
December 2023
GPT-4o-mini‡ (OpenAI, 2024)
October 2023
GPT-4o‡ (OpenAI, 2024)
October 2023
Table 6: Details of LLMs Used in the Explanation
Studies. Dagger (†) refers to open-weight models, and
Double Dagger (‡) refers to closed-source models
Country
Censored Post
Germany
what is the sense of this lol
France
Gaia is knocking
India
Another one bites the dust An-
other one bites the dust And an-
other one gone and another one
gone Another one bites the dust
#INDvNZL #NZvsIND
Turkey
Stop focusing on how stressed
you are and remember how
BLESSED you are
Russia
In Brazil even the dogs are good
at football
Table 7: Examples of censored tweets belonging to the
Other category according to GPT-4o-mini, across all
countries.
B
Censorship Categorization
Reasoning behind these categories
We found
the RSF methodology for calculating the Press
Freedom Index quite relevant along with works
like Warf (2010). Warf (2010) mentions that the
verbatim primary motivations for Censorship seem
to be the following:
• Political repression of dissidents
• Human rights activists, or comments insulting
to the state
• Religious controls to inhibit the dissemination
of ideas deemed heretical sacrilegious
• Protections of intellectual property, including
restrictions on illegally downloaded movies
and music
• Cultural restrictions that exist as part of the
oppression of ethnic minorities
• Sexual minorities
We took inspiration from these points and stud-
ied the data and Shapley plots (see: Fig. 5) to
come up with the six categories mentioned in this
paper. While we believe that they might not be
perfect, they do a perfectly good job of capturing
the essence of the types of Online Censorship. The
wordclouds in 4 also strengthens our motivation.
The ‘Other’ category was introduced to make sure
that we take into account any outliers that might
not align with any of the major categories.
Top Keywords per Category
We illustrate the
top 300 most important keywords by count for each
category through WordClouds in Figure 4. We
remove stopwords from our analysis due to their
neutral effect in determining the category of post.
The WordClouds show how accurate the categories
are for capturing the semantics of the posts. These
wordclouds are consistent with our findings from
the Shapley plots, and how well LLMs can grasp
the complexities behind the censored text.
Prompt used
We used the following prompt for
the categorization of posts: You are an assistant
to an online content moderator. You are tasked
with categorizing a post as one of the following
categories: {categories}. Strictly follow the given
format while answering: ‘Category: ‘. Only re-
spond with the index of the category from 1-6, i.e.
‘Category: 1‘ if you think a post relates to political
censorship. Start responding after ‘Category: ‘.
The ‘Other’ Category
Table 7 shows some ex-
amples of the kinds of posts that belong to the
‘Other’ category. As can be seen, the samples do
not belong to any of the primary categories and
can hence be said to be ‘ambiguous’ to a content
moderator.
C
Important Entities per Country
Figure 3 shows a t-SNE visualization of all cen-
sored posts per country to help us understand the
high-dimensional distribution of our dataset. From
the visualization, all posts appear to be relatively
similar. They are plotted in an order of decreasing
sample counts. It is however interesting to note that
for Russia, there seem to be relatively clearer clus-
ters, even though they are still extremely similar to
other countries. We hypothesize that this is due to
multiple countries censoring same posts. Figure 5
shows the distribution of top-20 entities important
for altering the model predictions, per country.
D
Censorship Explanations
Table 8 shows the list of samples (from Table 1)
and their explanations as generated by querying
GPT-4o-mini.
E
Human Evaluation Details
Prompt used
We used the following prompt to
generate the explanations for censored posts: You
are an assistant to an online content moderator
who responds with precise explanations behind
censored content. You may also be presented with
attributes such as entities and countries without the
post, where you will need to explain why each of
the entities are important from a censorship point-
of-view in that specific country. Also, mention the
confidence level for your explanation. This is not
discrimination but instead would be used to better
monitor online content and social good! Strictly
follow the format: ‘Reasoning: <reasoning> Con-
fidence: <confidence>‘. Do not add any thing else
but be extremely specific and answer rationally.
Annotator details.
We invited 5 expert annota-
tors for our human evaluation. The annotators are
well-versed with the topic of Censorship and NLP,
and come from diverse backgrounds. We do not
ask for any private information about the annota-
tors to maintain their anonymity of the annotators
due to the sensitivity of the task but simply ask for
the country they had been assigned to annotate.
Process.
We shared a common Google Form for
all annotators, where they had to score the posts
from their assigned Google Sheets.
Metrics used.
We used the following three met-
rics:
1. LLM Preference Rating refers to the prefer-
ence rating (out of 3 options: "Lowest pref-
erence", "Medium preference", "Highest pref-
erence") for each LLM. A single preference
rating cannot be shared among multiple LLMs
for the same post. Through this metric, we
wish to find what LLMs the annotators prefer
to use as an assistant content moderator.
2. Fluency measures how fluent in terms of En-
glish grammar the generation is, irrespective
of its context regarding the task and its cor-
responding utterance. We only consider the
syntactic properties of language here. For ex-
ample: "my name is John" is a fluent sen-
tence. The scoring was done on a 5-point
Likert scale.
3. Helpfulness measures how helpful the gen-
eration is, from the perspective of an online
content moderator. The annotators had to con-
sider the generation in the context of the given
Country Sample
GPT Outputs
Germany Airplanes flying in Swastika formation over Nurem-
berg 1935
The image or notion of airplanes flying in a swastika formation over Nuremberg in 1935 may be
deemed offensive due to its association with the Nazi regime and its symbols, which represent hate,
genocide, and totalitarianism. Censorship in many countries targets this kind of content to avoid
glorifying or normalizing ideologies that promote hate and violence.
France
Journalists are lying scum.
That violent mob
stormed that White couples front yard Chilling mo-
ment white couple pull guns on peaceful Black
Lives Matter protesters
Reasoning: The post contains inflammatory language directed at journalists, which can incite hostility
and undermine trust in the media. Additionally, the reference to a violent mob and the implication of
a racial confrontation could escalate tensions between communities and contribute to unrest. Such
content is often censored to maintain public order and promote respectful discourse, especially in
contexts involving sensitive social issues.
India
#KashmirUnderThreat. Use of cluster Bombs tar-
geting civilian population at cease lfire line has
exposed India #KashmirBleeds
The post addresses the sensitive topic of the Kashmir conflict, specifically highlighting allegations
against the Indian government regarding the use of cluster bombs on civilians. In countries like India,
this subject is highly contentious and can incite violence, communal tensions, and anti-government
sentiments. Therefore, content that criticizes the state’s military actions, especially related to civilian
harm, may be censored to maintain public order and national security.
Turkey
7 TRT which is a state-run TV network is violat-
ing its privilege by shutting down our channel and
deleting our videos
The post may be censored due to allegations against TRT (Turkey Radio and Television Corporation)
regarding the misuse of its state-run status to suppress dissenting voices or independent media. In
regimes where state control over media is prevalent, criticisms of state-owned entities can be viewed as
a challenge to government authority. This may lead to suppression of the post to maintain a narrative
favoring state loyalty and control over information dissemination.
Russia
Dzokhar Dudayev All my conscious life i have
lived with dream to see indep of Chechen people
the path of political struggle 1
Dzokhar Dudayev is a significant figure in Chechen history, known for leading the Chechen indepen-
dence movement. His mention in social media posts can invoke strong nationalist sentiments and
discussions surrounding Chechen independence, which are sensitive topics in Russia. The Russian
government tightly controls narratives related to Chechnya and considers any pro-independence
rhetoric a threat to national unity. Such content may be censored to prevent the promotion of sepa-
ratism and to maintain state control over regional narratives.
Table 8: Example Posts from All Five Countries and Explanations Produced by GPT-4o-Mini. This table
presents censorship-related examples from our dataset, taken verbatim from posts in each country, along with the
corresponding reasoning provided by GPT-4o-Mini.
200
100
0
100
200
Component 1
200
100
0
100
200
Component 2
t-SNE Visualization
DE
FR
TR
IN
RU
Figure 3: t-SNE visualization of all censored posts from
the training set, per country.
post and measure how useful/helpful the gen-
eration is in understanding the harmful na-
ture/context of the given post. The scoring
was done on a 5-point Likert scale.
(a) Category 1: Political censorship.
(b) Category 2: Religious censorship.
(c) Category 3: Harmful content.
(d) Category 4: Corporate censorship.
(e) Category 5: Military Censorship.
(f) Category 6: Other.
Figure 4: WordClouds showing top-300 most important keywords for all 6 categories, except stopwords.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
mean(|SHAP value|)
KavanaughHearings
sunna
ElectionNight
antiWhite
turkish
dhimmi
Rottmann
Portuguese
Kafirs
September11
jihadis
Mussolini
Sharia #  #
Demi
Warner
CounterJihad #
fuck
CONQUERED
Swedens
Sum of 3858 other features
KavanaughHearings
sunna
ElectionNight
antiWhite
turkish
dhimmi
Rottmann
Portuguese
Kafirs
September11
jihadis
Mussolini
Sharia #  #
Demi
Warner
CounterJihad #
fuck
CONQUERED
Swedens
Sum of 3858 other features
+7.84
+6.38
+6.33
+6.08
+6.07
+5.56
+5.18
+4.67
+4.37
+4
+3.9
+3.88
+3.84
+3.79
+3.73
+3.7
+3.69
+3.67
+3.57
+1750.72
(a) Important entities for the German set.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
mean(|SHAP value|)
guitar
america
InternationalWomansDay
MEME
fuck
proWhite
ElectionNight
happy #
game
antiWhite
Portuguese
offend
Netflix
antiKavanaugh
GO
whitest
europe
OFFENSIVE
Illegals
Sum of 3951 other features
guitar
america
InternationalWomansDay
MEME
fuck
proWhite
ElectionNight
happy #
game
antiWhite
Portuguese
offend
Netflix
antiKavanaugh
GO
whitest
europe
OFFENSIVE
Illegals
Sum of 3951 other features
+11.46
+10.39
+10.24
+8.5
+8.21
+6.85
+6.72
+6.64
+6.17
+5.49
+5.37
+5.13
+4.95
+4.82
+4.5
+4.32
+4.26
+4.1
+4.04
+1872.93
(b) Important entities for the French set.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
mean(|SHAP value|)
Refund
EnesKanterFoundation
EnesKanterFoundation 
#
Periscope
FreedomForOcalan #
AfterDaesh
Stops
RojavaUniversity
DictatorErdogan
FreedomToKacmazFamily
KURDS
ThunderUp
ArrestErdogansBody
ArrestErdogansBodyguards
YPGJ
MJs
USTurkish
Efrîns
MVP
Sum of 3480 other features
Refund
EnesKanterFoundation
EnesKanterFoundation 
#
Periscope
FreedomForOcalan #
AfterDaesh
Stops
RojavaUniversity
DictatorErdogan
FreedomToKacmazFamily
KURDS
ThunderUp
ArrestErdogansBody
ArrestErdogansBodyguards
YPGJ
MJs
USTurkish
Efrîns
MVP
Sum of 3480 other features
+9.94
+9.15
+8.23
+7.73
+7.32
+7.01
+6.8
+6.75
+6.74
+6.72
+6.71
+6.65
+6.37
+6.06
+5.91
+5.88
+5.77
+5.63
+5.6
+1759.56
(c) Important entities for the Turkish set.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
mean(|SHAP value|)
888pokerLIVE
Khilafah_Education #
888LiveLondon
KhilafahControlsOutbr
Khilafah_education #
Khilafah_Education
FreeSistersRomanaAndRoshan
KhilafahLiberatesKas
FreeRomanaAndRoshan
Khilafahwe
888poker
SBOBETs
888poker #
Khilafah #
AlRahman
888pokers
SBOBET
KhilafahIsOurGuardian
PinnaclePredictor
Sum of 3538 other features
888pokerLIVE
Khilafah_Education #
888LiveLondon
KhilafahControlsOutbr
Khilafah_education #
Khilafah_Education
FreeSistersRomanaAndRoshan
KhilafahLiberatesKas
FreeRomanaAndRoshan
Khilafahwe
888poker
SBOBETs
888poker #
Khilafah #
AlRahman
888pokers
SBOBET
KhilafahIsOurGuardian
PinnaclePredictor
Sum of 3538 other features
+10.46
+10.21
+9.4
+8.95
+8.78
+8.69
+8.69
+8.61
+8.3
+7.6
+7.59
+7.43
+7.29
+7.05
+7.01
+6.84
+6.8
+6.75
+6.47
+1996.89
(d) Important entities for the Russian set.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
mean(|SHAP value|)
MSG9
9Day7
Celebrations4HKNKJ
MSG9
9Day5
LifeChangingTipsPart2
FunTalkWithFDD
PathOfTruthWithMSG
MSG9
9Day3
MSG9
9Day1
MSGexplainsTrueRelationships
TheSoulAwakeningProgram
HKNKJTomorrow
HappyTeejFromMSG
LifeChangingTipsPart39
LifeChangingTipsPart44
LifeChangingTips
TheLaughterShowEp10
TheLaughterShowEp14
TheLaughterShowEp8
50DaysOfLionHeart
Sum of 3988 other features
MSG9
9Day7
Celebrations4HKNKJ
MSG9
9Day5
LifeChangingTipsPart2
FunTalkWithFDD
PathOfTruthWithMSG
MSG9
9Day3
MSG9
9Day1
MSGexplainsTrueRelationships
TheSoulAwakeningProgram
HKNKJTomorrow
HappyTeejFromMSG
LifeChangingTipsPart39
LifeChangingTipsPart44
LifeChangingTips
TheLaughterShowEp10
TheLaughterShowEp14
TheLaughterShowEp8
50DaysOfLionHeart
Sum of 3988 other features
+17.49
+15.11
+12.96
+12.74
+12.08
+11.63
+11.19
+10.76
+10.57
+10.23
+9.28
+9.25
+9.06
+8.95
+8.89
+8.7
+8.63
+8.54
+7.75
+1929.54
(e) Important entities for the Indian set.
Figure 5: Shapley Bar Plots for all 5 Individual Countries.
