Title: Natural Language Processing for Financial Regulation
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08533v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing for Financial
Regulation
Ixandra Achitouv1*, Dragos Gorduza2‚ÄÝ and Antoine Jacquier3‚ÄÝ
1*Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London and CNRS,
Complex Systems Institute of Paris ÀÜIle-de-France.
2 Oxford Man Institute of Quantitative Finance.
3Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London and the Alan
Turning Institute.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): ixandra.achitouv@cnrs.fr;
‚ÄÝThese authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
This article provides an understanding of Natural Language Processing tech-
niques in the framework of financial regulation, more specifically in order to
perform semantic matching search between rules and policy when no dataset
is available for supervised learning. We outline how to outperform simple pre-
trained sentences-transformer models using freely available resources and explain
the mathematical concepts behind the key building blocks of Natural Language
Processing.
Keywords: Language models, Financial Regulation, Natural Language Processing
1 Introduction
Over the past ten years, modern natural language processing models have revolu-
tionised the field of artificial intelligence, transforming how computers understand and
generate language. ChatGPT is one key example of how AI technology is becoming
increasingly important in generating more and more precise human-like responses to
a wide variety of problems, including business ones. These advancements have signifi-
cant implications for the financial industry, where vast amounts of regulatory data and
policies must be analysed and understood in order to comply with laws and regulations.
1
arXiv:2311.08533v1  [cs.CL]  14 Nov 2023
Indeed, Natural Language Processing (NLP) has gained traction in financial reg-
ulation as a solution for managing and interpreting complex regulatory information.
The ability to effectively process and analyse large amounts of regulatory text is cru-
cial for compliance officers, risk managers, and other financial professionals. However,
traditional methods of automatic text processing including keyword searches and dic-
tionaries are both inefficient to run at the scale required by the amount of files to
treat, and costly to set up since they require system experts to design dictionaries on
a case-by-case basis. Moreover, they are also prone to errors due to lack of coverage
which can expose the user to costly regulatory violations. Modern NLP techniques have
emerged in recent years, mostly based on deep neural networks and after the seminal
breakthrough [1] by Vaswani, Shazeer, Parmar, Uszkoreit, Jones, Gomez, Kaiser and
Polosukhin, who incorporated the attention mechanism to learn latent semantic links
between words in a sentence more accurately. These improvements, along with orders
of magnitude increases in the availability of datasets and computational power have
led to large language model (LLM), a type of model known for its ability to achieve
general-purpose language understanding and generation such as OpenAI‚Äôs GPT (used
in ChatGPT), Meta‚Äôs LLaMa or Google‚Äôs PaLM. One may however wonder whether
LLMs are actually required for simple NLP tasks such as semantic search, especially
due to their costs, instead of free open resources.
In the present work, we perform a semantic search applied to laws and regulation
using a so called domain adaptation technique with limited amount of data, bearing in
mind limited available resources from small and medium enterprises. We also recall the
historical NLP approaches and explain the leading concepts in this field. In particular,
we focus on semantic search, which naturally leads to the encoding concepts of a
sentence. We thus aim to fill the gap between well-known NLP concepts and the
mathematical frameworks behind.
This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 is a short historical review on encoding
methods of a sentence into a mathematical object as well as key machine learning
advances. In Section 3 we describe the task of semantic textual similarity, the different
techniques at hand and illustrate them with pseudo codes. In Section 4, we apply these
techniques concretely to financial regulation problems to improve semantic search
matching. Section 5 draws conclusion from this analysis.
2 Historical overview of word embedding approaches
Semantic vectors of words are high-dimensional vectors, and pairwise distances
between two vectors reflect the similarity of words. We briefly review the main lit-
erature on this topic, clarifying the notions of ‚Äòsimilarity‚Äô, ‚Äòmeaning‚Äô and ‚Äòcorrelation
between words‚Äô.
2.1 Deterministic approaches based on word counts
The roots of major modern NLP techniques can be traced back Firth‚Äô quote [2] ‚ÄòYou
shall know a word by the company it keeps‚Äô. Word co-occurrence statistic is a simple
deterministic approach to obtain a semantic vector representation of words. Latent
2
Semantic Analysis (HAL) [3] and Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL) [4] are his-
torically the two methods that built embedded semantic vectors derived from the
statistics of word co-occurrence. LSA derives its vectors from collections of segmented
documents, while HAL makes use of unsegmented text corpora. For segmented docu-
ments, a document-term matrix is used to describe the frequency of terms that occur
in a collection of documents such that rows correspond to the documents and columns
correspond to the terms. Each (i, j) cell, then, counts the number of times word j
occurs in document i. Later, Rohde, Gonnerman and Plaut [5] improved the HAL
method introducing the Correlated Occurrence Analogue to Lexical Semantics (COALS)
algorithm, which achieves considerably better performance through improvements in
normalisation and other algorithmic details.
2.1.1 Co-occurrence & Singular Value Decomposition
The deterministic approach proposed in [5] is one of the first methods to achieve good
and consistent results in predicting human similarity judgements in words embedding.
It is a two-step approach:
Step 1: produce a co-occurrence matrix. For each word w1, count the number of
times another word w2 occurs in close proximity to w1. Here ‚Äôclose proximity‚Äô (or ‚Äôwin-
dows size‚Äô) is a hyperparameter indicating the number of words to consider before/after
the central word w1. HAL suggested to use a 4-word window while COALS proposes
10-word windows. The counting is done using a weighting scheme whereby if w2 is
adjacent to w1 it receives the maximal weight, and the weight is proportional to the
length separation of the central word w1 (ramped window). This results in an N √ó N
co-occurrence matrix where N represents the number of words in the whole corpus.
One could in principle stop here, where each row of the co-occurrence matrix can
thus be associated with a word. With this procedure, HAL [4] demonstrated seman-
tic similarity between any desired pair of words. A few tricks were also proposed in
the computation of the co-occurrence matrix, for instance putting a threshold to the
number of co-occurrence count to remove frequent words such as ‚Äòthe‚Äô or ‚Äòa‚Äô.
Step 2: Dimension reduction of word vectors. From the co-occurrence count of
words the resulting embedded vectors should have at least the size of the words in the
corpus1. In HAL, the authors proposed to keep a relatively small number of principal
components of the co-occurrence matrix. For instance reducing the vector size by
eliminating all but the k columns with the highest variance. In [5] the reduction of
dimension is based on Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the normalised co-
occurrence matrix (this was also proposed in for latent semantic analysis in [3]).
2.2 Machine Learning
Over the last decade, Machine Learning algorithms contribution to NLP have brought
significant progress. Among these, Word2vec in 2013 by Mikolov, Chen, Corrado and
1In fact it has a 2N dimension in HAL where for every word in the target vocabulary, there is both a row
and a column containing relevant values. For instance, the row may contain co-occurrence information for
words appearing before the word under consideration, while the column contains co-occurrence information
for words following it. This (row,column) pair may be concatenated so that, given an N √ó N co-occurrence
matrix, a co-occurrence vector of length 2N is available. In COALS the distinction between left/right of the
central word is ignored.
3
Dean [6], Glove in 2014 by Pennington, Socher and Manning [7], BERT in 2018 by
Devlin, Chang, Lee and Toutanova [8] and SBERT in 2019 by Reimers and Gurevych [9]
are the most popular ones, which we shall use in this project. The key idea is to perform
a non-linear regression where the coefficients are adjusted by minimising a loss function
(or maximising a likelihood function). In the case of NLP, the coefficients/weights are
the embedded vectors.
2.2.1 Skip-gram and CBOW
To understand the Skip-gram model, we briefly review some fundamental concepts of
probabilistic language modelling where the goal is to compute the probability P(w) of
a sequence of words w := (w0, . . . , wn) occurring; we also write wi:j := (wi, . . . , wj)
and omit i whenever i = 0. A similar goal is to compute the conditional probability
of an upcoming word P(wj|wj‚àí1). The computation of these probabilities rely on
conditional probabilities where the general chain of rule can be expressed as
P(w) = P(w0)P(w1|w0)P(w2|w:1) ¬∑ ¬∑ ¬∑ P(wn|w:n‚àí1).
To estimate this probability we count from a corpus
P(wj|w:j‚àí1) =
#w:j
#w:j‚àí1
.
For sentences with more than a few words, the probability that a complex sentence
repeats itself often enough to be able to compute statistical properties is unlikely. To
overcome this, one usually assumes a pseudo-Markovian approximation (the k-gram
model) 2, whereby P(wj|w:j‚àí1) ‚âàP(wj|wj‚àík:j‚àí1) for some k ‚â§j. For instance for
k = 1 we get the properly Markov bi-gram model P(wj|w:j‚àí1) ‚âàP(wj|wj‚àí1). Given
a sentence, computing for each word the probability that it occurs given the previous
words is similar to filling a normalised co-occurrence matrix.
Skip-gram
models
are
generalisations
of
n-gram
models,
in
which
the
components
do
not
need
to
be
consecutive,
but
may
leave
gaps
that
are
skipped
over
[10,
11].
For
instance,
the
adjacent
words
for
the
sentence:
‚ÄòI
hit
the
blue
ball‚Äô
are
{I hit, hit the, the blue, blue ball}
for
a
bi-gram
and
{I hit, I the, I blue, hit the, hit blue, hit ball, the blue, the ball} for a 2-skip-bi-gram.
Finally, in Word2vec [12], the definition of the Skip-gram architecture is to predict
surrounding words given a specific word, which formally corresponds to computing
P(wn‚àíj:n+j|wn). while the Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) architecture predicts the
current word based on the context: P(wj|w:j‚àí1). These two models are illustrated
in [12, Figure 1].
2.2.2 Link with the embedding vectors
In the Skip-gram originally presented in [12], the training objective is to learn word
vector representations that are good at predicting the close-by words w(t ‚àí2), w(t ‚àí
2strictly speaking it is not Markovian for k Ã∏= 1 because we keep a memory of the k previous words
4
1), w(t + 1), w(t + 2) from an input word w(t). This is achieved by maximising the
average log likelihood probability, equivalently by minimising the loss function
J (Œò) := ‚àí1
T
T
X
t=1
X
‚àíc‚â§j‚â§c,jÃ∏=0
log P(wt+j|wt),
(1)
where c is the size of the training context, (w1, ¬∑ ¬∑ ¬∑ , wT ) is a sequence of training words
and Œò is the vector representation of words that the algorithm tries to optimise. Note
that every word w appears both as a central word (input wI) and as a context word
(output wO) so that Œò ‚ààR2w where w is the size of the vocabulary3. In the basic
Skip-gram formulation, a softmax function is proposed to model the loss function,
namely
P(wO|wI) =
exp
 v‚ä§
wOvwI

Pw
w=1 exp (v‚ä§
wvwI),
(2)
where wO and wI are the output and input words, and, given a word w, vwI and vwO
are its input and output vector representations. The loss function is then minimised via
gradient descent: the gradient of the likelihood (with respect to vwI) can be computed
easily and is equal to zero if and only if
vwO =
" w
X
w=1
exp(v‚ä§
wvwI)
#‚àí1
w
X
w=1
vw exp(v‚ä§
wvwI),
(3)
which is the expectation of vwO occurring given the context word vwI.
In practice, to improve computation efficiency, a hierarchical softmax is proposed
in [12, Equation (3)]), which uses a binary tree representation such that the computing
time cost reduces from w to log(w). An alternative technique to improve efficiency
is to sub-sample k random words and compute their probabilities to appear in the
context of the central words. This is known as negative sampling where log P(wt+j|wt)
in (1) is replaced by
log œÉ
 v‚ä§
wOvwI

+
k
X
j=1
Ewj‚àºPn(w)
h
log œÉ

‚àív‚ä§
wjvwI
i
,
(4)
where œÉ(¬∑) is the sigmoid function and the sum runs over a random sample of k
words (rather than w) based on their frequencies around the center word. Thus, the
task is to distinguish the target word wO from draws from noise distribution Pn(w)
using logistic regression. The noise distribution Pn(w) in (4) is a free parameter
and [12] found that Pn(w) = u(w)3/4/Z, where u(w) is a unigram and Z is just the
normalisation constant, outperformed computational efficiency significantly over the
uniform distributions. This avoids summing over all words in the denominator of (2).
In [12], typical values for k lie in the range [5, 20] for small training datasets, while
3the final embedded word w is simply the average of its input wI and output wO vector representations.
5
for large datasets k can be as small as [2, 5]. An implementation of this model can
be found at https://github.com/chrisjmccormick/word2vec commented/blob/master/
word2vec.c. Improvements of the CBOW and Skip-gram models have been proposed but
still rely on the same fundamental idea of co-occurrence statistics of words from [7].
2.2.3 Transformer and attention mechanism
Another major step was archived using multi-layer bidirectional Transformer
encoders [1] for the training architecture, and was used in BERT [8] (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers). A main difference with Word2vec is
that BERT is a non-static model with not just one hidden layer. Another key difference
is that there is no window-size limitation of n-words in BERT to consider the context
of the word to encode. The technique employed instead is known as the attention
mechanism and is the building block of a transformer architecture. Transformers were
originally designed for translation and they are now the state of the art architecture
in NLP. The transformer model architecture can be seen in [1, Figure 1].
Transformers can be summarised as encoder-decoder tools, where a sentence is fed
to the encoder and the decoder generates another sentence; the whole system is built by
stacking several layers or encoder/decoder. Each encoder has two sub-layers, a multi-
head self-attention layer and a position-wise fully connected feed-forward network, and
receives a list of vectors as input, passes it into a self-attention layer, then into a feed-
forward neural network, and finally sends out the output upwards to the next encoder.
The decoder itselg has tree layers: in addition to the two sub-layers of the encoder
layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head attention over
the output of the encoder stack and helps the decoder focus on relevant parts of the
input sentence.
The Self-attention mechanism is the building block of a Transformer and captures
the relationship between the different words in a sentence. All attention mechanisms in
a Transformer are split into independent heads whose outputs are concatenated before
being further processed. A self-attention mechanism computes a score value between
a query with keys, and reweighs the value. All heads‚Äô values will be used through a
scale dot architecture to update the attention weight matrix. A self-attention head
(assuming one single head) can summarised as follows [13]:
‚Ä¢ For each word i ‚àà{1, . . . , L} in a sentence of length L, return its positional embed-
ding vector wi of length de, which is one of the hyperparameters. In [1] the base
case is de = 512 while for example in GPT2 it is 768. The size of the embedding
impacts the probability that two random embedded words are correlated or not (if
their scalar product is close to ¬±1 or to 0 respectively).
‚Ä¢ Stack each embedding into a matrix X ‚ààRL√óde. For instance if we consider each
English word as a token, the sentence ‚ÄôI hit the blue ball‚Äô has L = 5 tokens, each of
them encoded in a 512-dimensional embedding vector.
‚Ä¢ Compute the query, key and value matrices Q, K and V by projecting X in the
(subspace) representations of the packed queries, keys and values:
Q := XWq,
K := XWk,
V := XWv,
6
where Wq, Wk, Wv are weights matrices of length de √ó dw trained during the
training process (randomly initialised) and their dimensions depend on the architec-
ture. For simplicity, in one single-head attention dw = de, while for multiple-head
(8 in [1]), dw = de/Nhead = 512/8 = 64. Multiple-head attention algorithm split
multiple query, key and value ‚Äòheads‚Äô in order to improve the performance of the
algorithm. This split reshapes weight matrices into Wi
q, Wi
k, Wi
v, of dimensions
de √ó dw. In the base case of [1], dw = 64 was selected after hyperparameter tuning
as was the length of the embedded vectors de. Larger values of the hyperparam-
eters such as dw or de provide better performance [1, Table 4], but require more
computational resources.
‚Ä¢ Compute a self-attention score of each word of the input sentence against the others,
by taking the dot product between query and key vectors of the respective words.
These scores are then normalised and passed into a softmax function. The resulting
attention-weighting matrix of size L √ó L represents the correlation between word i
and word j. Finally, the attention function or self-attention head takes the attention-
weighting matrix and multiply it by the value matrix V, defined as
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
QK‚ä§
‚àödw

V,
(5)
resulting in an updated vector representation of the contextualised token V.
The whole transformer itself uses h attention heads (h = 8 in [1]) and is summarised
in Algorithm 1 to allow the model to jointly represent information from different
representation subspaces at different positions. The reweighing ‚Äúvalues‚Äù from the heads
are passed through another densely connected layers. The outputs of these attention
heads are concatenated into a matrix O of dimensions L√óde. This matrix is multiplied
by an output weight matrix Wo of dimension de √ó de. The result is
eX, an updated
representation of X the input matrix of the embedded tokens with eX ‚ààRL√óde.
Algorithm 1 Multiheaded Attention Layer
Require: X, Wq, Wk, Wv, Wo
for i = 1 to h do (Split Wq, Wk, and Wv into h heads (Qi, Ki, Vi)i=1,...,h)
Qi ‚ÜêXWi
q;
Ki ‚ÜêXWi
k;
Vi ‚ÜêXWi
v
outputi ‚ÜêAttention(Qi, Ki, Vi);
O ‚ÜêConcatenate(output1, . . . , outputh)
eX ‚ÜêOWo
Ensure: eX
The transformer model has been very successful and is at the core of many machine
learning applications: for NLP, the BERT family [1], in biology, the Generative Pre-
trained Transformer (GPT) family to predict molecular structures [14], in computer
vision, to extract image information [15]. Recent models differ from their predecessors
primarily by their size (BERT has 310 million parameters, GPT3 has 175 billion [16],
7
PALM has 540 billion). The other chief difference lies in which part of the encoder-
decoder framework of the transformer architecture is leveraged. BERT uses the entire
encoder-decoder while models like the GPT family use the only decoder. The classical
BERT architecture is trained on two tasks [8]. The first is sentence entailment, where
the input is one sentence and the model is asked to predict whether the question
proposed as the output is logically entailed by the first or not. The second task is
Masked Language Modelling, where a random 15% subset of tokens in the entire
training corpus is replaced by a [MASK] token and the BERT model is asked to predict
the most likely candidate replacement. Both these pre-training approaches yield a very
powerful model that can be fine-tuned on a downstream task.
3 Semantic textual similarity search
To perform semantic similarity search, a classical approach would be to feed an input
sentence or text to the BERT transformer network which produces contextualised word
embeddings for all input tokens in the text. Then, via a pooling layer (such as mean-
pooling), the average of the contextualised word embeddings would return a fixed-sized
output representation vector. In the BERT-base model the dimension is 768; similarly
to the previous discussion, larger values provides better accuracy but at the cost of
computational memory and time. This sentence/text could be directly compared with
another pair using for instance cosine similarity between the two vectors. However this
would often yield poor sentence embedding compared to GloVe [9] and to expensive
computational time. For instance in [9], computing the most similar sentence pairs
from 1, 000 sentences took 65 hours with BERT. We have also tried to perform some
fine-tuning and further train BERT on our corpus and indeed found the computational
time to be significantly larger and the semantic search score high even for non matching
(policy, rule) pair.
To palliate this, SBERT (Sentence-BERT) uses a BERT architecture with siamese and
triplet networks [17] that is able to derive semantically meaningful sentence embed-
dings. This adds a pooling operation to the output of BERT and fine-tune the latter
by adding a training dataset with pairs of sentences. The cosine similarity between a
query vector Q and a policy vector P can be defined as
Sc(Q, P) :=
Q‚ä§P
‚à•Q‚à•‚à•P‚à•,
(6)
which converges to one as the similarity increases. This allows SBERT networks to
be fine-tuned and to recognise the similarity of sentences. Different versions of loss
functions can be used; for example, we later use the all-MiniLM-L6-v2, trained on a
dataset of over one billion training pairs. These models can be freely accessed using
Sentences Transformers (www.sbert.net) to perform text embeddings directly from a
large collection of pre-trained models tuned for various tasks.
Our goal here is to link rules issued by an organisation (such as governments or
financial regulators) to financial institutions policies (banks in particular). Financial
rules are often updated and financial institutions are required to issue new policies
addressing these changes. It is extremely challenging for large institutions to keep track
8
of regular updates and to ensure their policies match the latest rules. Using NLP, we
perform here semantic search between query sentences (rules) and answers (policies)
written in a corpus as follows:
‚Ä¢ Clean corpus and rules from meaningless symbols (bracket, hashtag, special
character, ...).
‚Ä¢ For each query, split the corpus into sentences or paragraphs, depending on the data
and the query size. Sentence-by-sentence comparison similarity will be more precise
than pooling many sentences into paragraphs.
‚Ä¢ Use a pre-trained model such as BERT to tokenise each word of the sentence, and map
sentences to embedded vectors, usually via mean-pooling of each embedded token.
The size of any embedded token depends on the pre-trained model. One can also
use pre-trained model such as all-MiniLM-L6-v2 and embed the sentence directly
using sentence-transformer library.
‚Ä¢ Use cosine similarity (6) as a metric between an embedded rule query and the
embedded policies to find the best match. By requiring that a match is positive
above a threshold (say Sc > 0.7), we can easily extract from a policy corpus which
sentences match the rule (if any).
This powerful pipeline can however be improved. Using pre-trained models to encode
our sentences to vectors may sound sensible, but they are trained on generic corpus
and are not familiar with domain-specific targets‚Äìsuch as financial regulation‚Äìwith
high accuracy. One may instead completely re-train BERT on a domain-specific corpus,
as done in [18]; this however requires huge amount of training data (3.3 billion tokens),
which is extremely costly. Instead‚Äìand this is the state of the art‚Äì training can be
performed using an Adaptative Pre-Training, described at www.sbert.net; this was
successfully applied in various domains, such as for the bio-medical language [19]. It
can then be archived with Sentence-Transformers frameworks and the Hugging Face
Transformers library, specifically built for NLP applications huggingface.co.
3.1 Classical Domain Adaptation (DA) Pre-Training method
The DA Pre-Training method can be split into two steps:
‚Ä¢ Step 1: further train a pre-trained model for words embeddings such as BERT, SBERT
or all-MiniLM-L6-v2 using a context specific corpus.
‚Ä¢ Step 2: fine-tune the resulting model based on an existing training dataset (such as
paired sentences), similarly to SBERT but on the domain-specific dataset.
Before performing Step 1, one can also add up domain-specific tokens to the exist-
ing model, although given the limited amount of datasets at hand, this may not always
be possible. To perform Step 1, known as Pre-Training on Target Domain, we use the
Mask Language Modelling (MLM) approach [20], which masks a random fraction of
tokens in a sentence and the transformer then tries to guess what is missing. Alter-
native approaches include Transformer-based Denoising AutoEncoder (TSDAE) [20].
While MLM outputs a token vector (mask word), the TSDAE encoder is fed with
noisy sentences which the decoder uses to predict the full original sentences. To per-
form Step 2, we need to specify the loss function and the training set. Many generic
9
training sets with labelled paired sentences are available (huggingface.co/datasets),
but we do not use them since wish to target our fine-tuning on (rules, policies) pairs.
For the loss function, we use the Multiple Negatives Ranking (MNR) Loss detailed
in [21, Section 4] and reviewed below.
The idea of Multiple Negatives Ranking (MNR), introduced in [21], is to suggest
responses to a question embedded in a vector X maintaining some kind of mem-
ory throughout the course of a dialogue, which translates to finding the probability
P(Y|X), where Y is the embedded vector answer. This probability is used to rank
possible answers Y given an input question X. Bayes‚Äô theorem and the total law of
probability indicate that this probability can be expressed as
P(Y|X) =
P(X, Y)
P
k P(X, Yk),
(7)
and the joint probability P(X, Y) is estimated using a neural network scoring
function S such that
bP(X, Y) := exp {S(X, Y)} .
In practice the denominator in (7) (equal to P(X)) is approximated by sampling K
responses from the training corpus with bP(X) := PK
k=1 P(X, Yk), leading to the
approximate probability used to train the neural network:
bP(Y|X) :=
exp {S(X, Y)}
PK
k=1 exp {S(X, Yk)}
.
Having a training dataset with (question, answer) pairs, each embedded question Xi
is paired with the embedded answer Yi and all other Yj for i Ã∏= j is treated as a
negative candidate for question Xi (so K ‚àí1 negatives). The goal of the training is
to minimise the loss function
J (X, Y, Œò) := ‚àí1
K
K
X
i=1
log bP(Yi|Xi),
where Œò gathers the word embeddings and the neural network parameters. To com-
pute the score, the authors in [21] represent the input question tokenised into a word
sequence X and responses Y as fixed-dimensional input features, extracting n-gram
features from each. During training, they learn a d-dimensional embedding for each
n-gram jointly with the other neural network parameters. To represent sequences of
words, they combine n-gram embeddings by summing their values. This bag of n-
grams representation is denoted as Œ®(X) ‚ààRd. Then a feedforward scoring model
takes the n-gram representation of a question and a response, and computes a score.
For instance in the dot-product architecture from [21, Figure 3], Œ®(X) and Œ®(Y)
go to two separate tanh activation layers returning the encoded X and Y as hx, hy
and performing S(X, Y) = h‚ä§
x hy. Using the MNR Loss, the score is computed using
at first the chosen pre-trained model and the default scoring is computed via cosine
10
similarity in (6).4 The key issue and challenge for this work lies in the absence of a
training dataset for policies and rules. While unsupervised text embedding learning
performs rather poorly in learning on domain-specific concepts without fine tuning, we
tested an approach to perform an Adaptative Pre-Training without using the training
dataset we generated in Section 4.1. This method generates pseudo-labeling pairs for
fine tuning and we describe it in the next section.
3.2 Domain Adaptation with Generative Pseudo-Labeling
Alternatively to the approach described above, we also tested the unsupervised fine-
tuning with Generative Pseudo-Labeling (GPL) [22]. This method can be used to
perform Step 2 from Section 3.1. In our context we wish to investigate how it improves
Step 2 over a fine-tuning fitting method that uses labelled (rules, policies) pairs. The
idea behind GPL can be condensed into four steps, that we now describe. Below, we
shall use calligraphic letters to denote sets (of paragraphs for example) as opposed to
standard letters for elements, for example P‚àí:= {P ‚àí
1 , P ‚àí
2 , . . .}.
3.2.1 GPL Step 1: Generating queries from a domain specific corpus
For each paragraph of the corpus, we generate queries using a T5-encoder-decoder
model [23] similarly to the architecture of [1] discussed in Section 2.2.2. This query
generator, which can easily be called again from Sentences-Transformer models, yields
positive (query, answer) pairs and is summarised in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Generator
Require: input paragraph P +, vocabulary size V , length of the output query
paragraph Lq
G ‚ÜêT5(P +) (G ‚ààRV √óLq: matrix of probability distributions)
Q ‚Üê(arg max(Gi))i=1,...Lq
Q ‚ÜêDecode(Q)
Ensure: (Q,P +)
3.2.2 GPL Step 2: Negative mining using dense retrieval
This step finds sentences in the text that share many similar words. For each query or
paragraph, there is now a positive pair. In addition, for each of the generated queries,
GPL retrieves M negative passages that are similar but not a match to the query,
which is known as a negative mining process. At the end of this step, we obtain triplets
of positive and negative passages associated with a query. This step makes use of a
function DenseRetrieval which is detailed in Algorithm 3.
4see
github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/sentence transformers/losses/
MultipleNegativesRankingLoss.py for details
11
Algorithm 3 Dense Retrieval
Require: Remaining set P = {P1, . . . , P|P|} \ {P +} of paragraphs; user query Q;
M ‚â§|P|: number of negative passages;
P‚àí, D ‚Üê{}, {}
E ‚Üê(T5(Pi))i=1,...,|P|
(Calculate an embedding E for each paragraph)
EQ ‚ÜêT5(Q)
(Calculate an embedding EQ for from the query Q)
D ‚Üê(Sc(Ei, EQ), Ei)i=1,...|E|
(with Sc(¬∑) defined in (6))
D ‚Üêsort(D) (Sort by cosine similarity)
P‚àí‚Üê(D1, . . . , DM)
Ensure: (Q, P +, P‚àí)
3.2.3 GPL Step 3: Pseudo labelling
Use a crossencoder [24] to score all query-positive passage and query-negative passages.
Note that some negative passage might actually be positive pairs. This step scores
the triplets composed of our initial paragraph P +, our generated query based on the
initial paragraph Q, one output P ‚àí
i
from our set of negative samples P‚àí.
Algorithm 4 Pseudo Labelling
Require: (Q, P +, P‚àí), crossencoder, M
for i = 1 to M do
margini ‚Üêcrossencoder(Q, P +) ‚àícrossencoder(Q, P ‚àí
i )
Ensure: (Q, P +, P ‚àí
i , margini)i=1,...,M
3.2.4 GPL Step 4: Training/Tuning the Transformer model to
identify the differences between positive and negative
passages, using a crossencoder model
The latter compare the embeddings of the passages by generating similarity scores for
both positive and negative pairs. Given a transformer model that we wish to train using
GPL and the output tuples from the previous step, we will train the said transformer
by backpropagation between the margin computed in Algorithm 4 and the predicted
margin we extract. This process is optimised using an MSE loss function applied to
the margin
SMSE :=
X‚ä§
Q

XP + ‚àíXP‚àí
i
 ,
(8)
with XQ, XP +, XP‚àí
i the embedded vectors of the query, positive passage, and negative
passage i.
3.3 To summarise
Both supervised and unsupervised domain adaptation methods use a pre-trained
model and further train it by comparing (query, answer) pairs or triplets (negative
answer). These pairs and triplets are in the classical supervised method given by the
12
Algorithm 5 Training loop of Transformer using GPL
Require: (Q, P +, P ‚àí
i , margini)i=1,...,M
for i = 1 to M do
(XQ, XP +, XP ‚àí
i ) ‚ÜêTransformer(Q, P +, P ‚àí
i )
predictedsim+ ‚ÜêSc(XQ, XP +)
(with Sc(¬∑) defined in (6))
predictedsim‚àí
i ‚ÜêSc(XQ, XP ‚àí
i )
predictedmargini ‚Üêpredictedsim+ ‚àípredictedsim‚àí
i
Lossi ‚ÜêSMSE(margini, predictedmargini) defined in (8))
Outputi ‚Üêbackpropagate(Lossi)
Ensure: Output
dataset used to perform the domain adaptation (corpus of a specific domain), but it
may also be generated. That is the GPL approach for a fully unsupervised domain
adaptation. Below, we explore the results of performing an Adaptative Pre-Training
method and a purely unsupervised approach, using GPL. To compare our results and
to perform supervised fine-tuning we need a pseudo training/validation dataset. We
describe in the next section how we create it.
4 Application to semantic matching for financial
regulation
4.1 Creation of a pseudo training and validation dataset
To create our validation dataset we use a mean assemble average of N pre-trained mod-
els (in what follows N=10)5 for the task of semantic search between rules and policies.
We run these N sentence-transforming models on a catalogue of rules and financial
policies provided by FinregE (https://finreg-e.com), a company providing clients in
financial services with a software focusing on current and future regulations, using
ML and AI tools to identify and interpret regulatory requirements and to integrate
compliance workflows for action and compliance management.
The dataset of rules is publicly available from Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
Rulebook 2022. After cleaning and splitting the rules into sentences of length 200, we
obtain about 50,000 sentences, composed of 21,914 rule IDs. The policies‚Äô dataset was
obtained from FinregE and is composed of 2,374 policies that may not cover all of the
newly edited FCAR rulesOur approach is the following:
‚Ä¢ For each model, we keep the rule/policy match sentences if the cosine similarity (6)
is above 0.7. This is an empirical choice that provides fair matches.
‚Ä¢ We keep pairs that have been identified by a number of models greater than
‚àö
N.
Given that the standard deviation of shot noise is equal to the square root of the
5multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v1, sentence-t5-xl, multi-qa-distilbert-cos-v1, msmarco-bert-base-dot-v5,
all-distilroberta-v1,
all-MiniLM-L12-v2,
distiluse-base-multilingual-cased-v2,
all-mpnet-base-v2,
stsb-distilbert-base, bert-base-nli-mean-tokens. These models can be found at www.sbert.net/docs/
pretrained models.html
13
Fig. 1 Sample of the semantic text search output between rules and policies. The score corresponds
to the percentage of models that have identified the same match.
average number of events N, hence if models are uncorrelated, selecting a signal to
noise match above one sigma should correspond to a
‚àö
N cut.
We end up with 1, 760 matching (rule, policy) pairs out of which we keep 1, 408 pairs
to fine-tune our model (Section 4.2) and 352 for the validation dataset. In Figure 1 we
can see a sample of our validation dataset results. This dataset will be good to identify
pairs that share high similarities but will not be able to pick up on subtle pairs. This
is why it is not an unbiased dataset for fine-tuning purposes but we proceed anyway
due to the absence of hand labelled pairing between rules and policies.
4.2 Domain Adaptation Pre-Training method
The
corpus
we
use
for
further
pre-training
(Section
3.1-Step
1)
are
rules
from
the
FCA
Rulebook.
We
use
a
full
word
mask
and
we
use
the
DataCollatorForLanguageModeling which is a class of transformers to perform the
MLM training6. Then we run Step 2 of Section 3.1 with the MNR loss using our train-
ing dataset matching (rule, policy) pairs. We perform Step 1 and Step 2 using both
BERT and all-MiniLM-L6-v2 pre-train model to further train in our domain-specific
corpus.
4.2.1 Results
In the absence of an unbiased validation dataset, it is difficult to perform proper model
comparison. We do so by rating two scores.
‚Ä¢ Score 1: margin between matching and random pairs. For all the rules in our valida-
tion datasets we use the model considered to compute the cosine similarity Sc(Ri, Pi)
between rule i and policy i (the matching pair) and the cosine similarity Sc(Ri, Pj)
6see
huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main classes/data collator
and
www.sbert.net/examples/
unsupervised learning/MLM/README.html
14
between rule i and a random policy j, with j Ã∏= i. Then we compute
S1 := 1
N
N
X
i=1
n
Sc(Ri, Pi) ‚àíSc(Ri, Pj)
o
,
(9)
where N is the length of the validation dataset (here N = 352).
‚Ä¢ Score 2: For each rule Ri, we compute the highest similarity scoring policy P ‚àó
i :=
arg maxj=1,...,N Sc(Ri, Pj). If P ‚àó
i = Pi, we then increment S2 by one and then divide
by N to get the fraction of ‚Äòcorrect‚Äô matches per model, namely
S2 := 1
N
N
X
i=1
1{Pi=arg maxj=1,...,N Sc(Ri,Pj)}.
For a perfectly tuned model and for an unambiguous validation dataset, S1 and S2
should be close to 1 since Sc(Ri, Pi) approaches 1 and Sc(Ri, Pj) approaches zero. In
practice, since we split rules and policies in sentences, it may happen that the same
sentence occurs in different policies. Therefore a match between Ri and Pj (with j Ã∏= i)
is not necessarily a wrong match. In addition in each rule, some sentences are quite
generic and are addressed by many policies. Our score does not account for these and
is therefore just a benchmark to test the impact of the domain adaptation and not an
actual score of the quality of semantic matching. Using BERT as the initial pre-trained
model our results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Result for the Domain adaptation
with BERT and steps defined in Section 3.1
Model
Score 1
Score 2
Regular BERT
0.09
0.32
BERT + Step 1
0.10
0.33
BERT + Step 1 & 2
0.32
0.33
The key improvement of the Domain Adaptation comes from fine-tuning Step 2
although we know that regular BERT is not really suited to perform semantic match-
ing. In fact the low Score 1 for regular BERT comes from the fact that both positive
and negative matches are high. Only fine-tuning can help BERT distinguish the nega-
tive pairing. That is why we also tested the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model using it as is,
performed Step 1 and Step 2, and quote the improvement of performing an adaptive
pre-training method defined as score fine-tune‚àíscore baseline
score baseline
.
Table 2 Result for the Domain adaptation with
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 and steps defined in Section 3.1
Model
Score 1
Score 2
all-MiniLM-L6-v2
0.21
0.46
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 + Step 1 & 2
0.27
0.56
Improvement
29%
22%
15
This shows again the improvement over the baseline. In addition we tested the
impact of the quality of the training/validation dataset by decreasing the score thresh-
old from 0.7 down to 0.6 when generating the training/validation dataset in Section 4.1
and found that it decreases both scores by 10%. Finally we find that the fraction
of masked words in the Mask Language Modelling does not impact significantly the
results. By default the fraction is set to 0.15 and we tried 0.2 in the BERT Step 1 and
did not find a change in the scoring. Overall, using limited data for Step 1 and Step 2
we find that the key effect comes from the fine-tuning as was previously stated in [9].
4.3 Fully unsupervised training with the GPL method
This time we perform fine tuning solely by running the GPL method on the FCA
Rulebook corpus and train the GPL method on 10,000 and 20,000 triplets. To do so we
follow the steps described in github.com/UKPLab/gpl using the default pre-trained
model MSMARCO. We output samples at each step to check the pseudo-labelling. On
Step 1, to generate queries from a passage of the corpus to get positive pairs, such as
Example 1.
Selected passage: ‚ÄòThe investor providing the capital may choose not to be involved in
the running of the venture‚Äô.
Generated queries:
‚Ä¢ how are investors involved in a venture
‚Ä¢ who is involved in the running of the venture
‚Ä¢ what are the investors of a venture
Example 2.
Selected passage: ‚ÄòIf a circular submitted for approval is amended a copy of amended
drafts must be resubmitted marked to show changes made to conform with FCA com-
ments and to indicate other changes‚Äô.
Generated queries:
‚Ä¢ how to amend FCA circular
‚Ä¢ what must FCA amendments show
‚Ä¢ how to revise circular for approval
Clearly some of these positive pairs can be noisy. A sample of our generated training
datasets containing our triplets of query, positive, negative passages is displayed in
Figure 2.
4.3.1 Results
Similarly to the scoring analysis in Section 4.2, we see that the GPL fine-tuning does
not impact the scores as much as the adaptative pre-training method. The scorings
themselves are again to be considered as a benchmark from the no-fine-tuning scor-
ing which translate into an improvement of the ratio
score fine-tune‚àíscore baseline
score baseline
. As
expected, GPL fine-tuning is not as efficient as mapping rules to policies, most likely
16
Fig. 2 Sample of the training dataset generated by the GPL approach from the FCA Rulebook.
The Margin is defined in (8). This data is used to fine-tune the msmarco pre-trained model.
because it did not perform the training over a set of policies but solely on rules. We
also find that performing the training on 10,000 or 20,000 triplets does not impact the
results by more than a percent.
Table 3 Result for the GPL fine-tuning
on the pre-trained MSMARCO model.
Model
Score 1
Score 2
msmarco
0.14
0.79
msmarco + GPL
0.15
0.84
Improvement
7%
6%
5 Discussion and comparison between GPL and
Adaptative pre-training
When looking at the validation dataset for the rule and policy match as well as the
policy identifies by the Adaptative pre-training (DA) and the GPL fine-tuning, there
is no clear way to identify which pairing is the more accurate. In fact they all return
meaningful pairings. In Figure 3 we show a sample where either the DA or the GPL
policy match does not agree with the validation policy. It seems that the validation
policy is not always the best match to address the rule. In addition, not all the rules
have been addressed in our policy sample. Therefore it is not possible to conclude
which approach performs the best matching to our rules. The three approaches we
investigate in this work are:
‚Ä¢ Mean ensemble of N pre-trained models selecting policies if they are returned by at
least
‚àö
N models with cosine similarity > 0.7. This is our validation policy defined
in Section 4.1.
‚Ä¢ Model from an Adaptative pre-training (DA), defined in Section 3.1
‚Ä¢ Model from GPL fully unsupervised training from rules corpus in Section 4.3.
17
Fig. 3 Sample comparison of pairing based on cosine similarity from our pseudo validation dataset
where we add the best match of the DA and GPL approaches.
It is likely that a combination of these three approaches should provide the best
pairing. Overall it is quite remarkable that even in the absence of a training dataset,
we manage to perform an Adaptative pre-training that improves the scores. This can
be helpful as an alternative or a complement to the GPL approach.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Rohini Gupta and Amit Madhar from Finreg-E
(https://finreg-e.com), without whom this project would not have been possible. IA
and AJ are supported by the Innovate UK Smart Grant ‚ÄòFinreg-E / Natural Language
Processing for Financial Regulation‚Äô. DG is supported by the ESRC Grand Union
Doctoral Training Partnership Grant and the Oxford Man Institute of Quantitative
Finance.
References
[1] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A., Kaiser,
L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in NeurIPS 30 (2017)
18
[2] Firsth, J.R.: Studies in Linguistic Analysis. Blackwell, Oxford (1957)
[3] Deerwester, S., Dumais, S.T., Furnas, G.W., Landauer, T.K., Harshman, R.:
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 41(6), 391‚Äì407 (1990)
[4] Lund, K., Burgess, C.: Producing high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical
co-occurrence. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 28(2),
203‚Äì208 (1996)
[5] Rohde, D.L., Gonnerman, L.M., Plaut, D.C.: An improved model of semantic
similarity based on lexical co-occurrence. Communications of the ACM 8(627-
633), 116 (2006)
[6] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv:1301.3781 (2013)
[7] Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.D.: Glove: Global vectors for word repre-
sentation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP,
pp. 1532‚Äì1543 (2014)
[8] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, vol. 1, pp. 4171‚Äì4186 (2018)
[9] Reimers, N., Gurevych, I.: Sentence-Bert: Sentence embeddings using Siamese
Bert-networks. arXiv:1908.10084 (2019)
[10] Rosenfeld, R.: A maximum entropy approach to adaptive statistical language
modelling. Computer Speech & Language 10, 187‚Äì228 (1996)
[11] Guthrie, D., Allison, B., Liu, W., Guthrie, L., Wilks, Y.: A closer look at
skip-gram modelling. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, vol. 6, pp. 1222‚Äì1225 (2006)
[12] Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed repre-
sentations of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in NeurIPS
26 (2013)
[13] Phuong, M., Hutter, M.: Formal algorithms for transformers. arXiv:2207.09238
(2022)
[14] Maziarka, L., Danel, T., Mucha, S., Rataj, K., Tabor, J., Jastrzebski, S.: Molecule
attention transformer. arXiv:2002.08264 (2002)
[15] Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner,
T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.: An image is worth
19
16√ó16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv:2010.11929
(2010)
[16] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Nee-
lakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-Voss, A.,
Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D., Wu, J., Winter, C.,
Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner,
C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., Amodei, D.: Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in NeurIPS 33, 1877‚Äì1901 (2020)
[17] Schroff, F., Kalenichenko, D., Philbin, J.: Facenet: A unified embedding for face
recognition and clustering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 815‚Äì823 (2015)
[18] Beltagy, I., Lo, K., Cohan, A.: Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific
text. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP, pp.
3615‚Äì3620 (2019)
[19] Lee, J., Yoon, W., Kim, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., So, C.H., Kang, J.: BioBert: a
pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining.
Bioinformatics 36(4), 1234‚Äì1240 (2020)
[20] Wang, K., Reimers, N., Gurevych, I.: Tsdae: Using transformer-based sequen-
tial denoising auto-encoder for unsupervised sentence embedding learning. In:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 671‚Äì688 (2021)
[21] Henderson, M., Al-Rfou, R., Strope, B., Sung, Y.-H., Luk¬¥acs, L., Guo, R., Kumar,
S., Miklos, B., Kurzweil, R.: Efficient natural language response suggestion for
smart reply. arXiv:1705.00652 (2017)
[22] Wang, K., Thakur, N., Reimers, N., Gurevych, I.: GPL: Generative pseudo label-
ing for unsupervised domain adaptation of dense retrieval. In: Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2345‚Äì2360 (2022)
[23] Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y.,
Li, W., Liu, P.J.: Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
text transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 21(1), 5485‚Äì5551
(2020)
[24] Humeau, S., Shuster, K., Lachaux, M.-A., Weston, J.: Poly-encoders: Transformer
architectures and pre-training strategies for fast and accurate multi-sentence
scoring. arXiv:1905.01969 (2019)
20
