Title: A Study on Bias Detection and Classification in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07479v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Study on Bias Detection and Classification in Natural
Language Processing
Ana Sofia Evans12, Helena Moniz234, and Luisa Coheur12
1 Instituto Superior T´ecnico, Universidade de Lisboa
2 INESC-ID
3 Unbabel
4 Faculdade de Letras, Universidade de Lisboa
anasevans98@gmail.com
helena.moniz@campus.ul.pt
luisa.coheur@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Abstract. Human biases have been shown to influence the performance of mod-
els and algorithms in various fields, including Natural Language Processing. While
the study of this phenomenon is garnering focus in recent years, the available
resources are still relatively scarce, often focusing on different forms or mani-
festations of biases. The aim of our work is twofold: 1) gather publicly-available
datasets and determine how to better combine them to effectively train models
in the task of hate speech detection and classification; 2) analyse the main is-
sues with these datasets, such as scarcity, skewed resources, and reliance on non-
persistent data. We discuss these issues in tandem with the development of our
experiments, in which we show that the combinations of different datasets greatly
impact the models’ performance.
Keywords: Bias Detection, Bias Classification, Hate Speech, Natural Language
Processing
1
Introduction
There is a growing awareness of the extent to which human biases can influ-
ence our models and algorithms. This realization has led to a fast growth in fields
dedicated to studying bias, such as the study of bias in Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP), which has focused not only on bias mitigation but also on its detection
and classification. However, bias detection is a relatively new field of study, lack-
ing many publicly available benchmark datasets or state-of-the-art models that
are able to complete this task. Existing datasets are relatively small, often do not
focus on the same types of bias, and are not even aimed at the same downstream
tasks. So, a question arises: can we learn how to detect and classify bias using
these (publicly available) resources? And, if so, how?
In order to answer this question, we have outlined the following objectives:
– Find and collect publicly available datasets aimed at bias classification to
serve as training data;
– Train and analyse the performance of several classifiers, trained with differ-
ent parameters and training data combinations;
arXiv:2408.07479v1  [cs.CL]  14 Aug 2024
– Delve into issues such as reliance on non-persistent data, providing both
consequence analysis and introducing possible solutions.
This work contributes, thus, with a thorough review of the current state-of-the-art
in bias and hate speech detection in NLP. We provide an overview of various
types of work developed in the scope of these fields, complemented by a detailed
exposition of some pre-existing datasets which differ in terms of style, collection
method, annotation style, and focus. The obtained results allow us to further anal-
yse which aspects of this field require further work, which ones are in desperate
need of attention, and possible avenues of future work.
Before we start, we need to define the concept of bias: “bias” refers to unequal
treatment of a given subject due to preconceived notions regarding that very
same subject, which necessarily influence our judgement. “Social bias”, there-
fore, translates to unequal treatment of certain individuals or groups based on
specific shared characteristics – namely, social constructs such as race, gender,
gender identity, etc. Hence, there are two things that should be defined in order
to construct our working definition of bias, namely: what is considered “unequal
treatment”? And what shared characteristics will we consider?
In this paper, we chose to define “unequal treatment” as:
– The use of derogatory terms which specifically target an individual or a
group based on the defined social characteristics (for example “bitch”, “dyke”,
“tranny”);
– The prevalence of stereotypes, which can also manifest through harmful
beliefs (i.e. “All Muslims are terrorists.”), stereotypical societal roles (i.e.
“Women belong in the kitchen.”), caricatures (i.e. “The Angry Black Woman”),
or even apparently benevolent beliefs (i.e. “Asians are good at math.”);
– Otherwise abusive language which specifically targets a group or an indi-
vidual based on the defined social characteristics (i.e. “Gay people make me
sick!”, “I’d never date a black guy.”).
Additionally, we define that we will be considering the following social charac-
teristics, henceforth referred to as “Target Categories”: Gender, Race, Profession,
Religion, Disability, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, Nationality, and Age.
In works similar to ours, we find that a term which often approximates our def-
inition of bias is “hate speech”. This is described in [1], as “Language used to
express hatred towards a targeted individual or group, or is intended to be deroga-
tory, to humiliate, or to insult the members of the group, on the basis of attributes
such as race, religion, ethnic origin, sexual orientation, disability, or gender.”
(2018:495) [1]. Although bias and hate speech share some similarities, they are
not quite the same; while instances of Hate Speech will always be instances of
bias, the same cannot be said in reverse. However, due to the aforementioned
similarities, we will be utilizing resources from both fields.
Considering that the study of bias and hate speech is inherently a sensitive subject,
which must be conducted with a degree of awareness and responsibility, we pro-
vide an Ethical Statement: due to our reliance in pre-existing resources, we have
made a number of concessions regarding the complexities of the phenomenons
being studied, such as the reduction of “Gender” to the two binary genders (and
further exclusion of non-binary identities) or the uncritical approach to “Race”,
which, as a construct, is highly dependent of the sociocultural or national context
it is discussed in [2]. Additionally, we were unable to use an Intersectional ap-
proach in our work. Intersectionality is a term coined by Kimberl´e Crenshaw in
1989 [3]. It refers to an analytical framework through which we can understand
the ways that the dimensions of an individual’s identity intersect and combine,
thus producing a social and personal experience that cannot be fully described by
either facet in isolation. Although we recognize the importance of adapting this
framework in works such as ours, we were unable to do so due to our reliance on
pre-existing resources.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an overview of the study
of bias in NLP. This includes the type of work which has been developed in the
scope of this field, but also existing concerns regarding that very same work, such
as critiques and limitations. The section also presents a selection of datasets de-
veloped for bias and hate speech detection and/or classification. In Section 3, we
set up the stage for the initial phases of our work, and, then, we describe how we
accessed and processed our chosen datasets, as well as the steps taken to ensure
coherency between the several datasets in our collection. Section 4 details the
experimental setup of our classifier training. We present preliminary results of
model performance, by testing our models with the testing sets of our classifiers,
and analyse the aforementioned results. Finally, Section 5 discusses the obtained
results, as well as their consequences and possible implications, and Section 6
presents the main conclusions drawn from our work, not only regarding the re-
sults obtained but also their implication towards future work in this field.
2
Related Work
In this section, we present an overview of work done in the fields of bias and hate
speech detection, followed by a critical analysis on the limitations of the current
state-of-the-art. Lastly, we examine datasets developed in the scope of bias and
hate speech detection.
2.1
Overview
When it comes to the study of bias in NLP, [4] is an almost obligatory mention,
having conducted one of the earliest studies we could find on the topic, focusing
on Gender Bias in Word Embeddings. While more studies on Bias in Word Em-
beddings have been released since this initial study [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], we have also
seen researchers further widening the scope of Bias in NLP, pouring over models
or tools frequently used in various NLP tasks and study them under the lens of
bias – sometimes as tools for detection and mitigation, other times as sources or
propagators of bias. There is work focused on Neural Networks [10], on state-of-
the-art models such as BERT [11, 12], techniques such as Adversarial Learning
[13, 14], and various NLP tasks, such as Coreference Resolution [15], Sentiment
Analysis [16], Dialogue Generation [17], and even POS tagging and Dependency
Parsing [18].
Another way in which models developed in the scope of NLP can perpetuate bias
is through their training data. A significant number of datasets are composed of
non-curated content from the Web, due to the sheer amount of information that
can easily be collected from online forums and platforms. While there are advan-
tages to this approach (like the aforementioned ease in collecting large amounts
of data, or the usage of casual, every day language instead of synthetic syntax),
the fact remains that there is plenty of unsafe and offensive content on the Inter-
net, which is uncritically collected to build these datasets.
An example of this is the work described in [19] on the Common Crawl Corpus5,
with a focus on finding instances of Hate Speech and sexually explicit content.
The Common Crawl is a multilingual corpus, composed of 200 to 300 TB of text
obtained from automatic web crawling, and with new versions being released
monthly. After resorting to a series of different detection approaches, they found
that 4.02% to 6.38% of their sample contained instances of Hate Speech, while
2.36% contained material deemed as sexually explicit. These percentages quickly
become alarming when one considers the total size of the corpus in question,
and thus that these percentages translate to a staggering number of Hate Speech
instances.
When we take into account these values, it becomes clear how models can easily
learn biased content, even if we do not notice it right away. Examples such as
Microsoft’s Tay [20] or Meta’s Galactica can serve as simpler cautionary tales,
but even juggernauts such as ChatGPT face these issues [21]. In the case of Chat-
GPT, the solution found by the developing team is a mix of reliance on human
annotators (which we will delve further on in Section 3.2) and overall avoidance
of harmful language. Although this strategy has shown a measure of success, it is
not infallible, reminiscent of the strategies employed by the team behind Philoso-
pher AI, built with a predecessor of ChatGPT’s current language model, when the
software began exhibiting biased behaviour67.
The presence of language models in our daily lives is, by now, unavoidable; the
creation and maintenance of large training datasets (with their inherent biases)
comes as an equally unavoidable consequence. Therefore, beyond studying how
models can perpetuate bias (and how to mitigate it), it becomes relevant to learn
how to leverage these very same models to detect and classify bias, or hate speech,
in bodies of data.
While some works have already focused on using NLP to detect and classify
bias in real-life applications, such as analysing the Case Law Access Project
(CAP) dataset8 regarding Gender Bias [22], analysing how Wikipedia pages por-
tray LGBTQ people across different languages [23], or even determining whether
there are noticeable differences in the way book critics review the works of male
and female authors [24], the field that has truly embraced this method is Hate
Speech Detection.
Hate Speech Detection, as a field of study, utilizes state-of-the-art models to de-
tect and classify instances of Hate Speech. The detection of instances themselves
might be simple, “yes-or-no” binary classification without specifying whom that
phenomenon targets, simply whether or not it is present [25, 26, 27, 1, 28]. We
refer to these as “Binary Classification” datasets. Other works also focus on a par-
ticular category or demographic, like sexism [29, 30, 31] or Islamophobia [32].
They might also focus on a simple “yes-or-no” classification (is the phenomenon
present or not), or they might create their own subcategories for specific man-
ifestations of the phenomenon in question. We refer to these as “Single-Target
Classification” datasets. Lastly, some works consider several targets categories at
5 https://commoncrawl.org/
6 https://thenextweb.com/neural/2020/09/24/gpt-3s-bigotry-is-exactly-why-devs-shouldnt-use-
the-internet-to-train-ai/ (Consulted in June of 2023)
7 https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/artificial-intelligence/machine-learning/open-ais-powerful-
text-generating-tool-is-ready-for-business (Consulted in May of 2022)
8 https://case.law/
the same time [33, 11, 12, 34, 35], which we shall name “Multi-Target Classifi-
cation”.
The growing relevance of this field can be attributed to the increased importance
of monitoring language online platforms. This is why a significant part of the data
utilized in this field is retrieved from social media platforms, with most works
favouring Twitter9 as a platform and keyword-based retrieval of keywords with
negative polarity [36], although there is also a growing focus on creating synthetic
data [34].
2.2
Critiques and Limitations
While Bias Detection and Hate Speech detection are not the same field, they inter-
sect substantially and share common pitfalls. For those reasons, the commentary
of this section refers to both fields interchangeably.
The first issue in the current state-of-the-art is the lack of established taxonomies
or centralized resources, whether in terms of terminology or benchmark datasets.
While plenty of works use terms such as “Bias”, “Hate Speech”, or “Abusive
language”, the definitions associated with these terms are rarely in agreement.
The absence of concise and concrete criteria leads to a “sparsity of heterogeneous
resources” [36]. Countering this is the argument that there is no such thing as a
set of pre-established criteria that could be applied, since there are no objectively
correct definitions to be constructed, and we should instead strive for more clarity
in the terminology used, as well as in the subtasks being studied [37].
The second limitation refers to the disproportionate focus given to certain target
categories in these fields. We can find many examples of work done regarding
sexism or gender bias, and, to a lesser extent, racism or racial bias. However, we
will be hard-pressed to find significant data regarding ableism, transphobia, anti-
Semitism, and many, many other categories worthy of a similar focus [33, 2, 37].
Additionally, works with gender as a target category often fail to conduct their
research under an intersectional lens, thus reducing the nuance and depth of the
phenomenon they propose to research [2].
Furthermore, regarding uneven distribution of resources, there is the sheer amount
of resources devoted to the English language in comparison to any other language.
While this is, to a degree, understandable, due to how widely used English is in
international contexts such as online spaces, it is not sustainable. The choice to
center English-speaking internet users in this research, implicit or unintentional
as it may be, creates its own form of data bias [2, 37]. While some works done in
other languages do exist, these are few and far in between [38, 39].
Lastly, we would like to speak about dataset annotation.
The first issue we would like to expand upon is bias induced by dataset annota-
tion. As humans, we are all prone to inherent biases. This is why datasets will
usually be annotated by more than one person, and why measures such as inter-
annotator agreement exist. In theory, these measures should allow labels to be
chosen with as little bias as possible, especially if researchers resort to a diverse
pool of annotators.
However, we can still find instances of annotation bias. In [40], the authors find
that entries of Hate Speech datasets which are written in AAE (African American
9 Currently X. Nevertheless, in this paper we will use the original name as it was the name of
the platform when the mentioned data was retrieved.
English) are more likely to be annotated as toxic or offensive. Models trained
on this data propagate this bias, and are more likely to classify tweets written in
AAE english as more offensive than their Standard English counterparts. In [41]
the authors find that male annotators are more likely to rely on slurs and offensive
language in the annotation process, and that a high inter-annotator agreement
between male annotators (higher than between female annotators) leads to the
final labels being those picked by male annotators. Models trained with this data
have a tendency to prioritize slurs and offensive words in their classification.
However, Excell and Al Moubayed report an increase of 1.8% in performance
once they train their model solely with female-annotated data.
The second issue we would like to mention when it comes to data annotation is
rather less broad, but significantly more ethically concerning. As mentioned in
the previous section, the team behind ChatGPT has partially relied on human an-
notators in order to identify and remove harmful content. This information has,
however, been divulged in the light of the terrible conditions in which these an-
notators work, being reportedly paid only 2 dollars a day as well as suffering psy-
chological harm due to their task10. This is not new; content moderation of online
platforms has long been known to be a psychologically harrowing task [42], espe-
cially without proper moderation training and psychological support. Moderators
have claimed to develop PTSD from the content they are continually exposed to.
Relying on human annotators to annotate and identify bias on training datasets is,
therefore, a matter of significant ethical concern, and one which further motivates
us to consider bias detection models a viable and attractive solution [43].
In conclusion, the fields of Bias and Hate Speech detection in NLP are currently
suffering from a series of pitfalls, from lack of centralized resources and agreed-
upon taxonomies, to an unbalanced distribution of those very same resources.
Furthermore, bias in dataset annotation is an issue that easily goes unnoticed
unless researchers specifically seek to correct it and account for it.
2.3
Datasets
In this section, we present some of the publicly available datasets related to bias
and hate speech detection. As mentioned in the previous section, not only are
there few standard benchmark datasets available, but the datasets that do exist of-
ten do not follow specific, pre-existing taxonomies or definitions, and often focus
on different manifestations of bias. As such, we chose to group our findings in
accordance with the denominations we defined in Section 3.1.2, namely: Binary
Classification, Single Target Classification, and Multi-Target Classification.
Binary Classification As previoulsy said, we define “Binary Classification” as
classification which focuses on identifying a certain phenomenon (whether that
is bias, hate speech, abusive or toxic language, etc) without specifying a target
category, like gender or race. Therefore, the datasets in this subsection focus only
on the presence of a given phenomenon, and not on identifying if it refers to a
particular group or not.
Davidson [26] is a crowdsourced dataset with around 24,000 tweets intended for
Hate Speech detection. This dataset is publicly available. In this dataset, entries
10 https://time.com/6247678/openai-chatgpt-kenya-workers/(Consulted in June of 2023)
are labelled as “hate speech” if they contain terms identified in Hatebase lexicon.
The labels used in this dataset are the following:
– hate (“I hate black people!”)
– offensive (“Money getting taller and bitches getting blurry”)
– normal (“colored contacts in your eyes?”)
Founta [1] is a crowdsourced dataset with 80,000 tweets intended for Hate Speech
detection. Since this dataset is only available upon request, we will not be shar-
ing example sentences. This work begins by proposing six types of language:
“Offensive”, “Abusive”, “Hate Speech”, “Aggressive Behaviour”, “Cyberbully-
ing behaviour”, “Spam”, and “Normal”. Founta et al. conduct two exploratory
rounds, in which they ask annotators from a crowdsourcing platform to annotate
small datasets with the aforementioned labels, according to given definitions. Af-
ter these two rounds, they conclude that the “Cyberbullying” label is rarely used,
and can be safely eliminated. They also conclude that “Offensive Language” and
“Aggressive Language” are both highly correlated, and in turn connected to the
more central “Abusive Language”. Therefore, they build their final dataset using
the four resulting labels from the exploratory rounds. The labels, as well as their
respective definitions, are the following:
– abusive: “Impolite or hurtful language delivered with strong emotion.”
– hate: “Hurtful language which targets a group or individual based on a set of
characteristics, such as sexual orientation, race, etc.).”
– spam: Marketing or advertising
– normal: Text that does not fit into any of the previous categories
Golbeck [28] is a dataset with 35,000 tweets intended for detecting instances of
Online Harassment, annotated by trained researchers. Since this dataset is only
available upon request, we will not be sharing example sentences. Although the
dataset follows a binary labeling system, the authors devised sub-categories as
criteria to classify instances of harassment. Since these sub-categories often over-
lapped, they chose to drop them and simply use them as annotation aids. Addi-
tionally, context is not taken into account; the usage of a derogatory term, even if
between friends, will be considered an instance of harassment. The labels used in
the dataset, as well as the type of content they identify, are the following:
– harassment: Includes text which manifests the explicit intent to cause harm,
to the point of graphic descriptions; content which targets a group or indi-
vidual based on a set of characteristics, such as sexual orientation, race, etc.,
whether it be offensive, hateful, or mild
– normal: Includes ambiguously offensive content, such as dark humour, and
any content which does not fit the previously mentioned criteria
A summary of the datasets presented in the current section can be found in Table
1.
Single Target Classification We use “Single Target Classification” to refer
to works that focus on a specific target group or demographic. These works might
opt to simply detect a phenomenon, or they might go further and create their own
subcategories for particular manifestations of the phenomenon in question.
AMI English Dataset [29] is a crowdsourced dataset, developed for the task of
Automatic Misogyny Identification, composed of almost 4,000 tweets. The tar-
get category of this dataset is gender, with a focus on misogyny. All entries of
the dataset are annotated on whether or not they are considered to contain misog-
ynistic content and, if applicable, which sub-category of misogynistic content it
Table 1. Binary Classification Datasets
Name
Size (entries) Twitter-based?
Labels
Davidson
20,000
Yes
hateful; offensive; normal
Founta
80,000
Yes
hateful; abusive; spam; normal
Golbeck
35,000
Yes
harassment; normal
contains. The labels used as sub-categories in the dataset, as well as the type of
content they identify, are the following:
– stereotype: depicts a stereotypical view of women, or places extensive fo-
cus on a woman’s appearance (Example: “Women are good only into the
kitchen... #makemeasandwich”)
– dominance: highlights gender inequality through male elevation (Example:
“Women are inferior to men...so shut up please!”)
– derailing: seeks to justify women’s abuse, or derails conversations focused
on the topic (Example: “@yesallwomen wearing a tiny skirt is “asking for
it”. Your teasing a (hard working, taxes paying) dog with a bone. That’s
cruel. #YesAllMen”)
– sexual harassment: describes sexual advancements, requests sexual favours,
and/or manifests intent to assert dominance through physical harm (Exam-
ple: “Stupid bitch I’ll put you down on the floor and I’ll rape you! You should
be scared!”)
– discredit: seemingly dismisses women without due cause (Example: “@mela-
niatrump stupid fuc**ing bitch”)
CONAN [32] is a nichesourced (i.e. annotated by experts), multilingual dataset,
developed for Hate Speech Detection, with a total of 14,988 entries. The target
category of this dataset is religion, with a focus on Islamophobia. The entries of
this dataset consist of pairs of sentences; one sentence identified as hate speech,
and a sentence that serves as a counter-narrative, i.e a response which seeks to
disprove the hateful statement with facts. These sentence pairs function almost
as simple, two-sentence dialogues. We provide the following sentence pair as an
example:
– Hate Speech Sentence - “Muslims grooming gangs are protected by the gov-
ernment and the police. This is a betrayal!”
– Counter-Narrative - “The only cover up I remember was in the Catholic
Church, but we remember that the actions of individuals do not reflect on
the whole.”
Benevolent-Hostile Sexism [30] is a dataset developed for Sexism Detection and
Categorization, with around 10,000 tweets. This dataset was annotated by three
individuals identified in the original work as “23 year old non-activist feminists”.
The target category of this dataset is gender, with a focus on sexism. The re-
searchers establish two sub-categories of sexism. The respective labels, as well
as the type of content they identify, is the following:
– Benevolent: text which seemingly exhibits positive sentiment and might be
disguised as a compliment, but often manifests stereotypical beliefs or con-
descension (Example: “They’re probably surprised at how smart you are,
for a girl.”)
– Hostile: text which is explicitly offensive and/or negative, such as an outright
insult (Example: “DUMB BITCH”)
Multi-Label Sexism Accounts [12] is an expert-annotated dataset developed
for Sexism Categorization, consisting of 13,023 accounts of sexism. Since this
dataset is not publicly available, we will not be sharing example sentences. The
target category of this dataset is gender, with a focus on sexism. The entries of this
dataset are accounts of lived experiences, shared by both victims and bystanders,
and obtained from the Everyday Sexism Project11. It is in order to respect the
privacy of those who shared the accounts in questions that the dataset was not
made publicly available. The authors designated 23 different categories of sex-
ism, which include, but are not limited to, instances of stereotypes, derogatory
terms, and otherwise offensive or harmful language. Additionally, this dataset is
multi-label, since the authors defend that the sub-categories they defined may
overlap, or be experienced simultaneously.
A summary of the datasets presented in the current section can be found in Table
2.
Table 2. Single-Target Classification Datasets
Name
Size (entries) Twitter-based?
Target
Categories
AMI - English Dataset
4,000
Yes
Gender
Benevolent-Hostile Sexism
10,000
Yes
Gender
CONAN
14,988
No
Religion
MLSA
13,023
No
Gender
Multi Target Classification Finally, we use “Multi Target Classification” to
describe works that focus on the effect of a given phenomenon on two or more
target categories, like, for example, gender and race. The datasets presented might
allow for multi-labeling or not and, as a general rule, the labels used in each
dataset correspond to its respective target categories.
CrowS-Pairs [44] is a crowdsourced dataset developed for Bias Detection. The
target categories of this dataset are: Gender and Gender Identity, Race, Sexual
Orientation, Religion, Nationality, Age, Disability, Nationality, Physical Appear-
ance, and Socioeconomic Status. The dataset focuses on bias through the use of
stereotypes. More specifically, this dataset is aimed at model evaluation, and its
composition reflects that. The entries of this dataset are composed of examples;
one which conforms to a given stereotype, and another which directly counters
it. For example, in the example presented below, the first sentence is a stereotype
because it plays with the expectation and generalized notion that men are more
prone to acts of heroism or feats of strength. Models should, in theory, be agnostic
regarding this notion.
– Stereotype: “Brad ran across the street, tackled the dog to save Beth and her
dog from attack.”
11 https://everydaysexism.com
– Counter-Stereotype: “Lisa ran across the street, tackled the dog to save Beth
and her dog from attack.”
Dynamically Generated Dataset [34] is a dataset developed for Hate Detection
with 40,000 entries and annotated by trained annotators. The target categories
of this dataset are: Gender, Gender Identity, Race, Sexual Orientation, Religion,
Nationality, Age, Disability, Nationality, and Socioeconomic Status. The labels
in this dataset contain both specifications of these categories (for example, us-
ing the labels gay and bis instead of the blanket sexual orientation, like most
datasets) as well as intersections of the several categories (for example, distin-
guishing between the labels gay, gaymen, and gaywom), therefore following an
intersectional approach. This dataset was built through a 4-round iterative pro-
cess; in each round, a model would be trained and tested with the existing dataset.
Following examination of the obtained results, the dataset would be added to by
annotators, in order to create a more challenging and complete dataset.
MLMA [45] is a crowdsourced, multilingual dataset developed for Hate Speech
Detection. This dataset contains 5,674 English tweets, 4,014 French tweets, and
3,353 Arabic tweets. The target categories of this dataset are: Origin, Gender,
Sexual Orientation, Religion, and Disability. Annotators were also allowed to use
the label “Other”. Furthermore, similarly to datasets presented in the previous
section, this dataset is also annotated regarding other tasks, such as the “Level of
Hostility” depicted in each tweet. The labels for this task are: Abusive, Hateful,
Offensive, Disrespectful, Fearful, and Normal.
StereoSet [11] is a benchmark, crowdsourced dataset with 16,955 entries devel-
oped for Bias Classification. The target categories of this dataset are: Gender,
Race, Profession, and Religion. This dataset focuses on bias through the use of
stereotypes. Each entry of this dataset is composed by a set of sentences; one of
the sentences reflects a stereotype, another sentence opposes that stereotype, and
the last one is a sentence while is wholly unrelated to the previous two. Further-
more, this dataset is meant for classification at the sentence level and the discourse
level. That is to say, it is meant to detect bias when it is contained in a simple sen-
tence, but also when it depends on the context of a previous sentence. For this
reason, part of the dataset is composed of sets of three full sentences, while an-
other part, from which we collected the example presented below, is structured
differently. It is composed of a sentence, identified as the Context (“Many people
live in Ehtiopia”), and the set of three sentences (Stereotype, Anti-Stereotype,
Unrelated) serve as continuations of the context:
– Stereotype: “The people are very thin and good at distance running.”
– Counter-Stereotype: “The people are fat and unathletic.”
– Unrelated: “Cats have sharp claws.”
Waseem and Hovy [35] is a dataset with more than 16,000 tweets developed
for Hate Speech detection, annotated by its creators and reviewed by an expert.
The target categories of this dataset are Gender and Race. This dataset focuses
on Hate Speech through offensive tweets, which the authors define as being any
tweet that resorts to the usage of sexist and/or racial slurs, attacks minorities,
silences minorities, negatively stereotypes a minority, among others. The labels
used in this dataset are the following:
– sexism (Example: “Not sexist but I really dislike women announcers!!”)
– racism (Example: “of course you were born in serbia...you’re as f**ked as
A Serbian Film #MKR”)
– none
A summary of these datasets can be found in Table 3.
Table 3. Multi-Target Classification Datasets
Name
Size
(entries) Twitter-based?
Target
Categories
CrowS-Pairs
4,000
No
gender, gender identity, race, sexual
orientation, religion, nationality, age,
disability, physical appearance,
socioeconomic status
DynGen
40,000
No
gender, gender identity, race, sexual
orientation, religion, nationality, age,
disability, socioeconomic status
MLMA
12,000
Yes
origin, gender,
sexual orientation,
religion, disability
StereoSet
16,955
No
gender, race, profession,
religion
Waseem-Hovy 16,000
Yes
gender, race
3
Data Gathering
As previously mentioned, our objective was to gather and combine pre-existing
resources, namely datasets developed in the scope of Bias and/or Hate Speech
Detection, and evaluate if these could be used to successfully train a model in Bias
Detection and Classification. After conducting our initial research, we settled on
using the datasets depicted in Table 4.
Table 4. Initial Dataset Collection
Dataset
Twitter-
based?
Classification
Type
CONAN [32]
No
Single Target
Davidson [26]
Yes
Binary
DynGen [34]
No
Multi Target
Founta [1]
Yes
Binary
Golbeck [28]
Yes
Binary
Benevolent-Hostile Sexism [30]
Yes
Single Target
MLMA [45]
Yes
Multi Target
StereoSet [11]
No
Multi Target
Waseem-Hovy [35]
Yes
Multi Target
3.1
Tweet Retrieval
Some of these datasets, namely Benevolent-Hostile Sexism [30] and Waseem-
Hovy [35], are Twitter-based datasets which, due to privacy concerns, did not
directly share the textual content of their Tweet entries. Instead, they share the
Tweet IDs of each tweet. This is an alphanumerical identifier which, through the
functionalities offered by Twitter API 12, can be used to Look-Up Tweets and
retrieve the correspondent text. Thus, the initial phase of our work consisted of
retrieving the content of these datasets so that we could then use them for our end
goal.
Interlude: Dataset Degradation, or the Problem of Non-Persistent
Data There is a notable problem with the strategy of using Tweet IDs to re-
solve privacy concerns; namely, the fact that we can only retrieve a tweet if that
tweet still exists. Unavailable tweets cannot be recovered.
In order to better investigate this issue, we turned to the Founta dataset [1]. The
creators of this dataset responded to privacy concerns by separating tweet iden-
tifiers and tweet text into separate files and then sharing both files, rather than
withholding the text altogether. Ergo, while we had no need to retrieve tweets of
this dataset, since the relevant information was freely provided, we still possess
the identifiers and are free to use them.
The results of our analysis regarding unavailable tweets, across all three datasets,
can be found in 5. The table contains the total number of tweets in the dataset,
the number of available tweets, and the number of unavailable tweets, as well
as why they were unavailable. Since Benevolent-Hostile Sexism separated the
Benevolent and Hostile components into two files and their yielded results dif-
fered significantly, we chose to showcase them separately.
Table 5. Initial Dataset Collection
Datasets
Total
Currently
Available
Currently Unavailable
Total
Suspended
User
Private
Account
Deleted Tweet
/Account
Others
Benevolent
Sexism
7,210
2,411
4,799
1,491
375
2,925
8
Hostile
Sexism
3,378
2,718
661
200
86
375
0
Founta
99,996
53,857
46,139
18,436
4,974
22,501
225
Waseem-
Hovy
16,907
10,370
6,537
4,859
378
1,295
5
Total
127,491
69,356
58,136
24,986
5,813
27,096
238
Total (%)
100.00% 54.40%
45.60%
19.60%
4.56%
21.25%
0.19%
-
-
100.00%
42.98%
10.00%
46.61%
0.41%
As can be seen in Table 5, 45.60% of the tweets collected in these datasets had,
at the time of retrieval, become unavailable. Additionally, we found that most
12 https://developer.twitter.com/en/products/twitter-api
unavailable tweets were either deleted or posted by deleted accounts (46.61% of
unavailable tweets and 21.25% of all the tweets in the datasets). A significant
percentage was posted by accounts which were suspended at time of retrieval
(42.98% of unavailable tweets and 10.60% of all tweets).
This is not as surprising as it might appear at first. On one hand, deleting an ac-
count is not unusual. This fact alone means that the length of time between dataset
creation and retrieval of a tweet ID contained in that dataset is proportional to the
likelihood of that tweet becoming unavailable. On the other hand, and further ex-
acerbating the previous point, Twitter allows users to flag or report content that
they might find offensive. If the reported tweets are concluded to be so by Twit-
ter’s moderation team, accounts might find themselves suspended as a result. It
is unsurprising that tweets belonging to a Hate Speech or Bias detection dataset
might fall into this category, and thus that these datasets degrade over time.
However, unsurprising as it may be, it still warrants concern. Datasets are not
only important resources, they are also inherently costly. That their value may
deprecate over time due to reliance on non-persistent information presents a se-
rious challenge, especially for a field as dependent on online-based resources as
Hate Speech detection. Perhaps solutions such as [1], which still address privacy
concerns while circumventing the issue of degradation, should be prioritized over
simply sharing Tweet IDs with little to no regard as to the preservation of the data
in question.
Consequences This dataset degradation influences the usefulness of our re-
sources, most notably the Waseem-Hovy dataset and, in particular, the entries
annotated for racism. While the original dataset boasted 1,970 entries with the
aforementioned label, this amount was reduced to a grand total of 12 entries. Re-
garding the unavailable entries, 38 entries related to deleted tweets, while 1,920
referred to suspended users.
The Benevolent Sexism portion of the Benevolent-Hostile Sexism dataset, how-
ever, yielded another problem entirely. Out of the original 7,210 tweets in total,
only 2,411 remained after processing. While this may seem incredibly problem-
atic, our main issue is actually related to the available entries. After briefly pe-
rusing the results, we realized that there seemed to be an unusual number of
repeated textual content. We concluded that, out of these 2,411 available entries,
only 631 were unique tweets. The remaining 1,780 entries consisted of retweets
of the same original tweet, which resulted in different tweet IDs for what basically
amounted to plenty of repeated content.
Both of these results had an immediate effect on our plans moving forward.
Firstly, having been reduced to a mere 631 entries, we decided to remove the
Benevolent Sexism portion from our dataset collection, being left with the Hostile
Sexism portion. Secondly, while we had previously considered Waseem-Hovy as
a multi-target classification dataset – as a dataset which annotated entries for both
the “gender” and “race” categories – the fact that only 12 entries remained for
“racism” meant that this was no longer viable. Thus, we removed these entries,
instead integrating the dataset into our collection as a single-target classification
dataset with the target category “gender”.
The final configuration of our dataset collection can be found in Table 6
Table 6. Final Configuration of the Dataset Collection
Dataset
Twitter-
based?
Classification
Type
CONAN [32]
No
Single Target
Davidson [26]
Yes
Binary
DynGen [34]
No
Multi Target
Founta [1]
Yes
Binary
Golbeck [28]
Yes
Binary
Hostile Sexism [30]
Yes
Single Target
MLMA [45]
Yes
Multi Target
StereoSet [11]
No
Multi Target
Waseem-Hovy [35]
Yes
Single Target
3.2
Label Mapping
After retrieving the missing Twitter data, we proceeded to uniformise our dataset
collections. We replaced Twitter-specific markers, such as usernames or hashtags,
by specific text markers which would later be saved as special tokens; we selected
only the relevant content from each dataset and saved it to identically structured
CSV files; and, finally, we established label coherency through label mapping.
The first mapping dimension we tackled was Binary Classification, i.e. simply
identifying whether an entry was biased or non-biased in accordance to our pro-
posed definition. The label correspondences are detailed in Table 7.
Table 7. Binary Classification - Label Mapping
Dataset
Binary Label Correspondence
biased
non-biased
CONAN
hateful
normal
Davidson
hate, offensive
normal
DynGen
hate
nothate
Founta
hateful, offensive
spam, normal
Golbeck
harassment
normal
Hostile Sexism
hostile
-
MLMA
offensive, abusive, hateful, disrespectful
fearful, normal
StereoSet
stereotype
counter-stereotype, unrelated
Waseem-Hovy
sexism
none
The second mapping dimension dealt with the target categories each dataset tack-
led. Due to this, Davidson, Founta, and Golbeck are not included in this section,
since these datasets solely deal with the Binary Classification task, as described
in Section 2.2. The correspondences described below are summarized in Table 8.
Many of our multi-target datasets used sub-labels to specify the target category
of each entry. We chose to apply this principle to our work. After examining our
collection and thus settling on our proposed definition of “bias”, we similarly
Table 8. Binary Classification - Label Mapping
Category
DynGen
MLMA StereoSet
gender
wom
gender
gender
race
mixed.race, ethnic.minority, indig,
indig.wom, non.white, non.white.wom,
trav, bla, bla.wom, bla.man, african,
asi, asi.man, asi.wom, asi.south, asi.east,
arab, immig, asylum, ref, for,
hispanic, nazis, hitler
origin
race
profession
wc, working
-
profession
religion
jew, mus, mus.wom, other.religion
religion
religion
disability
dis
disability
-
sexual orientation
bis, gay, gay.man, gay.wom, lgbtq
-
-
gender identity
trans, gendermin
-
-
age
old.people
nationality
eastern.europe, russian, pol,
chinese, pak, asi.chin, asi.pak,
other.national
-
-
b none
none, notgiven, other.glorification
notargetrecorded, NA
other
-
decided on the following class labels: gender, race, profession, religion, disabil-
ity, sexual orientation, gender identity, nationality, b none, and non-biased. non-
biased is the sub-label correspondent to the non-biased label we have previously
presented. b none refers to entries which are annotated as biased, but either do
not specify a target (like the binary classification datasets) or are similarly un-
specified in their original datasets.
4
Model Training
4.1
Experimental Setup
For this work, we used the Emotion-Transformer13, developed in the scope of
Emotion Detection but adaptable to our Bias Classification task. The Emotion-
Transformer is built on top of a pretrained Transformer model. In this work, we
chose the DistilBERT pretrained model from HuggingFace14, which served as a
necessary compromise between temporal efficiency and overall performance.
To establish the Emotion-Transformer’s level of performance, we trained it with
individual datasets of our collection and compared the obtained results against
results reported in the publication of those same datasets. Any comparison of re-
sults for Benevolent-Hostile Sexism and Waseem-Hovy would be invalid, due to
the alterations these datasets suffered, described in the previous section. Addi-
tionally, DynGen was evaluated in a multi-labeling task, which would make our
evaluation of it as a single-labeling task irrelevant.
13 https://github.com/HLT-MAIA/Emotion-Transformer
14 https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model doc/distilbert
Out of the remaining datasets, only Davidson and MLMA reported performance
results. Davidson originally reported an F1-score of 0.9, using a Support Vec-
tor Machine with L2 regularization [26]. MLMA does not specify what type of
methods were used in training and testing, but reports an F1-score 0.43 as its best
result for the relevant classification task [45].
We obtained an F1-score of 0.8 for Davidson, training the Emotion-Transformer
during 5 epochs, with Binary Cross-Entropy with Logits Loss and max pooling
function; and an F1-score of 0,42 for MLMA, training the Emotion-Transformer
during 4 epochs, with the same Loss and Pooling functions described for the pre-
vious experiment. While the F1-score obtained for Davidson is lower than orig-
inally reported, the values are still similar. Thus, we conclude that the Emotion-
Transformer is able to perform at a similar level to those models used to test the
original datasets.
We divided our datasets into four non-exclusive groups, named Group A, Group
B, Group C, and Group D. Group A, as the smallest and most coherent of the
groups, serves as our baseline for performance comparison. Groups B, C, and D
each answer a research question, described in Table 9.
We performed a non-deterministic split of each group’s data, splitting it into
training, testing, and validation sets (80% train and 10% for testing and vali-
dation each). In total, we conducted over 100 experiments, in which we trained
the model with different parameters and training data combinations.
The tested parameters were: Number of Training Epochs, Loss Function, and
Pooling Function. The remaining parameters remained unchanged throughout ex-
periments, such as Seed Value (12), Patience (1), Gradient Accumulation Steps
(1), Batch Size (8), Number of Frozen Epochs (1), Encoder Learning Rate (1.0e-
5), Classification Head Learning Rate (5.0e-5), and Layerwise Decay (0.95).
These were the default values set for the Emotion Transformer.
Table 9. Dataset Groups
Group Name
Datasets
Questions
A
Davidson + Founta + Golbeck
Baseline
B
Group A + Hostile Sexism +
Waseem-Hovy
How do single-target datasets
influence performance?
C
Group A + DynGen +
MLMA + StereoSet
How do synthetic and multi target
datasets influence performance?
D
Group C + CONAN + Hostile
Sexism + Waseem-Hovy
Can we obtain better performance
by using all of our resources together?
4.2
Interlude: Class Imbalance, Undersampling, and Data
Augmentation
As we mentioned in Section 2.2, one of the most blatant limitations of this field of
study, at the moment, is the way certain target categories (most notably, “Gender”
and “Race”) receive a lot more attention – and, as such, a lot more dedicated
resources – than any other category. This skewed distribution has had an obvious
impact in our work; not only is our single-target control group focused on the
target category “Gender”, but also the distribution of available resources across
our chosen target categories is glaringly skewed, as can be seen in Tables 10
and 11. Table 10 details the split between biased and non-biased entries in each
dataset, while Table 11 splits into target categories.
Table 10. Breakdown of Biased and Non-Biased Entries, represented by number of entries per
label
Groups
Non-Biased Biased
Total
Group A
81,112
44,016 125,128
Group B
88,754
49,449 138,203
Group C
109,265
75,341 184,606
Group D
120,851
81,289 202,140
The split between the “biased” and “non-biased” categories is relatively balanced.
The distribution of target categories across other groups, however, is blatantly
skewed.
Table 11. Breakdown of Entries of each target category, represented by number of entries per
label
Category
Group B B (%) Group C C (%) Group D D (%)
Non-Biased
88,754 64.22% 109,265 59.19% 120,851 59.79%
Biased (None)
44,016 31.85% 51,947 28.14% 51,947 25.70%
Gender
5,433
3.93%
3,182
1.72%
8,615
4.26%
Race
-
-
10,613
5.75%
10,613
5.25%
Profession
-
-
1,855
1.00%
1,855
0.92%
Religion
-
-
2,632
1.43%
3,147
1.56%
Disability
-
-
1,575
0.85%
1,575
0.78%
Sexual Orientation
-
-
1,854
1.00%
1,854
0.92%
Gender Identity
-
-
1,132
0.61%
1,132
0.56%
Nationality
-
-
528
0.29%
528
0.26%
Age
-
-
23
0.01%
23
0.01%
One way of balancing a previously imbalanced dataset is through Undersampling;
namely, removing entries from majority classes until we are close to an even split
across classes. This is a solution that we cannot implement in our work. “Age”,
for example, features 23 entries in total. Undersampling would sabotage our per-
formance, heavily reducing the amount of available data to a meager portion,
which would not be enough for our model to learn from.
The other way of balancing a dataset is by turning to the opposite direction: if we
cannot remove entries, then we shall add new ones. Since we cannot simply create
new entries, due to it being a rather costly process, we could opt to augment our
datasets through Data Augmentation, which is the process of creating new data
by altering copies of pre-existing data. This can result in a stale and/or repetitive
dataset, if used in excess, but it seems like a possible solution to our problem.
However, one of the most complicated aspects of this field of study is the fact
that “bias” is not a fixed category, with unanimously agreed-upon manifestations.
There are some instances in which simply grabbing a biased sentence and replac-
ing a word related to a target category by a word related to a different category
would successfully result in a brand new biased sentence. For example, if one
were to look at the sentence “I hate Muslims!”, and simply swap “Muslims” for,
say, “Nurses”, we would obtain a brand new sentence which exhibited hate re-
garding the target category “Profession”.
However, the types of biased entries in our datasets – and the way bias often man-
ifests in real life – are often not this straightforward. We often consider certain
sentiments or sentences to be biased not because of their inherent nature, but be-
cause they refer to a target category in a way that, in our sociocultural framework,
is considered biased. “All girls are terrorists.” and “All Muslims are terrorists.” are
both sentences which contain a generalization; however, only the second sentence
represents a stereotype – or, in other words, “a preconceived notion” of a group of
people which, quite often, results in unequal treatment of individuals perceived to
be part of that very same group”. This is our definition of bias; not just any type
of generalization.
Bias and Hate Speech are not concepts which exist in a vacuum, and can be
carelessly replicated by simply swapping word pairs. We cannot divorce these
concepts from the realities they represent without robbing them of their inherent
meaning and fundamentally changing the aim of our work.
Hence, we decided to continue working with imbalanced datasets, shifting our
exploratory focus to also analyse how this imbalance would impact model per-
formance. We invite future work to further explore the possibility of balancing
these types of datasets, and how to achieve that goal without compromising the
complexity of the phenomenon being studied.
4.3
Results
As previously mentioned, Group A is our baseline. It is also the only group that
can only be used to train models for the Binary Classification task. Groups B, C,
and D can be used in both Binary Classification and in Multi-Target Classifica-
tion.
We conducted three types of tests. The first was in Multi-Target Classification,
using Groups B, C, and D, in which both the training and testing data were from
the same group. The second type was in Binary Classification, using all groups,
in which both the training and testing data were also from the same group. The
third type was also in Binary Classification – but we used a Model trained with
data from Group A to classify test data from Groups B, C, and D.
The best F1-scores obtained in the first testing round, on Multi-Target Classifica-
tion, are depicted in Table 12. We refer to these experiments as “Multi-B”, “Multi-
C”, and “Multi-D”. Additionally, we will refer to the Binary Cross-Entropy with
Logits Loss Function as simply “BCE”.
Further examination of these results, particularly of Multi-C and Multi-D, show
that the lower F1-scores result from lower values for precision and recall across
classes. The “Age” class, in particular, yields an F1-score of 0 across all tests.
This is unsurprising due to the extremely low number of entries for this category,
Table 12. Multi-Classification Task: Best Results
Experiments Epochs Pooling Loss Precision Recall
F1
Multi-B
6
avg
BCE 0.8806 0.8886 0.8842
Multi-C
6
max
BCE 0.6314 0.5860 0.6046
Multi-D
4
avg
BCE 0.6395 0.5978 0.6132
which, in both groups, amounts to a grand total of 0.01% of all entries (as shown
in 11). Not only is this not enough to properly train the model, as the data split
between train, validation, and test also ensures that very few entries make it into
the testing phase to begin with.
Therefore, we conducted another set of experiments, named NoAge-C and NoAge-
D, in which we removed “Age” as a target category and as a class for our model
to learn. The results can be found in Table 13.
Table 13. NoAge-C and NoAge-D Best Results
Experiments Epochs Pooling Loss Precision Recall
F1
NoAge-C
6
max
BCE 0.7159 0.6520 0.6770
NoAge-D
6
max
BCE 0.7181 0.6495 0.6800
In order to obtain a valid comparison, we decided to compare the NoAge-C and
NoAge-D experiments with their Multi-C and Multi-D counterparts. Figure 1
depicts the average F1-score from NoAge-C and NoAge-D, obtained from the
four experiments conducted, as well as the average F1-score from the Multi-C
and Multi-D counterparts trained with the same parameters.
We can observe from Figure 1 that the overall F1-score of the experiments in-
creased after removing the “Age” category, which makes sense since there are
no longer any null scores to drag the overall score down. Both the b none and
non-biased labels remain unchanged, each representing over 20% and 50%, re-
spectively, of groups C and D. It stands to reason that the removal of a small class
like “Age” would not cause a significant change to the biggest classes.
We can observe variations equal to, or over, 0.03 between the average F1-scores.
For Multi-C and NoAge-C, this variation can be observed in race (5.75% of
Group C), religion (1.43%), disability (0.85%), and gender identity (0.61%). For
Multi-D and NoAge-D, we only observe a variation of this magnitude in nation-
ality (0.26%).
When it comes to classes that represent a smaller percentage, such as disability,
gender identity, and nationality, it makes sense that even small changes in the
dataset could result in changes in the model’s performance. Since the model has
fewer data to learn from, the removal or addition of entries or classes is more
easily noticed in smaller classes. Furthermore, the fact that some of these cate-
gories suffered variations in one Group and not the other can be easily explained
by chance; a different split between train, validation, and testing, or perhaps a
different seed value, could result in these variations happening to other classes, in
Fig. 1. Average F-scores of Multi-C, Multi-D, NoAge-C, and NoAge-D
different iterations of these experiments. Even the results observed for religion,
which represents 1.56% in Group D, can be supported by this hypothesis.
What does not factor into this hypothesis is the variation observed in race in
Group C. This discrepancy is an anomaly, originated by a different, unrelated
anomalous result. As stated, the values depicted in 1 are F1-score averages from
a number of experiments. One of the Multi-Target Classification experiments
trained with Group C data yielded a very low F1-score on race. This is due to
an extremely low Recall score (0.0596, to be precise) and a high Precision score
(0.9787). Therefore, the large difference between average scores for race is not
related to the removal of the “Age” class.
The second type of test was conducted on datasets from all four dataset groups.
The results are depicted in Table 14. We will refer to the groups of experiments in
this testing round as “Binary-B”, “Binary-C”, “Binary-D”, and “Group A”, since
it remains unchanged across the different types of tests.
The experiments with Group A yielded interesting results. Models trained with
BCE for 3 to 7 epochs, inclusively, produced the exact same Precision, Recall,
and F1-score values in testing, differing only according to the Pooling Function
applied. This phenomenon did not occur during the remaining experiments and
happened consistently once we tried to replicate the experiment. Due to this, we
have chosen to circumvent this redundancy, and represent the number of epochs
during which the same value was observed. Group A, as expected, yields the best
overall results.
The third type of test was conducted using the best performing model trained
with Group A data. We will refer to these experiments as “Inter-B”, “Inter-C”,
and “Inter-D”. The results can be found in Table 15.
Table 14. Binary-Classification Task: Best Results for F1-score
Experiments Epochs Pooling Loss biased non-biased Overall
Group A
3-7
avg
BCE 0.8653
0.9296
0.8974
Binary-B
4
avg
BCE 0.8578
0.9240
0.8909
Binary-C
6
avg
BCE 0.8314
0.8880
0.8597
Binary-D
4
avg
BCE 0.8199
0.8830
0,8515
Table 15. Inter Binary-Classification Task: Best Results for F1-score
Experiments Epochs Pooling Loss biased non-biased Overall
Inter-B
4
avg
BCE 0.8389
0.9170
0.8780
Inter-C
4
avg
BCE 0.7272
0.8409
0.7840
Inter-D
4
avg
BCE 0.6964
0.8336
0.7650
5
Discussion
5.1
“How do Single-Target datasets influence performance?” Or:
Group-A vs Multi-B, Binary-B, and Inter-B
This is the question that led us to create Group B as a distinct control group, with
its sole Target Category. Furthermore, since all the individual datasets in this
group are Twitter-based, we also remove other variables from this experiment,
such as the linguistic variation of Internet and synthetic data.
As can be seen in Tables 12 and 14, the difference in overall performance between
Group A and Multi-B is slight. From this, we can conclude that the model is able
to correctly predict when a sentence is biased, and also when that bias is aimed
at target category gender.
Observing the Binary-B results, shown in Table 14, we can see a 0.01 decrease in
F1-score in the biased category when compared to Group A’s results. While the
model’s ability to differentiate between biased and non-biased content is main-
tained, we can presume that the entries from the Single-Target datasets differ
enough from the unspecified biased entries to result in a slight, decrease in per-
formance. This addition does not seem to impact the non-biased category in any
significant way.
Lastly, we can compare the Inter-B results with Group-A and Binary-B. Inter-B’s
F1-score of 0.8780 compared to A-E1’s 0.8974 shows us that the model solely
trained on Group A data, while clearly able to identify some of the gender-biased
entries and perform adequately, does not perform as well as the baseline. Most
importantly, it also does not perform as well as a model trained with Group-B
data, as evidenced by Multi-B’s F1-score of 0.8909.
We can conclude that adding entries labeled for a specific target category to a
general Bias/Hate Speech dataset results in a model which can accurately identify
and classify biased content revolving around that very same target category, with
little to no decrease in overall performance. These results are, therefore, highly
promising.
5.2
“How do synthetic and Multi-Target datasets influence
performance?” Or: A Lukewarm Overview of Group C
This is the question that motivated the existence of Group C as a control group,
by adding to our baseline those datasets that were Multi-Target and/or synthetic.
This was an almost by default choice, since most of our Multi-Target datasets
were also synthetic.
As depicted in Tables 12 and 14, the difference in performance between Group
A and Multi-C is significant, even with the increase observe by removing the
“Age” category, as depicted in Table 13. This result is caused by the lower scores
obtained in the several target categories.
Fig. 2. Class breakdown of the F1-scores obtained across Multi-C experiments
Figure 2 represents the results obtained in the Multi-C experiments. Since the
results obtained in the “Age” category are not only null but have also been dis-
cussed, we excluded them from the present analysis. We can observe, in Figure 2,
some interesting patterns in the results obtained for the several categories. Firstly,
there is the anomalous result obtained from the race class, which was not recur-
rent and which we have already discussed.
Secondly, we can also observe that sexual orientation and gender identity are the
only categories that achieve a F1-score equal to (or greater than) 0.6 across all
three experiments. This is rather interesting since these categories make up 1%
and 0.61%, respectively, of the total data in Group C, yet achieve better perfor-
mance than other categories, which leads us to believe that the language found in
entries of these types might differ enough from the rest to lead to this result. sex-
ual orientation achieves better Precision than Recall, while the opposite is true
for Gender Identity. Our hypothesis is that, firstly, slurs and derogatory language
related to sexual orientation are frequently used online, and as such might be
present in other categories (namely, the unspecified b none class), thus resulting
in a number of sexual orientation entries being mislabeled as b none and lower-
ing the recall score due to a higher number of false negatives. Gender Identity,
however, has only recently become “mainstream”; the likely lack of content re-
garding this topic in the unspecified biased category, combined with the overall
low number of entries labeled as gender identity and the specificity of this con-
tent, might very well result in a higher number of false positives due to overfitting,
thus yielding a lower precision score.
The remaining results do not differ as significantly. nationality shows a consis-
tently lower performance than most other classes, but it is also only 0.29% of the
total data in Group C, and as such this is expected.
Lastly, let us examine the results obtained in Binary-C and Inter-C, as depicted
in Tables 14 and 15 respectively, While the model trained with Group A data
is able to identify Non-Biased entries, with a performance on par with models
trained with Group C data, the same cannot be said for biased data. Therefore,
we believe that models trained for the Binary-Classification task using general,
Twitter-based Bias/Hate Speech Detection datasets do not achieve a satisfactory
performance when identifying synthetic/Multi-Target biased content.
In conclusion, adding entries labeled for different categories to a general Bi-
as/Hate Speech dataset yields varying results, dependent on the type of language
found in each category as well as the overall number of entries for each category;
none of these results, however, show a satisfactory performance.
5.3
“Can we obtain a better performance by using all of our
resources together?” Or: The Epic of Group D
Lastly, we arrived at our last control group, which is composed by the unification
of all our resources. We are, therefore, analysing how well (or how badly) the gen-
eral, Twitter-based Bias/Hate Speech Detection datasets, Single-Target datasets,
and synthetic and/or Multi-Target datasets perform together.
We would like to remind that Group D is the only one to include the CONAN
dataset, introduced in Section 2.3, which is a synthetic, Single-Target dataset for
the target category “Religion”. This dataset did not fit neatly into the previous
control groups, but we decided to nevertheless include it in this Group; “all of
our resources”, after all, means all of our resources.
As can be seen in Tables 12 and 14, we once more find a significant difference
in performance between Group-A and Multi-D, partially bridged by NoAge-D,
in Table 13. Group A’s overall F1-score consistently hits the 0.89 range, while
Multi-D’s rests in the 0.61 range and NoAge-D falls, on average, in the 0.67
range. Multi-D sees a decrease in performance for both the b none and non-
biased categories, even when compared to Multi-C.
Figure 3 shows the comparison between F1-scores obtained across all categories
for both Multi-C and Multi-D. As previously mentioned, there is a slight decrease
in performance for classes b none and non-biased, which is interesting not due to
the severity of the decrease – which, as mentioned, is slight – but due to the fact
that it happens at all.
There is, however, a severe decrease in performance worthy of note in gen-
der identity. We believe this might either be due to the split between train, vali-
dation, and test sets – seeing as this class makes up a mere 0.56% of Group D,
and, as such, is easily affected by the random data split – or due to some type of
Fig. 3. Comparison between F1-score averages of Multi-C and Multi-D
overlap of terms with the added gender entries from the Single-Target datasets.
The fact that there is no pattern in terms of Precision and Recall, in opposition to
what we observed in the previous section, leads us to believe that the first option
is the more likely answer.
We also see a noticeable improvement in gender, religion, and race. The latter
can, once more, be justified by the lower average value resulting from the anoma-
lous result obtained in Multi-C, rather than any real improvement in the model’s
behaviour.
The improvement observed in the other two classes, however, can be attributed
directly to the addition of the Single-Target datasets which deal precisely with
the target categories in question. The fact that the improvement in religion is
markedly lower than in gender also supports this theory; religion makes up 1.43%
of Group C’s data compared to 1.56% of Group D, while gender goes from a
modest 1.72% in Group C to a respectable 4.26% in Group D. Furthermore, we
observed in Section 5.1 that the Single-Target entries for “Gender” behaved ex-
tremely well when added to the baseline datasets, which we attributed partly to
the fact that all datasets in Group B were Twitter-based. CONAN’s synthetic ori-
gin could be a contributing factor to the less marked improvement in performance.
Shifting our attention to the Binary-Classification task, we can observe a pattern
similar to the previous sections. The model trained with Group A data, used in
the Inter-D experiment depicted in Table 15, does not perform nearly as well as
the model trained with Group D data. Notably, it also performs noticeably worse
in the Biased class, which can certainly be attributed to the synthetic and Multi-
Target datasets featured in Group D, introducing not only new linguistic forms
but also different ways to express and convey bias.
In the end, all our resources together do not perform better than our baseline
group. We do observe marked improvement in the classes to which we added new
entries when compared to those same classes in Group C, which suggests that the
lower performance score might be due to the low number of entries for the several
categories rather than the model’s inherent difficulty in dealing with the different
kinds of biases and categories. Additionally, while the synthetic datasets do not
Fig. 4. F1-scores of experiments Multi-D, Inter-D, as well as the average F1-scores of Binary-D
perform as well when the baseline data is Twitter-based, their addition to the
training data is markedly necessary if we want a model that can properly identify
them, as shown in the comparison between Inter-D and Binary-D.
6
Conclusion
Bias in NLP is a recent field of study, with plenty of works being published in
recent years. We are discovering that there are many ways in which human bi-
ases can, and do, infiltrate our programs and algorithms. One of these ways is
through biased training data, which teaches models how to replicate those very
same biases.
In our work, we sought to use publicly available resources to train a classifier in
the task of Bias Detection and Classification. The aim of our work was to discover
if (or how) pre-existing resources could be used together to train a classifier in this
task.
We find that while models can learn to identify Bias for a certain target cate-
gory when trained when unspecified Bias/Hate Speech Detection datasets and a
smaller dataset for that very same target category (Single-Target Classification),
they do not perform well if one follows this system with many target categories
and smaller datasets of varying sizes. However, models trained in this way still
appear to be better at identifying Bias in synthetic text, or in more nuanced forms,
than datasets trained only on generalized datasets and Twitter-based data, which
implies that the model learns additional information that allows it to perform bet-
ter in select contexts.
These conclusions emphasize the disproportionate attention given to certain tar-
gets of bias, which means that there are not enough resources available to train
models to identify other types of biases. This is made worse by the reliance
on non-persistent data, which leads to dataset degradation and further sabotages
whatever available resources exist.
These conclusions also emphasize the need for clarity and diversity in further re-
search in this field. It is paramount to diversify the focus of research, especially in
an age in which social biases continue to grow in social importance. Technologi-
cal advances must keep pace with societal ones, and that goal cannot be achieved
if we remain stagnant and do not pay heed to recurring mistakes.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia (FCT),
through Portuguese national funds Ref. UIDB/50021/2020, and Agˆencia Nacional
de Inovac¸˜ao (ANI), through the project C645008882-00000055 (Center for Re-
sponsible AI) funded by Recovery and Resilience Plan (RRP) and Next Genera-
tion EU European Funds and through the project CMU-PT MAIA Ref. 045909.
Bibliography
[1] Antigoni Founta, Constantinos Djouvas, Despoina Chatzakou, Ilias Leon-
tiadis, Jeremy Blackburn, Gianluca Stringhini, Athena Vakali, Michael Siri-
vianos, and Nicolas Kourtellis. Large scale crowdsourcing and characteri-
zation of twitter abusive behavior. In Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 12, 2018.
[2] Anjalie Field, Su Lin Blodgett, Zeerak Waseem, and Yulia Tsvetkov. A
survey of race, racism, and anti-racism in NLP. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1905–1925, Online, August 2021. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[3] Kimberl´e Crenshaw. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A
Black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory, and
antiracist politics [1989]. Routledge, 2018.
[4] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and
Adam T Kalai. Man is to computer programmer as woman is to home-
maker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 29:4349–4357, 2016.
[5] Christine Basta, Marta R Costa-juss`a, and Noe Casas. Evaluating the un-
derlying gender bias in contextualized word embeddings. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages
33–39, 2019.
[6] Wei Guo and Aylin Caliskan. Detecting Emergent Intersectional Biases:
Contextualized Word Embeddings Contain a Distribution of Human-like Bi-
ases, page 122–133. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 2021.
[7] May Jiang and Christiane Fellbaum.
Interdependencies of gender and
race in contextualized word embeddings.
In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages 17–25,
Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[8] Masahiro Kaneko and Danushka Bollegala. Gender-preserving debiasing
for pre-trained word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1641–1650,
2019.
[9] Yi Chern Tan and L Elisa Celis. Assessing social and intersectional biases
in contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01485,
2019.
[10] Sima Sharifirad, Alon Jacovi, Israel Bar Ilan Univesity, and Stan Matwin.
Learning and understanding different categories of sexism using convolu-
tional neural network’s filters. In Proceedings of the 2019 Workshop on
Widening NLP, pages 21–23, 2019.
[11] Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. StereoSet: Measuring stereo-
typical bias in pretrained language models. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 5356–5371, Online, August 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[12] Pulkit Parikh, Harika Abburi, Pinkesh Badjatiya, Radhika Krishnan, Niyati
Chhaya, Manish Gupta, and Vasudeva Varma. Multi-label categorization
of accounts of sexism using a neural framework. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1642–1652, 2019.
[13] Haochen Liu, Wentao Wang, Yiqi Wang, Hui Liu, Zitao Liu, and Jiliang
Tang. Mitigating gender bias for neural dialogue generation with adversar-
ial learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 893–903, Online,
November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[14] Brian Hu Zhang, Blake Lemoine, and Margaret Mitchell. Mitigating un-
wanted biases with adversarial learning.
In Proceedings of the 2018
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 335–340, 2018.
[15] Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei
Chang. Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 15–20, 2018.
[16] Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif Mohammad. Examining gender and race bias
in two hundred sentiment analysis systems. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 43–53,
New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
[17] Emily Dinan, Angela Fan, Adina Williams, Jack Urbanek, Douwe Kiela,
and Jason Weston.
Queens are powerful too: Mitigating gender bias in
dialogue generation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 8173–8188,
Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[18] Aparna Garimella, Carmen Banea, Dirk Hovy, and Rada Mihalcea.
Women’s syntactic resilience and men’s grammatical luck: Gender-bias in
part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
3493–3498, 2019.
[19] Alexandra Luccioni and Joseph Viviano. What’s in the box? an analysis of
undesirable content in the Common Crawl corpus. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 182–189, Online, August 2021. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
[20] Marty J Wolf, Keith W Miller, and Frances S Grodzinsky. Why we should
have seen that coming: comments on microsoft’s tay “experiment,” and
wider implications. The ORBIT Journal, 1(2):1–12, 2017.
[21] Ali Borji. A categorical archive of chatgpt failures. arXiv e-prints, pages
arXiv–2302, 2023.
[22] Noa Baker Gillis. Sexism in the judiciary: The importance of bias definition
in NLP and in our courts. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Gender
Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages 45–54, Online, August 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[23] Chan Young Park, Xinru Yan, Anjalie Field, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Multi-
lingual contextual affective analysis of lgbt people portrayals in wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media, volume 15, pages 479–490, 2021.
[24] Samia Touileb, Lilja Øvrelid, and Erik Velldal. Gender and sentiment, crit-
ics and authors: a dataset of norwegian book reviews. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages
125–138, 2020.
[25] Pinkesh Badjatiya, Shashank Gupta, Manish Gupta, and Vasudeva Varma.
Deep learning for hate speech detection in tweets. In Proceedings of the
26th international conference on World Wide Web companion, pages 759–
760, 2017.
[26] Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy, and Ingmar Weber. Au-
tomated hate speech detection and the problem of offensive language. In
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Me-
dia, volume 11, 2017.
[27] Nemanja Djuric, Jing Zhou, Robin Morris, Mihajlo Grbovic, Vladan Ra-
dosavljevic, and Narayan Bhamidipati. Hate speech detection with com-
ment embeddings. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on
world wide web, pages 29–30, 2015.
[28] Jennifer Golbeck, Zahra Ashktorab, Rashad O Banjo, Alexandra Berlinger,
Siddharth Bhagwan, Cody Buntain, Paul Cheakalos, Alicia A Geller, Ra-
jesh Kumar Gnanasekaran, Raja Rajan Gunasekaran, et al. A large labeled
corpus for online harassment research. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
web science conference, pages 229–233, 2017.
[29] Elisabetta Fersini, Paolo Rosso, and Maria Anzovino. Overview of the task
on automatic misogyny identification at ibereval 2018. IberEval@ SEPLN,
2150:214–228, 2018.
[30] Akshita Jha and Radhika Mamidi. When does a compliment become sexist?
analysis and classification of ambivalent sexism using twitter data. In Pro-
ceedings of the second workshop on NLP and computational social science,
pages 7–16, 2017.
[31] Ashima Suvarna and Grusha Bhalla. # notawhore! a computational linguis-
tic perspective of rape culture and victimization on social media. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pages 328–335, 2020.
[32] Yi-Ling Chung, Elizaveta Kuzmenko, Serra Sinem Tekiroglu, and Marco
Guerini. CONAN - COunter NArratives through nichesourcing: a multi-
lingual dataset of responses to fight online hate speech. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 2819–2829, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
[33] Soumya Barikeri, Anne Lauscher, Ivan Vuli´c, and Goran Glavaˇs. Reddit-
Bias: A real-world resource for bias evaluation and debiasing of conver-
sational language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 1941–1955, Online, August 2021. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
[34] Bertie Vidgen, Tristan Thrush, Zeerak Waseem, and Douwe Kiela. Learn-
ing from the worst: Dynamically generated datasets to improve online hate
detection. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1667–1682,
Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[35] Zeerak Waseem and Dirk Hovy. Hateful symbols or hateful people? pre-
dictive features for hate speech detection on twitter. In Proceedings of the
NAACL student research workshop, pages 88–93, 2016.
[36] Fabio Poletto, Valerio Basile, Manuela Sanguinetti, Cristina Bosco, and Vi-
viana Patti. Resources and benchmark corpora for hate speech detection: a
systematic review. Lang. Resour. Evaluation, 55:477–523, 2021.
[37] Bertie Vidgen, Alex Harris, Dong Nguyen, Rebekah Tromble, Scott Hale,
and Helen Margetts. Challenges and frontiers in abusive content detection.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pages
80–93, Florence, Italy, August 2019. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
[38] Paula Fortuna, Vanessa Cortez, Miguel Sozinho Ramalho, and Laura P´erez-
Mayos. MIN PT: An European Portuguese lexicon for minorities related
terms. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms
(WOAH 2021), pages 76–80, Online, August 2021. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
[39] Pei Zhou, Weijia Shi, Jieyu Zhao, Kuan-Hao Huang, Muhao Chen, Ryan
Cotterell, and Kai-Wei Chang. Examining gender bias in languages with
grammatical gender. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
5276–5284, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
[40] Maarten Sap, Dallas Card, Saadia Gabriel, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith.
The risk of racial bias in hate speech detection. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1668–1678, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
[41] Elizabeth Excell and Noura Al Moubayed. Towards equal gender repre-
sentation in the annotations of toxic language detection. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages
55–65, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[42] Miriah Steiger, Timir J Bharucha, Sukrit Venkatagiri, Martin J. Riedl, and
Matthew Lease. The psychological well-being of content moderators: The
emotional labor of commercial moderation and avenues for improving sup-
port. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’21, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[43] Amit Pinchevski. Social media’s canaries: content moderators between dig-
ital labor and mediated trauma. Media, Culture & Society, 45(1):212–221,
2023.
[44] Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman.
CrowS-pairs: A challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked
language models.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1953–1967, On-
line, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[45] Nedjma Ousidhoum, Zizheng Lin, Hongming Zhang, Yangqiu Song, and
Dit-Yan Yeung.
Multilingual and multi-aspect hate speech analysis.
In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4675–4684, Hong Kong,
China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
