Title: Health, Psychosocial, and Social issues emanating from COVID-19 pandemic based on Social Media Comments using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12144v1
--------------------------------------------------

Health, Psychosocial, and Social issues emanating from COVID-
19 pandemic based on Social Media Comments using Natural 
Language Processing 
 
Oladapo Oyebode1, Chinenye Ndulue1, Ashfaq Adib1, Dinesh Mulchandani1, 
Banuchitra Suruliraj1, Fidelia Anulika Orji4, Christine Chambers2, Sandra Meier3, and 
Rita Orji1 
 
1 Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 
2 Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 
3 Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada 
 
Corresponding Author: 
Oladapo Oyebode 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Dalhousie University 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4R2 
Canada 
Email: oladapo.oyebode@dal.ca 
 
Abstract 
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a global health crisis that affects 
many aspects of human lives. In the absence of vaccines and antivirals, several 
behavioural change and policy initiatives, such as physical distancing, have been 
implemented to control the spread of the coronavirus. Social media data can reveal 
public perceptions toward how governments and health agencies across the globe 
are handling the pandemic, as well as the impact of the disease on people regardless 
of their geographic locations in line with various factors that hinder or facilitate the 
efforts to control the spread of the pandemic globally. 
Objective: This paper aims to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
people globally using social media data. 
Methods: We apply natural language processing (NLP) and thematic analysis to 
understand public opinions, experiences, and issues with respect to the COVID-19 
pandemic using social media data. First, we collect over 47 million COVID-19-
related comments from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and three online discussion 
forums. Second, we perform data preprocessing which involves applying NLP 
techniques to clean and prepare the data for automated theme extraction. Third, we 
apply context-aware NLP approach to extract meaningful keyphrases or themes 
from over 1 million randomly-selected comments, as well as compute sentiment 
scores for each theme and assign sentiment polarity (i.e., positive, negative, or 
neutral) based on the scores using lexicon-based technique. Fourth, we categorize 
related themes into broader themes. 
Results: A total of 34 negative themes emerged, out of which 15 are health-related 
issues, psychosocial issues, and social issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic from 
the public perspective. Some of the health-related issues are increased mortality, 
health concerns, struggling health systems, and fitness issues; while some of the 
psychosocial issues include frustrations due to life disruptions, panic shopping, and 
expression of fear. Social issues include harassment, domestic violence, and wrong 
societal attitude. In addition, 20 positive themes emerged from our results. Some of 
the positive themes include public awareness, encouragement, gratitude, cleaner 
environment, online learning, charity, spiritual support, and innovative research. 
Conclusions: We uncover various negative and positive themes representing public 
perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic and recommend interventions that can 
help address the health, psychosocial, and social issues based on the positive themes 
and other remedial ideas rooted in research. These interventions will help 
governments, health professionals and agencies, institutions, and individuals in 
their efforts to curb the spread of COVID-19 and minimize its impact, as well as in 
reacting to any future pandemics. 
 
Keywords: Social media; COVID-19; Coronavirus; Natural language processing; 
Context-based 
analysis; 
Thematic 
analysis; 
Interventions; 
Health 
issues; 
Psychosocial issues; Social issues. 
 
Introduction 
Background 
Infectious diseases have occurred in the past and continue to emerge. Infectious 
diseases are termed “emerging” if they newly appear in a population or have existed 
but are increasing rapidly in incidence or geographic range [1]. Examples of 
emerging infectious diseases include acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, Ebola, 
dengue hemorrhagic fever, Lassa fever, severe acute respiratory syndrome, H1N1 
flu, Zika, etc. [2]. Evidence shows that emerging infectious diseases are among the 
leading causes of death and disability globally [3]. For instance, a 1-year estimate of 
the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic shows that 43 to 89 million people were infected [4] 
and 201,200 respiratory deaths and 83,300 cardiovascular deaths were linked to 
the disease [5] globally. In addition, 770,000 HIV deaths were recorded in 2018 
alone, with approximately 37.9 million people already infected with the virus 
globally [6]. Ebola is another deadly infectious disease that has an average case 
fatality rate of about 50%, with a range of 25% to 90% case fatality rates in past 
outbreaks [2,7].  
 
In December 2019, the novel coronavirus which causes the COVID-19 disease 
emerged and soon became the latest deadly infectious disease [8,9] globally with 
more than 9.4 million confirmed cases and over 482,800 deaths in 188 
countries/regions as at June 25, 2020 [10]. Hence, it was declared a pandemic by the 
World Health Organization. The COVID-19 pandemic has strained the global health 
systems, and also caused socio-economic challenges due to job losses and 
lockdowns (and other restrictive measures) imposed by governments and public 
health agencies to curtail the spread of the virus. Evidence has already shown that 
emerging infectious diseases impose significant burden on global economies and 
public health [3,11–13]. To understand public concern and personal experiences, 
and factors that hinder or facilitate the efforts to control the spread of the COVID-19 
pandemic globally, social media data can produce rich and useful insights that were 
previously impossible in both scale and extent [14]. 
 
Over the years, social media has witnessed a surge in active users to more than 3.8 
billion globally [15], making it a rich source of data for research in diverse domains. 
In the health domain, social media data (i.e., user comments or posts on Twitter, 
Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, online forums, blogs, etc.) have been used to 
investigate mental health issues [16,17], maternal health issues [18,19], diseases 
[20–24], substance use [25,26] and other health-related issues [27,28]. Other 
domains (e.g., politics, commerce, marketing, banking) have also witnessed 
widespread use of social media data to uncover new insights related to election 
results [29–32], election campaign [33], customer behaviour and engagement 
[34,35], etc. As regards the COVID-19 crisis, social media data can reveal public 
perceptions toward how governments and health agencies across the globe are 
handling the pandemic, as well as the social, economic, psychological, and health-
related impact of the disease on people regardless of their geographic locations in 
line with various factors that hinder or facilitate the efforts to control the spread of 
the COVID-19 pandemic globally. 
 
In this paper, we apply natural language processing (NLP) to understand public 
opinions, experiences, and issues with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic using data 
from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and three online discussion forums (i.e., 
Archinect.com [36,37], LiveScience.com [38], and PushSquare.com  [39]). NLP is a 
well-established method that has been applied in many health informatics papers to 
understand various health-related issues. For example, Abdalla et al. studied the 
privacy implications of word embeddings trained on clinical data containing 
personal health information [40], while Bekhuis et al. applied NLP to extract clinical 
phrases and keywords from corpus of messages posted to an internet mailing list 
[41].  
 
The contributions of our research are as follows: 
1. We apply a context-aware Natural Language Processing (NLP) approach for 
extracting opinionated themes from COVID-19-related social media 
comments. 
2. We uncover various negative and positive themes representing public 
perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic. Our results reveal 34 negative 
themes, out of which 15 are health-related issues, psychosocial issues, and 
social issues related to the pandemic from the public perspective. In addition, 
20 positive themes emerged from our results. 
3. We recommend interventions that can help address the health, psychosocial, 
and social issues based on the positive themes and other remedial ideas 
rooted in research. These interventions will help governments, health 
professionals and agencies, institutions, and individuals in their efforts to 
curb the spread of COVID-19 and minimize its impact, as well as in reacting 
to any future pandemics. 
Relevant Literature 
Social media has been a rich source of data for research in many domains, including 
health [42]. Research that utilizes social media in conjunction with natural language 
processing (NLP) within the health domain continues to grow and cover broad 
application areas such as health surveillance (e.g., mental health, substance use, 
diseases, pharmacovigilance, etc.), health communication, sentiment analysis, and so 
on [43]. For example, Park et al. [44] used the lexicon-based approach to track 
prevalence of keywords indicating public interest in four health issues –  Ebola, e-
cigarette, marijuana, and influenza – based on social media data. Afterwards, they 
generated topics or themes that explain changes in discussion volume over time 
using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) algorithm. Similarly, Jelodar et al. [45] 
applied LDA to extract latent topics in COVID-19-related comments and used the 
LSTM 
recurrent 
neural 
network 
technique 
for 
sentiment 
classification. 
Furthermore, Nobles et al. [46] used social media data to examine the needs 
(including seeking health information) of reportable sexually transmitted diseases 
community. Their NLP approach involves extracting top 50 unigrams from the posts 
based on frequency, and then generating topics or themes using the non-negative 
matrix factorization technique instead of LDA. Paul et al. [47] applied the Ailment 
Topic Aspect Model to generate latent topics from Twitter data with the aim of 
detecting mentions of specific ailments, including allergies, obesity, and insomnia. 
They used a list of keyphrases to automatically identify possible systems and 
treatments. McNeill et al. [48] investigated how the dissemination of H1N1-related 
advice in the United Kingdom encourages/discourages vaccine and antiviral uptake 
using Twitter data. They conducted an automated content analysis using KH-Coder 
tool to explore potential topics based on frequency of occurrence, and then 
performed a more detailed or conversational analysis to understand skepticism 
over economic beneficiaries of vaccination, as well as the risks and benefits of 
medication based on public opinion. On the other hand, Oyebode et al. [49] 
performed sentiment analysis on user reviews of mental health apps using machine 
learning approach. They compared five classifiers (based on five different machine 
learning algorithms) and used the best performing classifier to predict the 
sentiment polarity of reviews. However, none of the approaches above considers the 
context in which words appear in unstructured texts, which instinctively plays a 
huge role in conveying meaning. 
 
To investigate the significance of contextual text analysis, Dave et al. [50] compared 
the non-contextual N-Gram Chunking approach and the contextual Part-of-Speech 
(POS) chunking approach in their experimental research in the field of advertising. 
While the N-Gram chunking method simply extracts words of varying lengths within 
sentence boundary as candidate keyphrases or themes, the POS chunking method 
infers the context of words using POS patterns such as one or more noun tags (NN, 
NNP, NNS, and NNPS) along with adjective tags (JJ) and optional cardinal tags (CD) 
and determiners (DT). They focus on keyphrases of up to length six for their 
experiments. Their initial assessment showed that majority of the keyphrases 
generated using the N-Gram chunking method are not meaningful within the 
advertising context, hence not useful. Furthermore, they observed the impact of 
keyphrases from both methods on the performance of classification systems based 
on Naïve Bayes, logistic regression, and bagging machine learning algorithms. Their 
findings revealed that systems using the POS chunking method outperformed those 
using the N-Gram chunking method for feature extraction. We leveraged Dave et 
al.’s contextual method in this work and extended it to capture additional POS 
patterns, NLP preprocessing techniques, and sentiment scoring using lexicon-based 
technique. 
 
Finally, to uncover insights about the type of information shared on Twitter during 
the peak of the H1N1 (swine flu) pandemic in 2009, Ahmed et al. [51] generated 
eight broad themes using coding method involving expert reviewers. Similarly, 
Bekhuis et al. [41] involved two dentists to manually and iteratively classify clinical 
phrases into categories and subcategories.  We also used this method in the theme 
categorization stage of our work to group related themes or keyphrases into broad 
themes. 
Methods 
The main goal of this paper is to understand people’s personal experiences and 
opinions with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic using social media data. To achieve 
this, we apply various standard and well-known computational techniques which 
are highlighted below and summarized in Figure 1. 
1. We collect COVID-19-related comments or posts from Twitter, Facebook, 
YouTube, and three online discussion forums using programming languages 
(Python and C#) and relevant application programming interfaces (APIs). 
2. We perform preprocessing tasks which involve applying Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) techniques to clean the data and prepare them for the 
theme extraction phase. 
3. We apply context-aware NLP approach to extract meaningful themes or 
keyphrases which are words or phrases that convey the topical content of 
the comments. This approach is in seven stages: grammar definition, 
sentence breaking and tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, lemmatization, 
syntactic parsing, transformation and filtering, and sentiment scoring. 
4. We categorize related themes into broader themes. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Methodological stages 
Data Collection 
We utilized various automated techniques to collect 47,410,795 (over 47 million) 
COVID-19 or Coronavirus-related comments from six social media platforms – 
Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, Archinect.com, LiveScience.com, and PushSquare.com. 
The techniques, as well as the breakdown of the data collected from each platform, 
are described below: 
1. Twitter: We developed a tool using C# programming language to 
automatically extract tweets containing relevant hashtags in real-time 
through the Twitter Streaming API [52]. The Twitter hashtags related to 
COVID-19 
include 
#QuarantineAndChill, 
#MyPandemicSurvivalPlan, 
#CoronaVirus, #caronavirusoutbreak, #CoronavirusOutbreak, #Quarantined, 
#pandemic, #coronapocalypse, #COVID19, #QuarantineLife, #Covid_19, 
#StopTheSpread, #CoronaVirusUpdates, #StayAtHome, #selfquarantine, # 
COVID ー19, 
#panicbuying, 
#ncov2019, 
#Coronavid19, 
#CoronaCrisis, 
#SocialDistancing, 
#COVID, 
#cronovirus, 
#CoronaVirusUpdate, 
#CoronavirusPandemic, and #COVID-19. A total of 47,249,973 tweets were 
collected. 
2. YouTube: We developed a Python script to retrieve comments associated 
with relevant videos through the YouTube Data API [53] using the search 
keywords such as: covid19, covid-19, and coronavirus. Due to YouTube’s 
quota limits, we were only able to extract 111,722 comments across 2,939 
videos. 
3. Facebook: Due to Facebook’s automated search restrictions, we applied a 
semi-automated approach to extract comments. First, we manually retrieved 
relevant groups (n=91) and pages (n=68) using the following search 
keywords: COVID-19, Coronavirus, and COVID.  Afterwards, we developed a 
Python script to extract 777 and 8,382 comments posted on the groups and 
pages respectively. 
4. Online discussion forums: We developed a Python script to extract 20,747; 
793; and 18,401 comments (from Coronavirus-related threads) on 
Archinect.com, LiveScience.com, and PushSquare.com respectively. 
Data Preprocessing 
Next, we applied the following NLP techniques to clean and prepare data for 
analysis using Python: 
1. Remove hashtags, mentions, and URLs 
2. Expand contractions (e.g., wouldn’t is replaced with would not) 
3. Unescape HTML characters (e.g., “&amp;” is replaced with the “&” 
equivalent) 
4. Remove HTML tags (e.g., <p>, <span>, <br />, etc.) 
5. Remove special characters, except those with semantic implications such as 
period and exclamation mark (which are useful for identifying sentence 
boundary), comma, etc. 
6. Reduce repeated characters (e.g., toooooool becomes tool) 
7. Convert slangs to their equivalent English words using online slang 
dictionaries [54,55] which contain 5,434 entries in total 
8. Remove numeric words 
 
After the preprocessing tasks were completed, non-English and duplicated 
comments were removed, thereby reducing total number of comments to 8,021,341. 
Theme Extraction 
Next, we randomly selected 1,051,616 comments (representing approximately 13% 
of the entire dataset) and then extracted meaningful keyphrases or themes that 
convey the topical content of the comments. We refer to the dataset containing the 
comments as corpus and each comment as document in the remaining parts of this 
paper. We focus on themes that are opinionated (i.e., express or imply positive or 
negative sentiment [56]) since our goal is to determine public opinions and impact 
with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. We extracted candidate themes from our 
corpus using a seven-stage context-aware NLP approach, shown in Figure 2. We 
implemented our approach using the Python programming language. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Context-aware Natural Language Processing (NLP) Approach 
Grammar definition 
A grammar is a set of rules that describe how syntactic units (such as sentences and 
phrases) should be deconstructed into their constituents [57]. To derive meaningful 
themes or keyphrases, we defined a grammar (see below) which specifies a 
meaningful part-of-speech (POS) pattern that the syntactic parser uses to 
deconstruct each sentence in the documents. Table 1 shows the various parts of 
speech (or syntactic categories) covered by our grammar. These syntactic categories 
are based on well-established part-of-speech tagging guidelines for English [58]. 
 
{< 𝑫𝑻>? < 𝑱𝑱.∗>∗ < 𝑵𝑵.∗>∗ < 𝑽𝑩.∗>? (< 𝑰𝑵>? < 𝑫𝑻>? < 𝑱𝑱.∗>∗ < 𝑵𝑵.∗>∗)? } 
 
In the grammar above, the “?” and “*” characters represent “optional” and “zero or 
more occurrences” respectively. Our grammar is aimed at generating keyphrases 
that capture both context and sentiment of a conversation using nouns, adjectives, 
and verbs. Research has shown that nouns are most useful in knowing the context of 
a conversation (i.e., what is being discussed) [59], while verbs and adjectives are 
important for sentiment detection [60]. Determiners and prepositions are also 
captured by the grammar since they usually co-occur with noun or adjective phrases 
(e.g., a meal for six people, a hospital on the hilltop, etc.). 
 
Table 1. POS tags, description, and the corresponding matching POS pattern 
Tag 
Description 
Matching Pattern 
DT 
Determiner 
<DT> 
JJ 
Adjective 
<JJ.*> 
JJR 
Adjective (comparative) 
JJS 
Adjective (superlative) 
NN 
Noun (singular) 
<NN.*> 
NNS 
Noun (plural) 
NNP 
Proper Noun (singular) 
NNPS 
Proper Noun (plural) 
VB 
Verb (base form) 
<VB.*> 
VBD 
Verb (past tense) 
VBG 
Verb (gerund or present participle) 
VBN 
Verb (past participle) 
VBP 
Verb (non-3rd person singular present) 
VBZ 
Verb (3rd person singular present) 
IN 
Preposition or subordinating conjunction 
<IN> 
 
Sentence Breaking and Tokenization 
Next, each document is split into sentences, and then each sentence is split into 
tokens or words. The sentence breaking task is achieved using an unsupervised 
algorithm 
that 
considers 
abbreviations, 
collocations, 
capitalizations, 
and 
punctuations to detect sentence boundaries [61]. 
Part-of-Speech (PoS) Tagging 
The tagging module associates each token with its part of speech. The part of speech 
tags are based on the Penn Treebank tagset [58,62], some of which are shown in 
Table 1. 
Lemmatization 
Each token is reduced to its root form, depending on its part of speech. This activity 
is called lemmatization. For example, worse and better which are both adjectives will 
become bad and good respectively. Prior to lemmatization, each token is converted 
to lowercase. While [63] applied stemming for its tokens, we chose lemmatization 
over stemming since lemmatization returns root words that are always meaningful 
and exist in the English dictionary. Stemming, on the other hand, may return root 
words that have no meaning at all since it merely removes prefixes or suffixes based 
on rule-based method [64]. 
Syntactic Parsing 
The syntactic parsing module deconstructs each sentence into a parse tree and then 
creates chunks or phrases based on the grammar or POS pattern defined in the first 
step. In other words, the parser’s chunking process involves matching phrases 
composed of an optional determiner, zero or more of any time of adjective, zero or 
more of any type of noun, any type of verb (but optional), as well as an optional 
component. This component consists of an optional preposition, an optional 
determiner, zero or more of any type of adjective, and zero or more of any type of 
noun. The output of this stage is the candidate themes (𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠). 
Transformation and Filtering 
In this stage, themes that are stopwords (i.e., words that are commonly used, such as 
the, a, an, with, in, that, etc.) are removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 using a predefined list 
𝐿𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 compiled from multiple sources such as [65]. Also, a subset of 𝐿𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 
are removed from the start and end of (and from within) the remaining themes in 
𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 such that the meaning of the themes is preserved. Afterwards, duplicates 
were removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠. In addition, themes containing more than ten words 
are removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠. While previous research excluded themes above length 
six [50], we excluded themes above length ten to prevent losing important themes 
that would have enriched insights from this paper. Since our focus is on opinionated 
themes (i.e., positive and negative themes), we applied a filtering technique that 
involves computing sentiment score for each theme and discarding non-opinionated 
themes. 
Sentiment Scoring 
To determine opinionated themes in 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠, the scoring module computes 
sentiment score, 𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒, ranging from −1 to +1 for each theme using the VADER 
lexicon-based algorithm [66]. Afterwards, each theme is assigned a polarity based 
on the sentiment score using the criteria in [66] and shown in Table 2. Themes with 
the neutral polarity are excluded from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 since they are not opinionated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Criteria for sentiment scoring 
Criteria 
Sentiment Polarity 
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒> 0.05 
Positive 
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒< −0.05 
Negative 
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 between −0.05 and +0.05 
Neutral 
 
Theme Categorization 
Next, we recruited four reviewers to categorize related themes into a broader theme 
using thematic analysis method. We assigned the negative themes to a group of two 
reviewers (G1) and the positive themes to a second group of two reviewers (G2). 
Each reviewer independently examines the themes iteratively and continues to 
categorize related themes until saturation level is reached (i.e., no new categories 
were emerging from the themes). We measured interrater reliability using the 
percentage agreement metric [67]. The percentage interrater reliability score for G1 
is 98.0% while the score for G2 is 99.3%. 
 
Results 
In this section, we discuss the results of our experiments and theme categorization. 
From the large corpus used for the experiment, a total of 427,875 unique negative 
themes and 520,685 unique positive themes were automatically generated. 
Negative Themes 
Figure 3 shows top 130 sample negative themes and their dominance in terms of 
frequency of occurrence. Our results revealed that death (n=10,187) is the dominant 
theme, followed by die (n=7,240), fight (n=5,891), bad (n=3,808), kill (n=3,668), lose 
(n=3,631), pay (n=3486), leave (n=3,234), crisis (n=2,783), hard (n=2,720), worry 
(n=2,476), sick (n=2,314), sad (n=2,129), and so on. Figure 4 shows more negative 
themes, such as national health emergency, scary time, life suck, everyone struggle, 
dangerous lie, child die, trouble breathe, no medicine, sick people, pay bill, horrible 
virus, fear coronavirus, extra cautious, steal mask, family die, people in crisis, bad 
leadership, in house bore, feel horrible, total incompetence, call virus hoax, conspiracy 
theory ridiculous, take no precaution, serious lockdown, increase in suicide rate, 
people starve, lack of preparedness, fight menace, restriction on travel, etc. 
 
Figure 3. Top 130 negative themes and their dominance in terms of frequency of 
occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance) 
 
 
 
     
       
       
       
      
     
   
   
      
     
    
        
      
           
     
      
        
       
          
     
      
        
   
    
         
    
     
          
          
      
     
      
    
       
   
         
       
        
     
             
         
    
      
    
       
        
     
    
     
           
              
           
   
     
       
        
    
             
    
    
    
    
         
      
   
         
            
            
      
             
       
         
    
           
     
           
    
    
              
        
         
       
         
       
     
   
             
          
    
        
       
       
      
      
          
    
   
      
     
     
            
              
       
     
     
        
     
    
      
      
        
         
    
      
       
       
       
      
        
           
     
      
          
   
    
     
     
       
     
     
            
Figure 4. Sample negative themes 
 
Positive Themes 
Figure 5 illustrates top 130 positive themes and their dominance in terms of 
frequency of occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance in 
the figure). Our results revealed that help (n=18,498) is the dominant theme, 
followed by hope (n=7,708), protect (n=7,130), love (n=6,895), support (n=6,198), 
good (n=5,740), share (n=5,187), care (n=4,917), stay safe (n=4,917), and so on. 
Figure 6 shows more positive themes, such as keep everyone safe, clean environment, 
trust scientific data, create cure, economic relief, encourage business, remain strong, 
good mask, social distancing best way, generous, respect human right, help prevent 
further spread, pray for health, social solidarity, support relief effort, protect health 
worker, good immune system, practice good hand hygiene, speak truth, expand testing, 
protect vulnerable people, free treatment, ease anxiety, etc. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Top 130 positive themes and their dominance in terms of frequency of 
occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance) 
 
 
      
     
     
     
       
          
            
              
          
     
        
    
    
         
       
       
       
              
          
       
        
         
                
     
           
         
             
    
         
      
   
     
        
    
   
    
           
         
        
         
     
          
          
              
         
     
                  
       
    
           
           
                   
              
                
                
       
    
       
    
   
      
          
       
       
         
         
    
     
    
         
     
        
    
           
    
      
    
        
         
        
       
              
              
              
               
     
      
           
      
       
           
    
         
      
    
            
         
         
           
          
        
     
                 
     
          
        
           
          
         
            
                   
             
         
                 
                  
           
        
      
       
       
        
         
          
        
     
             
     
      
         
          
 
Figure 6. Sample positive themes 
 
Theme Categories 
Overall, 34 negative and 20 positive theme categories emerged after the Theme 
Categorization phase discussed in the Methods section. 15 out of the 34 negative 
theme categories are health-related, psychosocial, and social issues (which are the 
main focus of this paper and shown in Table 3). Figure 7 shows the 15 negative 
theme categories and the corresponding number of themes under each category, 
while Figure 8 shows the negative theme categories and the total number of 
comments for each category. Frustration due to life disruptions emerged as the top 
negative theme category with the highest number of comments, followed by 
Increased mortality, Comparison with other diseases or incidents, Nature of the 
disease, and Harassment. On the other hand, Table 4 shows the 20 positive theme 
categories, description, and sample comments. Figure 9 shows the corresponding 
number of themes under each positive theme category, while Figure 10 shows the 
total number of comments for each theme category. Public awareness emerged as 
the top positive theme category based on the number of comments, followed by 
Spiritual support, Encouragement, and Charity. 
 
We refer to the theme categories as simply “themes” and the various themes under 
each category as “subthemes” in the remaining part of this paper. 
 
 
                   
 
Figure 7. Negative themes and the corresponding number of subthemes 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Negative themes and the corresponding number of comments - frequency 
 
Figure 9. Positive themes and the corresponding number of subthemes 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Positive themes and the corresponding number of comments - frequency 
Table 3. Negative themes, descriptions, and corresponding sample comments 
 
Theme 
Description 
Sample comments 
Health-related 
Issues 
 
 
 
 
Increased 
mortality 
Increasing number of deaths 
due to the Coronavirus disease 
“Grieving for the world and 
my country, every night the 
death count rises up. I cry for 
everybody that as died, for 
those people fighting it, & 
family who have lost 
someone. I do not know each 
person by name BUT I want 
you to know you are not 
alone in this pain.” a [C58] 
 
“... The number of deaths 
from the CoronaVirus in 
London are doubling every 
two days. London could end 
up with a worse than Italy.” 
[C90] 
 
Health 
concerns 
Health concerns expressed by 
people, such as mental health 
issues (e.g., anxiety, depression, 
stress, obsessive compulsive 
disorder, etc.), excessive 
drinking, migraine, fatigue, and 
others 
“It is been either ten or 
fourteen days since the 
nursing home I work at went 
on lockdown due to Covid_19 
and the stress/anxiety is really 
starting to get to me. I am 
struggling to sleep at night.” 
[C3327] 
 
“On my fifth day of sickness, 
the symptoms disappeared, 
leaving only an odd metallic 
taste in my mouth, nasal 
mucosal ulcers and intense 
fatigue. This is what a former 
chair of the UK RCGP went 
through after catching 
COVID19.” [C945] 
 
Struggling 
health 
systems 
Inability of health systems to 
cope with pandemic and give 
people adequate healthcare 
“What clearly shows is the 
correlation between 
countries with clean hospitals 
and countries with bad 
hospitals and corona deaths. 
People die with corona not of 
corona. In particular New 
York and California displays 
its poor health system.” [C81] 
 
“Pakistani doctors openly 
saying their numbers are 
being underreported. They 
claim 100s of patients in 
Lahore alone, and say that 
because of poor facilities, 
hospitals themselves might 
be spreading the virus.” [C44] 
 
Fitness issues 
Inability to perform usual 
physical activity nor attend 
fitness sessions, and dislike for 
indoor workout 
“Woke up at 8:20 am and still 
in bed from the past 2 hours. 
No mood of workout” [C271] 
 
“I just need it to be known 
that I hate quarantine 
workouts and I miss the damn 
gym. Also I never thought I 
would ever say this in life!” 
[209] 
 
Rising 
number of 
cases 
Concerns over rising COVID-19 
cases 
“The United States is 
currently on the path of the 
most widespread viral attack 
in the world.” [C908] 
 
“This has done a heinous 
crime on humanity by 
spreading to more and more 
areas of the country. The head 
of the Jamat must be booked 
for murder crime, as many 
have died due to Corona 
infection after attending their 
function.” [C24] 
 
Nature of 
disease 
Explaining the nature of the 
COVID-19 disease, including its 
symptoms (such as cough, loss 
of taste and fever), its “no 
symptom” (or asymptotic) 
behaviour, how it spreads, and 
vulnerable population 
“Recent reports suggest that 
Covid-19 does not only affect 
the respiratory system, but 
also affects the Central 
Nervous System. Loss of smell 
and loss of taste happen to be 
some of the early symptoms 
of covid-19.” [C660] 
 
“…they are all grabbing and 
touching the desk. This virus is 
much more contagious than 
the flu and there is 0 
immunity exposure illness. 
Keep doing it like this and it is 
only a matter of time before 
everyone who spoke will 
have the virus…” [C900] 
 
“If 3 elders died within 72 
hours and had no symptoms, 
should we not be testing 
everyone?” [C2447] 
 
Comparison 
with other 
diseases or 
incidents 
Comparing Coronavirus disease 
with other diseases or incidents, 
such as flu, pneumonia, natural 
disasters, war, etc.   
“A war fought with no guns or 
bombs, where people flee 
from what they do not see or 
is it World War 3?” [C515] 
 
“I believe Covid19 is this 
mutated H5N1 avian flu virus. 
It is airborne, which might 
explain the rapid spread 
around the world.” [C671] 
Psychosocial 
Issues 
 
 
 
 
Expression of 
Fear 
Expression and spread of fear 
among people, including fear of 
infection, sickness, and death 
“… Indigenous tribes are 
closing off their reserves to 
visitors as they fear the 
disease that is fast spreading 
across South America could 
wipe them out…” [C3884] 
 
“…This virus has caused a lot 
of fear in the lives of many, it 
has also brought about 
different mindset in the heart 
of men. Truly the world is 
coming to an end.” [C7227] 
 
Retrospection 
People recalling past life prior to 
pandemic and wished they got it 
back 
“I miss football. I miss my 
family. I miss my friends. But 
more than all of that, I miss 
human touch!” [C300] 
 
“If you consider yourself and 
how is social distancing going 
for you? I miss walking 
around and reading/writing 
at local coffee shops.” [C3001] 
 
Frustration 
due to life 
disruptions 
Expression of frustrations over 
disruption to everyday life, such 
as consistent homework (for 
schoolers), more household 
chores (for moms), difficulty 
accessing family members or 
loved ones, sporting event 
suspension, postponement of 
planned trips and tours, higher 
food prices, restaurants closure, 
etc. 
“Everyday, I wake up from a 
very normal dream, and 
realize I have to do another 
day in this insane world. All I 
want to do is go see my mom 
and give her a hug, but I 
cannot! I feel so alone. I cry 
every day. I cannot do this 
much longer.” [C2905] 
 
“Day 15 of I only leave my 
house for food and exercise. 
Living in such extremes is 
confusing and disorienting for 
my body. Every time I step 
outside, I become hungry and 
start sweating, preemptively.” 
[C4484] 
 
“Not getting a hair cut in 
February was a terrible idea. I 
am two hair shades away 
from looking like an 
overweight member of BTS” 
[C89] 
 
Work-from-
home 
complaints 
Complaints about working from 
home during pandemic, such as 
distractions/disturbance, 
psychological stress, pain, sleep 
issues, etc. 
“Is anyone else experiencing 
leg and knee pain from 
working from home too much 
or is it just me? If so, how 
have you all dealt with it?...” 
[C824] 
 
“Working from home is an epic 
fail! I am losing it between my 
child, pets, monkey calls, and 
renovations. Wake me when 
this is over.” [C853] 
 
Panic 
shopping 
People stockpiling groceries and 
other essential goods due to 
pandemic 
“This panic buying is 
ridiculous! Heart rending! 
Guess it takes a situation like 
to show how selfish callously 
indifferent we really are 
towards other humans / 
animals. Have a heart 
people!” [C779] 
 
“And yet there is still no 
logical reason for clearing the 
shelves of toilet roll, depriving 
those who are old infirm or in 
poverty from accessing such 
necessities because the self-
serving privileged have 
greedily taken it all away.” 
[C4] 
Social Issues 
 
 
 
 
Wrong 
societal 
attitude 
Blaming people’s wrong attitude 
as causing or fanning the spread 
(such as disobeying instructions 
from governments and 
healthcare professionals, eating 
bats and wild animals, etc.) 
“Cannot believe how 
irresponsible people are being 
in regard public health. We all 
have a duty of care to each 
other, please abide by the 
social distance rules” [C4924] 
 
“...We are only going to die 
from our own arrogance if 
people keep going outside 
gathering, believing they will 
never get it or infect others...” 
[C2557] 
 
Domestic 
violence 
Rise in domestic violence cases 
in homes 
“Of all women murdered with 
a gun in the US, half are killed 
by their intimate partners. 
COVID19 pandemic is causing 
a rise in domestic violence. 
Close the gun stores.” [C56] 
 
“… a police station in China 
received 162 reports of 
domestic violence in February 
compared to 47 for the same 
month in 2019. Advocates 
attribute this rise in cases to 
the lockdown.” [C100] 
 
Harassment 
Harassing and blaming people 
from certain countries, race, or 
religion as responsible for the 
Coronavirus disease 
“… stop being so racist 
against Northeastern state of 
India. We are not Corona. Get 
your damn information right. 
The most affected places with 
is not Northeast. Instead of 
being a racist and criticising 
others, why do not you be 
more careful?” [C1413] 
 
“An Asian American couple in 
Minnesota found a racist note 
taped to their front door 
blaming them for the 
coronavirus” [C921] 
a All comments are included verbatim throughout the paper, including spelling and grammatical mistakes. 
 
 
Table 4. Positive themes, descriptions, and corresponding sample comments 
Theme Category 
Description 
Sample comments 
Gratitude 
Appreciating health workers, 
delivery workers, farmers, pilots, 
security agents, and other 
frontline worker, as well as the 
government, for their active role 
during the pandemic 
“Let us show our appreciation for hard 
work the health care professionals are 
doing to save lives at these thought times.” 
[C37] 
 
“Thank you to all on the Frontline and the 
Key Workers, keep up the amazing work, 
you are doing an amazing job, keep our 
country going. Keep Smiling in challenging 
times” [C156] 
Public awareness 
Raising awareness intimating the 
public about general safety and 
control measures to limit the 
spread of the disease (such as 
good hygiene, social distancing, 
staying at home, face masks, 
healthy eating, etc.), addressing 
misinformation, travel guidelines, 
etc. 
“Practicing good hygiene, like washing your 
hands often, with soap and water, for at 
least 20 seconds, is the best way to prevent 
the spread of Coronavirus...” [C707] 
 
“We can help ourselves by keep practicing 
proper hygiene, assume anyone around us 
could be positive and we must keep 
personal distancing, wear protective gear, 
mask, gloves, etc. Boost our immune 
system by eating healthy food. Search what 
kind of vegetable and fruits is best to 
increase our body's ability to fight the 
virus. Sanitize groceries before bringing 
them inside the house...” [C16] 
 
“If extremely necessary, stay healthy while 
travelling by maintaining personal hygiene, 
cough etiquette and keeping a distance of 
at least one metre from others. Here are 
some travel tips from World Health 
Organization” [C537] 
Cleaner 
Environment 
Evidence of cleaner environment, 
including less pollution and good 
air quality, due to pandemic-
related lockdowns 
“Coronavirus, making Earth healthy again” 
[C588] 
 
“Coronavirus pandemic leading to huge 
drop in air pollution” [C664] 
 
“Remember the time when we used to 
share the post that said, ‘We have only 6 
months to take action and save the 
environment, mend your ways or there is 
no way to save the earth’. Guess what? A 
virus saved the environment better than 
the most evolved beings did.” [C992] 
Evidence of 
recovery from 
disease 
Evidence of people recovering 
from Coronavirus disease with or 
without treatment 
“A 95-year-old, become the oldest woman 
in to recover from the novel coronavirus 
without the need for antiviral treatment 
after her body showed a great reaction to 
the disease, doctors say.” [C214] 
 
“He was referring to the number of 
patients treated in the Baptist Healthcare 
system here. He said the numbers show 
90% of their Coronavirus positive patients 
recover at home.” [C321] 
Homemade 
protective 
equipment 
People’s ingenuity in creating 
essential protective equipment 
(e.g., face masks, face shield, etc.) 
themselves in their homes or 
community 
“When your missus tells you she put 
Vodka in her fairy. How was I supposed to 
know she is trying to make homemade 
hand sanitizer with the washing up 
liquid?” [C9335] 
 
“82 and counting. Eager volunteers all 
over the city are stitching face masks to 
ensure that our community remains 
protected despite the imminent shortage 
of PPEs in this pandemic.” [C129] 
Online learning 
Public engagement in online 
learning, such as schools teaching 
students/pupils online, self-
development by enrolling in 
online courses covering different 
domains, etc. 
“We will all be spending more time at 
home in the next few months due to 
coronavirus. I have already registered 
myself with number of short courses with 
online learning for the subjects that 
interest me. This could be a good time to 
learn something new or sharpen up your 
skills.” [C1648] 
 
“Despite all the news, today is the first day 
back to school for Florida's students 
virtually. Distance learning might be the 
new normal for a while...” [C710] 
Connection with 
family and friends 
Spending time with family, 
friends, and loved ones due to 
pandemic and lockdown 
“Yesterday my mom had a video call with 
her group of friends instead of going out 
for their regular meetup. I am proud of my 
mom. Who said boomers are outdated?” 
[C7151] 
 
“This is not the time to be selfish. This is 
the time to be more present. I did a roll 
call this morning, calling all my friends 
video call, family and those I care about just 
to check on them...” [C2560] 
Entertainment 
People accessing entertaining 
contents online or offline, such as 
watching movies on streaming 
websites, playing games, etc. 
“Stay at Home and Stay Safe. Please share 
me good Amazon Prime or Netflix movies 
and television shows.” [C93] 
 
“Downloading the play station 1 and 
nintendo 64 emulators on my pc. Can get 
any game.” [C399] 
 
“9th grade Colin has returned and will be 
playing grand theft auto for 8 hours 
straight” [C3192] 
Charity 
Provision of relief packages 
(including donations, gifts, and 
fundraising) for individuals, 
businesses, and hospitals to ease 
financial burden caused by the 
pandemic 
“Kicking off NeighborsHelpingNeighbors 
here in RI with the RhodeIsland Hospitality 
Relief Fund - a fund aiming to help 
industry members directly affected by 
COVID19.” [C3623] 
 
“The 2 trillion emergency relief package 
now before the House provides the 
following: 1,200 checks for those earning 
less than 75k, plus 500 per child, 
unemployment benefits for 39 weeks up 
from 26, unemployment benefits rise by 
600/week for 4 months” [C10913] 
 
“Zlatan Ibrahimovic has created a 
fundraiser to gather 1m to help hospitals 
in Italy working to tackle the coronavirus. 
The striker has donated €100,000 to get 
the fund started.” [C24] 
Advocacy of 
increased testing 
Advocacy of increased testing as 
a means of curbing spread by 
detecting infected people and 
isolating them quickly 
“Studies in Iceland show that half of 
carriers show no symptoms. Having 
widespread test allows them to isolate 
those with the virus, and thus, the virus 
itself. Test, test, test.” [C1333] 
 
“US surpassing all countries in number of 
patients. Is it simply because they are now 
testing at a faster rate even on slightest 
suspicion? Yes, one of the ways to stop this 
pandemic is Testing, Testing and Testing as 
recommended by WHO” [C6363] 
Grassroots support 
Extending support to people at 
the local or community level 
during the pandemic 
“The amazing QueerCare are offering 
support to local mutual aid groups. They 
have trained volunteers and are already in 
contact with people who will need support 
over the weeks and months to come...” 
[C2839] 
 
“My self, and some other good citizens 
residing in Lagos bought 150 pieces of 
pocket hand Sanitizers to distribute to 
people who cannot afford it or have 
knowledge of what is all about and in 
same process to tell them how to stay safe. 
That is our own giveaway.” [C773] 
Access to 
necessary tools 
Access to tracking or 
communication tools/features 
for information dissemination or 
remote communication during 
pandemic and lockdown 
“This is the most stunning visualization of 
how spread around the world. A 
mesmerizing and terrifying display of 
globalization and virus spread.” [C6625] 
 
“I would like to personally thank for the 
private chat function during Zoom video 
meetings.” [C2244] 
 
“This tool is useful in identifying those 
who are medically more at risk of 
suffering complications from COVID19 ...” 
[C9233] 
Spiritual support 
Offering prayer of recovery for 
those with pandemic-related 
health conditions and those at 
risk, as well as a show of hope in 
challenging times 
“I pray for everyone diagnose of COVID19 
swift and complete recovery in Jesus name. 
Dear Lord, heal the world. Take away and 
give everyone good health.” [C9230] 
 
“Let’s pray for all African communities who 
live in hostels, huts, rural areas with no 
connectivity. No information. Innocents 
but will also be affected by the 
CoronaVirus” [C2104] 
 
“...those who have relationship with God 
are less likely to become depressed than 
those who do not. It is because their 
confidence and hope is in Him so, let us 
trust God amid the pandemic.” [C1349] 
Solidarity for 
frontliners 
Public call for support and 
protection of frontliners, such as 
health workers, delivery workers, 
etc. 
“What is New York City doing to protect 
the workers at Amazon fulfillment center? 
The virus is spreading quickly among the 
employees…” [C3332] 
 
“While the news of is getting more urgent 
by the hour, it is great to know that during 
a turbulent time some corporations 
showed their support by increasing the 
minute wage for frontline workers, hiring 
100s of people to assist with increased 
demand, helping unite.” [C4439] 
Development of 
curative solutions 
or treatments 
Ongoing efforts by health 
researchers to develop vaccines 
or drugs to cure or treat the 
Coronavirus disease 
“There is a bunch of solutions being 
researched from I guess infusions to drugs 
to slow virus reproduction, to vaccines. 
None will be ready until a year or two. 
Clinical studies take time and that is how 
we do medical science safely.” [C5759] 
 
“Coronavirus vaccine clinical trial starts 
Monday, U.S. official says…But officials still 
say it will take a year to 18 months to fully 
validate any potential vaccine.” [C2034] 
Physical activity 
Efforts made by people to stay 
active and fit, as well as physical 
activity suggestions, during 
lockdown or isolation 
“I know it is a bad situation but damn I am 
improving my fitness during this 
lockdown” [C6335] 
 
“Just finished our fitness session via skype 
with friends. I live in Barcelona, lost track 
of how many days since I went outside, we 
have to keep the body moving though” 
[C9430] 
 
“Get active every day with the kids or by 
yourself! GoNoodle is here to help!...” 
[C9364] 
Encouragement 
(1) Encouraging people to stay 
calm as they cope with the 
pandemic situation, (2) 
Encouraging people to view the 
pandemic from a positive 
standpoint and stay productive 
amidst the challenges, (3) 
Encouraging people to help 
others in need and not panic buy, 
and (4) Encouraging people to 
obey lockdown rules, as well as 
guidelines released by 
governments and health 
professionals 
“Let us all stay calm. Give the authorities 
time to attend to and address public 
concerns…” [C3] 
 
“Yes, we can. If we stay calm and respect 
the rules, together we will defeat the 
enemy.” [C38] 
 
“Stay calm and help each other. Be careful. 
Do not panic buy, and never give up!” 
[C164] 
 
“We have done it before and can do it now. 
See the positive possibilities. Redirect the 
substantial energy of our frustration and 
turn it into positive, effective, unstoppable 
determination for our safe and healthy 
future” [C2273] 
Support for remote 
working 
People’s support for the work-
from-home measure, including 
adapting/coping with the 
challenges it brings 
“Working from home with the children of 
school can be challenging. We have taken a 
look at some of the ways you can help 
structure your day and stay on top of 
working from home with our schools 
closed.” [C148] 
 
“Working from home amid Coronavirus 
pandemic was amazing at least today. 
Came up with some amazing designs…We 
are coming up with our first property in 
June. Already sold out” [C53] 
Innovative 
research 
Global research efforts to create 
innovative products to address 
the pandemic, including 
developing interventions (such as 
digital or technological 
interventions) that help people 
socially, physically, emotionally 
or psychologically, as well as 
“Doctors and scientists...have designed an 
application to help the public monitor their 
symptoms and the spread of the virus in 
real-time with the contributing to their 
own vital research” [C96] 
 
“...Well, it is a huge scientific discovery! 
Scientists want to use artificial intelligence 
improve their overall health and 
wellness 
technology for a quicker and cheaper 
COVID-19 screening...” [C197] 
 
“The COVID19 Global Hackathon is an 
opportunity for developers to build 
software solutions that drive social impact, 
with the aim of tackling some of the 
challenges related to the current 
coronavirus pandemic...” [C619] 
 
Traditional remedy 
Some suggestions regarding the 
natural or traditional means of 
protecting the body from 
contracting the disease  
“Gargling vitamin c, vinegar, warm water, 
and a little bit of baking soda every 20 
minutes. After 5 days, she tested negative. 
If you or anyone you know starts getting 
symptoms, this can help! Catch it early 
before it gets to your lungs!” [C803] 
 
“…I am sure I have Covid_19. I believe the 
natural healing helped my daughter but 
suppressed my symptoms...” [C2777] 
Discussion 
Principal Results 
In this paper, we analyzed social media comments to uncover insights regarding 
people’s opinions and perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic using context-
aware NLP approach. Our empirical findings revealed negative and positive themes 
(see Tables 3 and 4) representing negative and positive impact of COVID-19 
pandemic and coping mechanisms on the world population. We discussed the 
implications of the negative themes in this section and then recommend 
interventions that can help tackle these issues based on the positive themes and 
other remedial ideas rooted in research. 
Negative issues surrounding COVID-19 Pandemic 
Table 3 shows the negative themes grouped under health-related issues, 
psychosocial issues, and social issues from our results. The health-related issues 
include health concerns, increased mortality, struggling health systems, fitness issues, 
nature of disease, rising number of cases, and comparison with other diseases or 
incidents. Psychosocial issues are expression of fear, panic shopping, retrospection, 
work-from-home issues, and frustration due to life disruptions. Social issues are 
wrong societal attitude, domestic violence, and harassment. 
 
Health-related issues 
Evidence shows a rapid increase in the number of COVID-19 cases and a high case-
fatality rate of 7.2% [68]. In addition, substantial number of infected patients had 
severe pneumonia or were critically ill [68]. Another evidence revealed the mental 
health issues experienced by people and health professionals directly impacted by 
COVID-19 pandemic [69], as well as the global healthcare systems’ inability to deal 
with the outbreak [70]. The themes under this category are discussed in the 
following subsections. They align with existing research and uncovered additional 
insights with respect to the health-related issues caused by COVID-19 and witnessed 
by people globally. 
Health concerns 
Based on our findings, people experienced various mental health issues (such as 
anxiety, depression, stress, obsessive compulsive disorder, etc.) during the 
pandemic. This is possibly due to the length of time spent staying at home (which 
may be traumatic for some people while causing loneliness for others), worrying 
about being infected with the disease and difficult living conditions, as well as guilt 
on the part of healthcare workers who feel responsible for being unable to save 
their patients from death. Research confirms that worry is associated with anxiety 
and depression [71]. Cases of mental health disorders linked to COVID-19 have also 
been reported [72]. Furthermore, people expressed other concerns like excessive 
drinking, migraine, chest pain, mild to severe fatigue, nasal mucosal ulcers, sleep 
disorder, and others. Sample comments are shown below: 
 
“Cannot sleep. Mind is racing. Feeling anxious.” [C6648] 
 
“I am so stressed and my anxiety has hit the roof. I am anxious about money 
and how we will cope?” [C238] 
“This coronavirus outbreak is more stressful for the family. Doing my best to 
keep sanitized and safe. But, fear of the invisible killer lingers on, taking a 
mental toll on my mother, wife, son, who are petrified every time I walk out of 
the main door.” [C116] 
 
“The chest pains today is beyond. It kinda have crawled up a bit and I feel like 
I put my hand on my heart from time to time. Very tired today. But weirdly 
still no fever. But I am cold and I feel sick.” [C12293] 
 
“We have only been in for 3 weeks we are already feeling anxiety, depression 
severe, so we decided to think of some ways we can keep ourselves each 
other in good spirits.” [C8263] 
Increased Mortality 
People attested to an increase in death rates in many countries across different 
continents including North America, Europe, Asia, Middle East, and Australia, as 
shown in the sample comments below. Many countries, especially those in Africa, 
started reporting deaths from COVID-19 (see [C1264]). Our findings also revealed 
people of varying demographics died from the disease, including teenagers, adults, 
and older adults, as well as those with or without underlying health conditions (see 
[C8837] and [C940]). 
 
“This is why America leads the world in the death toll already, and the pace 
still is not showing any signs of slackening.” [C3399] 
 
“UK coronavirus death rate DOUBLES as 381 die in 24 hours and boy, 13, with 
no health problems becomes youngest victim” [C8837] 
 
“Turkish health minister shares latest coronavirus data: 16 more people have 
died, bringing death toll to 108” [C9000] 
 
“Kenya has recorded the first death. According to Health Cabinet 
Secretary,...the 66 years old man died on 26th in the afternoon at the 
AghaKhan hospital intensive care unit.” [C1264] 
 
“100 more UK deaths in last 24h alone. These are not all elderly co-morbid 
people. Among these are the young, and the fit...” [C940] 
Struggling health systems 
Health systems around the world are struggling to cope with the surge in the 
number of COVID-19 patients, and in most cases are unable to admit patients due to 
limited resources [73]. Research has shown that healthcare burden due to COVID-19 
is associated with the increase in mortality rate [74]. As revealed in the sample 
comments below, our findings corroborated evidence of overstretched global health 
systems during this pandemic. 
 
“Hospitals turning away coronavirus patients in California. EMTALA being 
used to set up tents outside of hospital ER, then dumping patients without 
treatment or testing. I obtained recordings of standard hospital practice of 
rejecting Covid19 patients.” [C4949] 
 
“These are not just numbers. These are people and families. These lives can 
be saved if the chunk of $2.2 Trillion are not used for bailing out corporations 
and used to fix the broken US Health System.” [C3000] 
Fitness issues 
Evidence argues the prevalence of physical inactivity globally due to nationwide 
quarantine or lockdown [75]. This is confirmed in our findings which show that 
people have trouble staying fit due to inability to control eating habits or urges 
while at home, as well as personal dislike for indoor-only workouts, as shown in the 
comments below. Physical inactivity has been linked to coronary heart disease, 
diabetes, stroke, and mental health issues [76–78] which, in turn, are risk factors for 
mortality in COVID-19 adult inpatients [79]. 
 
“…severely missing my gym, missing routine, and cannot control my eating 
while at home. Things are getting bad.” [C9002] 
 
“During this shelter in place, I was gonna eat healthy and kill some workouts. 
But instead I've been Guy Fieri'ing around the kitchen sampling all my 
quarantine food every 2 hours. At this point, which will get me first - 
coronavirus or a coronary?” 
Nature of disease 
People expressed their opinion about the nature of COVID-19 based on their 
experiences and information available to them. As shown in the sample comments 
below, people with underlying health conditions (e.g., diabetes, heart disease) are at 
higher risk of developing severe complications from the disease. In addition, the 
asymptotic attribute of COVID-19 is also discussed, and the possibility of the virus to 
infect some critical immune cells that may lead to the failure of sensitive organs like 
the lungs. People also perceived the disease as racial- or nationality-independent 
but seems to pose more risk to men than women. The disease is also seen as highly 
contagious and shows symptoms such as cough, fever, fatigue, loss of smell, muscle 
aches, and respiratory-related symptoms (e.g., shortness of breath). These findings 
align with clinical evidence regarding COVID-19 [80–85]. 
 
“Some WTC Health Program members with certain health conditions...may be 
at a higher risk of serious illness from COVID19” [C3620] 
 
“…Majority do not show symptoms while spreading Covid_19” [C10033] 
 
“...If the coronavirus infects some of the immune cells then there is a cellular 
catastrophe and organs like lungs are gone within hours.” [C9200] 
 
“Coronavirus is a disease that pays no attention to borders, race or nationality. 
However, it appears COVID-19 does pose a noticeably bigger threat to men 
than it does to women.” [C1902] 
 
“This is absolutely true. If you have a combination of cough, fever, problems 
smelling, weakness, muscle aches or shortness of breath, assume you have 
covid19. Don't bother getting tested. I know of many docs who don't test 
anymore if patient has obvious symptoms.” [C2729] 
Rising number of cases 
Our findings show that more people are getting infected with COVID-19 in many 
parts of the world, as shown in the sample comments below. Evidence confirms 
increasing number of COVID-19 cases in North America [86,87], Europe [88], as well 
as a growing concern for vulnerable continents such as Africa [89]. 
 
“There is rapid increase in cases of COVID19 in India...I request PM to extend 
the lockdown to avoid community spread.” [C1325] 
 
“Despite infection cases increasing at exponential rate doubling every 3 days, 
Trump pushes workers to risk their lives for economy...” [C6522] 
Comparison with other diseases or incidents 
Our findings reveal that people compare COVID-19 with other diseases such as flu 
(e.g., Spanish flu and H1N1 swine flu) and SARS, as well as with more extreme 
incidents such as war. However, while some people tend to downplay the severity of 
COVID-19 (see [C647]), others think it is dangerous or frightening (see [C922] and 
[C45]). Research shows that COVID-19 has a higher transmissibility rate than SARS 
[90] and killed more people than SARS and MERS combined [91], thereby making it 
a highly contagious and lethal disease. 
 
“It is just another strain of flu. People with weak and have health problem it 
will affect different than people with stronger and not so much health 
problems. Media is making it sound worse...” [C647] 
 
“I was not at all concerned about swine flu, I was not at all concerned about 
Ebola, I was not at all concerned about Zika virus, but this virus I was 
concerned about going all the way back to January. If I had enough information 
to be concerned about this virus, then so did they. We are a month behind on 
dealing with this virus and there are no excuses, even a lay person like myself 
knew all the way back in January that this was bigger than anything that has 
come before it in my lifetime...” [C922] 
 
“This is a war. We need to protect ourselves and minimize unnecessary contact 
to avoid another Spanish flu that killed 50 million people...” [C45] 
 
Psychosocial issues 
Expression of Fear and Panic shopping 
Based on our findings, people are fearful or scared about COVID-19 and while many 
expressed genuine fear (including those who had lost loved ones to the disease, 
contracted the disease, or had an infected family member), others attributed it to 
fear mongering that is further amplified by the media. As a result of this fear, many 
people engage in panic buying to stockpile essential items so they can stay 
indoors/limit movements for some days or weeks to keep themselves and their 
families safe. Below are sample comments: 
 
“Very frightening when people who have travelled think that covid cannot 
affect them. Such foolish behaviour and thoughts putting all of us at risk. 
Those who travelled please STOP moving around and be at home.” [C8887] 
 
“Fear mongering through projecting number of possible deaths. The media is 
disgusting.”  [C5559] 
 
“Everyone who is panic shopping is driving my family and me nuts...Everyone 
in our area is panic-buying groceries. We can't get noodles, rice, or really any 
real staple foods. We hardly have any food already. I'm kinda scared.” [C2937] 
 
Work-from-home complaints 
Furthermore, the pandemic triggered work-from-home (or remote work) measure 
to promote continuity of businesses during lockdown [92], but this may have 
negative implications on people’s lifestyle and wellbeing. For example, people found 
consistently working from home exhausting, boring, and distracting with kids at 
home. In addition, people living in countries without stable electricity and strong 
internet found it difficult and more costly to work from home, as they have to fuel 
their generators and pay more for considerably good internet connectivity. Evidence 
shows that people work longer hours at home than onsite due to difficulty in 
maintaining clear delineation between work and non-work domains [93], thereby 
leading to work-family conflict and strain [94]. Below are sample comments: 
 
“Do you find working from home exhausting? You are not alone. Why is that 
and how can you combat it?” [C11224] 
 
“This thing of working from home annoys. Waking up at 4 am to have things 
done before the Boy wakes up. Otherwise you will spend better part of the 
day watching cartoons with no work done” [C9902] 
 
“It is very clear from today's program how the government is not organized 
or coordinated with this issue. How should one work from home with 
constant power cuts and bad internet?” [C8855] 
 
Frustration due to life disruptions and Retrospection 
Finally, people are generally frustrated about life disruptions caused by COVID-19 
(which is the top issue based on our empirical findings as shown in Figure 8). Based 
on our findings, this frustration is mostly due to decreased leisure and interaction 
with friends/family, authorities’ actions/inactions, as well as uncertainty of 
upcoming situation which leads to cognitive dissonance [95], insecurity, and mental 
discomfort [96]. People expressed their frustrations using words reflecting anger 
and unhappiness/sadness, as shown in the sample comments below. Research 
shows that positive emotions (e.g., happiness) and life satisfaction decreased during 
COVID-19 pandemic [97]. Therefore, it is unsurprising that people missed (and 
crave for) their pre-pandemic lives, in retrospection (see [C377]). 
 
“I am getting more and more angry with this current situation we are in. My 
favourite show has had to postpone its final episode, after already 
postponing series 11...” [C7776] 
 
“We are literally living in a time when arbitrary shit is more important than 
health, wellness and preservation of life. Entitlement. Ignorance. Selfishness. 
An untouchable mentality. Humanity at its absolute worst. April's going to be 
a painful month to live through.” [C1228] 
 
“I cannot wait until this whole thing is OVER. I miss doing nails. I miss being in 
my element and doing the creative things I enjoy. I have no practice hand; I 
have no work; I feel lost. I was just licensed in Jan!” [C377] 
 
Social issues 
Wrong societal attitude 
Our findings revealed disapproval and concerns about people’s defiance of 
precautionary measures or guidelines (such as social distancing and travel 
guidelines) to curb the spread of COVID-19 (see [C7218] and [C1444] below), as 
well as some people’s habit of eating animals assumed to be carriers of viruses (see 
[C4013]). Research highlights certain factors responsible for reduced compliance 
with public health guidelines, such as poverty, economic dislocation, lack of 
compensation, and mistrust of science [98–100]. 
 
“The only good thing about Coronavirus is that it will cull the stupid people 
from amongst us - those that do not take it seriously and continue to gather in 
public, those that go overseas to attend weddings and other events when they 
know the risk...” [C7218] 
 
“The public response to this crisis in the UK has been absolutely pathetic. 
Showing we are an entitled society who cannot handle being told what to do. 
Embarrassing that people cannot follow simple instruction.” [C1444] 
 
“Why is that someone who knows how dangerous eating these animals are 
and still go right ahead and eat. Is it that they do not have any sense or is it 
just irresponsible stupid people to do this then what are they crazy or just 
insane?” [C4013] 
 
Domestic Violence 
Furthermore, increase in domestic violence incidents was reported as a result of the 
COVID-19-related lockdown, as shown in the comments below. Evidence already 
confirms the link between COVID-19 and the rising cases of domestic violence 
globally [101–105]. 
 
“Cases of domestic violence in the USA has skyrocketed since the CoronaVirus 
forced couples to stay home together for 14 days or more.” [C9900] 
 
“While domestic violence across France increased by 32% in one week, in Paris 
it rose by as much as 36%.” [C13720] 
 
“What worries me more than the coronavirus, is the safety and welfare of 
those stuck at home with their abusers, the children witnessing domestic 
violence and the lonely relying on company. Staying home is not always safer.” 
[C7910] 
Harassment 
Our findings also uncovered undue harassment of people from certain culture, race, 
or religious background while accusing them of spreading COVID-19 disease. 
Sample comments below reveal public intimidation and racist attack towards 
Chinese/Asians and certain Indian tribes. This aligns with evidence of widespread 
anti-Chinese and anti-Asian xenophobic or racist attacks, especially in the United 
States, both physically and on social media [106–111]. 
 
“...This supermarket refuses to sell the food to the CHINESE! We should stop 
going to this supermarket! We strongly against RACISM towards Chinese 
people abroad! THIS MUST STOP!” [C2008] 
 
“Coronavirus has only taught me one thing; some people are so racist, 
especially on this platform. The amount of hate, racist comments and abuse I 
am seeing Chinese/Asian people get is painful.” [C5000] 
 
“Indians got racism in their blood, breath, and beyond. A Mizo girl faced racism 
in Pune as a woman kept covering a face whenever the Mizo girl passed by. A 
friend Naga from maternal side in Mumbai, got called corona virus in the 
middle of an empty road.” [C6660] 
 
Recommended interventions for addressing the negative issues 
As lockdown and physical distancing persists, people with health concerns should 
be able to receive medical attention without visiting a hospital. Considering the 
proliferation of smartphones and the current wave of global digitization, digital 
interventions using mobile, artificial intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT), and 
virtual reality technologies have been shown to be effective for delivering remote 
healthcare (or telehealth) to patients [112–117]. This is based on our findings under 
the innovative research positive theme (see Table 4) which revealed global research 
efforts to create digital interventions using emerging technologies to address the 
health crisis caused by COVID-19. For example, mobile apps that detect mental 
health issues (e.g., depression and anxiety) based on phone sensors (or wearable 
sensors) data and self-reports using machine learning/deep learning models, and 
then guide users through therapeutic procedures or treatments will be useful tools 
during and after the pandemic. In addition, these apps should allow users to book 
appointment with doctors/clinicians/therapists and access remote medical advice, 
diagnosis, and treatments when necessary.  
 
Also, data-driven surveillance systems based on artificial intelligence that predict 
location of next COVID-19 outbreak can enhance the effectiveness of containment 
efforts, thereby slowing the spread of the disease and reducing case-fatality rate. 
Furthermore, the development of curative solutions or treatments (see Table 4), can 
be accelerated by leveraging machine learning/deep learning algorithms. For 
example, deep learning models can be used to predict chemical compounds that can 
halt viral replication, as well as to suggest drugs that can be effective against the 
virus.  
 
To address fitness issues during lockdown, physical activity (which is one of the 
positive themes in our results) programs or sessions with personalized feedback 
delivered through mobile apps will be helpful. Research has shown that 
smartphone-based health programs yield significant weight loss and increase 
physical activity [118]. There is also an urgent need to strengthen the global 
healthcare systems to cope with current and future pandemics through public and 
private investments in the health sector on an ongoing basis, such as provision of 
public health infrastructure that is robust and adequate for the target population 
and easily accessible, as well as the provision of health insurance for everyone 
irrespective of financial status. 
 
Public awareness (which emerged as the top positive theme in our findings) is also 
crucial for addressing negative issues arising from COVID-19 by providing timely 
and accurate information to people, which can be lifesaving. To reach wider 
audience in an efficient manner and with less cost, public awareness can be 
delivered through mobile technologies such as mobile-driven and voice-enabled 
conversational AI agents (or chatbots) with access to evidence-based and clinically 
validated resources (e.g., precautionary or safety measures approved by public 
health agencies and organizations, as well as government-approved policies or 
guidelines) can deliver accurate information regarding COVID-19 to people in their 
own native language (and in an interactive fashion) through their smartphones. 
These chatbots can also be made to route difficult questions to health experts for 
real-time feedback within the same chat session. This will help to improve people’s 
understanding of the disease, including how it differs from other infectious diseases, 
and how to protect themselves and their families from getting infected with COVID-
19. In addition, people will be empowered with information required to effectively 
respond to fear mongering, domestic violence, and harassment. Evidence already 
shows the deployment of multilingual chatbot for public health awareness on 
coronavirus symptoms, diagnosis, and precautionary measures [119]. Furthermore, 
chatbots can also respond to emergencies by contacting appropriate security 
agencies and emergency response teams on behalf of the users. Moreover, chatbots 
can deliver evidence-based therapeutic interventions to people, while coordinating 
with specialists behind the scenes where necessary.  
 
For people with non-smartphone devices, public health agencies can partner with 
telecommunication companies to deliver COVID-19-related information directly to 
their phones as text messages at regular intervals using the short messaging service 
(SMS). Social media is another platform through which evidence-based information 
can be shared with the public but may be overshadowed by fake news or false 
information which is mostly shared on social media [120]. Nevertheless, official 
COVID-19-related channels managed by (or in conjunction with) reputable 
international health organizations (e.g., World Health Organization) or local health 
authorities within the social media platforms, many of which have already been 
deployed, provide accurate information/updates about COVID-19 cases, fatality 
rates, and safety measures/guidelines [121,122]. In addition, people receive 
location-based updates on these channels, including emergency alerts, in a timely 
and effective manner. 
 
Finally, based on our findings (see Table 4), connectedness with family and friends, 
encouragement, spiritual support, and charity can help to ease people’s frustrations, 
anxiety, and trauma (due to life disruptions caused by the pandemic) by addressing 
their emotional, physical, and spiritual needs. Evidence shows that psychological 
first aid and spiritual care can promote a sense of safety, calmness, self- and 
collective-efficacy, connectedness, and hope, as well as help people confront and 
overcome fear [123]. Therefore, people should endeavour to frequently 
communicate and follow up with loved ones (through direct voice/video calls or 
using social media), encourage others in distress to stay calm and remain positive, 
identify people’s immediate needs and offer necessary assistance, help people find 
hope and meaning, and ensure safety and comfort of vulnerable population.  
 
Mobile technology can play a key role in facilitating easy access to relief packages. 
For instance, mobile apps can be deployed with geolocation and multilingual 
features to help people locate the nearest food bank and charity organizations 
offering assistance in their geographical area. In addition, charity organizations can 
effectively mobilize and deliver relief items to more people, including individuals 
that are indisposed, based on data collected through these apps. Also, the elderly, 
the sick, and those in self-isolation can indicate their condition while requesting for 
relief so that their items can be delivered to their doorstep instead of picking it up. 
These apps can further integrate with other local and international charity 
organizations to widen the coverage of relief efforts. Recruitment of volunteers can 
also take place through these apps. The usage data collected can be further analyzed 
in real-time and used to predict the communities that are in dire need of assistance 
using machine learning or deep learning techniques. 
Conclusions 
In this paper, we explored the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on people globally 
using social media data. We analyzed over 1 million comments obtained from six 
social media platforms using a seven-stage context-aware Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) approach to extract candidate themes or keyphrases which we 
further categorized into broader themes using thematic analysis. Our results 
revealed 34 negative themes, out of which 15 are health-related issues, psychosocial 
issues, and social issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic from the public 
perspective. Top health-related issues include increased mortality, comparison with 
other diseases or incidents, nature of disease, and health concerns, while top 
psychosocial issues include frustrations due to life disruptions, panic shopping, and 
expression of fear. Top social issues include harassment and domestic violence. 
Besides the negative themes, 20 positive themes emerged from our results. Some of 
the positive themes include public awareness, encouragement, gratitude, cleaner 
environment, online learning, charity, spiritual support, and innovative research. We 
reflected on our findings and recommend interventions that can help address the 
health, psychosocial, and social issues based on the positive themes and other 
remedial ideas rooted in research.  
 
Digital interventions using emerging technologies such as mobile apps, artificial 
intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT), and virtual reality will play a major role in 
delivering remote healthcare (i.e., telemedicine or telehealth) to people in the 
comfort of their homes, including empowering them to self-manage their health and 
wellness. This will help to curb the spread of COVID-19 and future infectious 
diseases since many people will stay away from hospitals (or clinics) to book 
appointments or see doctors (or other healthcare professionals) unless it is 
absolutely necessary to visit, thereby keeping health workers and patients safe. 
These technologies are also useful in providing timely and accurate information 
about COVID-19 symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, precautionary/safety measures 
and guidelines, and other relevant information to target audience worldwide. 
Finally, digital interventions and other interventions discussed in this paper can 
help address the emotional, physical, and spiritual needs of people who are 
traumatized or frustrated by the disruptions caused by the pandemic. They also 
inform governments, health professionals and agencies, and institutions on how to 
react to the current COVID-19 pandemic, as well as future pandemics. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank NSERC Discovery Grant for funding this research. 
They also thank the DeepSense team at Dalhousie University, as well as Compute 
Canada, for providing the computing infrastructure used to perform our research 
experiments. 
Authors’ Contributions 
OO collected data, conducted the experiments, analyzed the results, and wrote the 
manuscript. CN, DM, BS, and AA collected data and categorized the themes, and 
reviewed the manuscript. RO is the research supervisor and reviewed the 
manuscript. FAO is a data analyst and researcher, and reviewed the manuscript. SM 
is a Psychiatry and Epidemiology researcher, and reviewed the manuscript. CC is a 
clinical psychologist and reviewed the manuscript. 
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared 
Abbreviations 
NLP: natural language processing 
POS: part of speech 
References 
1.  
Morse SS. Factors in the Emergence of Infectious Diseases. Plagues Polit 
Palgrave Macmillan UK; 2001. p. 8–26. [doi: 10.1057/9780230524248_2] 
2.  
Kimberlin DW. Red Book: 2018-2021 report of the committee on infectious 
diseases. Red B 2018-2021 Rep Comm Infect Dis American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2018;(Ed.31).  
3.  
Morens DM, Folkers GK, Fauci AS. The challenge of emerging and re-emerging 
infectious diseases. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2004. p. 242–249. 
PMID:15241422 
4.  
Jilani TN, Siddiqui AH. H1N1 Influenza (Swine Flu) [Internet]. StatPearls. 
StatPearls Publishing; 2018 [cited 2020 May 16]. PMID:30020613 
5.  
Dawood FS, Iuliano AD, Reed C, Meltzer MI, Shay DK, Cheng PY, 
Bandaranayake D, Breiman RF, Brooks WA, Buchy P, Feikin DR, Fowler KB, 
Gordon A, Hien NT, Horby P, Huang QS, Katz MA, Krishnan A, Lal R, 
Montgomery JM, Mølbak K, Pebody R, Presanis AM, Razuri H, Steens A, Tinoco 
YO, Wallinga J, Yu H, Vong S, Bresee J, Widdowson MA. Estimated global 
mortality associated with the first 12 months of 2009 pandemic influenza A 
H1N1 virus circulation: A modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis Elsevier; 2012 
Sep 1;12(9):687–695. [doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70121-4] 
6.  
World Health Organization. HIV/AIDS [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2020 May 16]. 
Available from: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hiv-aids 
7.  
World Health Organization. Ebola virus disease [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 
May 
16]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/ebola-virus-disease 
8.  
Tian H, Liu Y, Li Y, Wu C-H, Chen B, Kraemer MUG, Li B, Cai J, Xu B, Yang Q, 
Wang B, Yang P, Cui Y, Song Y, Zheng P, Wang Q, Bjornstad ON, Yang R, 
Grenfell BT, Pybus OG, Dye C. An investigation of transmission control 
measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science 
(80- ) American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); 2020 
Mar 31;368(6491):eabb6105. PMID:32234804 
9.  
Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, Hu Y, Tao ZW, Tian JH, Pei YY, 
Yuan ML, Zhang YL, Dai FH, Liu Y, Wang QM, Zheng JJ, Xu L, Holmes EC, Zhang 
YZ. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. 
Nature Nature Research; 2020 Mar 12;579(7798):265–269. PMID:32015508 
10.  
Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. COVID-19 Map [Internet]. [cited 
2020 May 16]. Available from: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html 
11.  
Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, Gittleman JL, Daszak P. 
Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature Nature Publishing 
Group; 2008 Feb 21;451(7181):990–993. PMID:18288193 
12.  
Bloom DE, Black S, Rappuoli R. Emerging infectious diseases: A proactive 
approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. National Academy of Sciences; 2017. p. 
4055–4059. [doi: 10.1073/pnas.1701410114] 
13.  
Fan V, Jamison D, Summers L. The Inclusive Cost of Pandemic Influenza Risk. 
Natl Bur Econ Res 2016; [doi: 10.3386/w22137] 
14.  
Barbier G, Liu H. Data Mining in Social Media. Soc Netw Data Anal Springer US; 
2011. p. 327–352. [doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8462-3_12] 
15.  
Kemp S. Digital 2020: Global Digital Overview [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 
May 17]. Available from: https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-
global-digital-overview 
16.  
Robinson P, Turk D, Jilka S, Cella M. Measuring attitudes towards mental 
health using social media: investigating stigma and trivialisation. Soc 
Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol Dr. Dietrich Steinkopff Verlag GmbH and Co. 
KG; 2019 Jan 28;54(1):51–58. [doi: 10.1007/s00127-018-1571-5] 
17.  
Guntuku SC, Buffone A, Jaidka K, Eichstaedt J, Ungar L. Understanding and 
Measuring Psychological Stress using Social Media. Proc 13th Int Conf Web 
Soc Media, ICWSM 2019 [Internet] Association for the Advancement of 
Artificial Intelligence; 2018 [cited 2020 May 17]. p. 214–225. Available from: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07430 
18.  
Golder S, Chiuve S, Weissenbacher D, Klein A, O’Connor K, Bland M, Malin M, 
Bhattacharya 
M, 
Scarazzini 
LJ, 
Gonzalez-Hernandez 
G. 
Pharmacoepidemiologic Evaluation of Birth Defects from Health-Related 
Postings in Social Media During Pregnancy. Drug Saf Springer International 
Publishing; 2019 Mar 7;42(3):389–400. PMID:30284214 
19.  
Rezaallah B, Lewis DJ, Pierce C, Zeilhofer HF, Berg BI. Social media 
surveillance of multiple sclerosis medications used during pregnancy and 
breastfeeding: Content analysis. J Med Internet Res Journal of Medical 
Internet Research; 2019 Aug 7;21(8):e13003. [doi: 10.2196/13003] 
20.  
Blumenthal KG, Topaz M, Zhou L, Harkness T, Sa’adon R, Bar-Bachar O, Long 
AA. Mining social media data to assess the risk of skin and soft tissue 
infections from allergen immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Mosby Inc.; 
2019 Jul 1;144(1):129–134. [doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2019.01.029] 
21.  
Huang Y, Huang D, Nguyen QC. Census Tract Food Tweets and Chronic Disease 
Outcomes in the U.S., 2015–2018. Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet] 
MDPI 
AG; 
2019 
Mar 
18 
[cited 
2020 
May 
17];16(6):975. 
[doi: 
10.3390/ijerph16060975] 
22.  
Oyebode O, Orji R. Detecting Factors Responsible for Diabetes Prevalence in 
Nigeria using Social Media and Machine Learning. 15th Int Conf Netw Serv 
Manag CNSM 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.; 2019. 
[doi: 10.23919/CNSM46954.2019.9012679] 
23.  
Signorini A, Segre AM, Polgreen PM. The Use of Twitter to Track Levels of 
Disease Activity and Public Concern in the U.S. during the Influenza A H1N1 
Pandemic. PLoS One [Internet] 2011 [cited 2020 May 17];6(5):1–10. [doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0019467] 
24.  
Chew C, Eysenbach G. Pandemics in the age of Twitter: Content analysis of 
tweets during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak. PLoS One 2010;5(11). [doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0014118] 
25.  
Zhan Y, Etter J-F, Leischow S, Zeng D. Electronic cigarette usage patterns: a 
case study combining survey and social media data. J Am Med Informatics 
Assoc 
[Internet] 
2019 
[cited 
2020 
May 
17];26(1):9–18. 
[doi: 
10.1093/jamia/ocy140] 
26.  
Hassanpour S, Tomita N, DeLise T, Crosier B, Marsch LA. Identifying substance 
use risk based on deep neural networks and Instagram social media data. 
Neuropsychopharmacology Nature Publishing Group; 2019 Feb 1;44(3):487–
494. [doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-0247-x] 
27.  
Comito C, Forestiero A, Papuzzo G. Exploiting social media to enhance clinical 
decision support. Proc - 2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM Int Conf Web Intell Work WI 
2019 Companion [Internet] New York, New York, USA: Association for 
Computing Machinery, Inc; 2019 [cited 2020 May 17]. p. 244–249. [doi: 
10.1145/3358695.3360899] 
28.  
Huber J, Woods T, Fushi A, Duong MT, Eidelman AS, Zalal AR, Urquhart O, 
Colangelo E, Quinn S, Carrasco-Labra A. Social Media Research Strategy to 
Understand Clinician and Public Perception of Health Care Messages. JDR Clin 
Transl Res [Internet] SAGE Publications Ltd; 2020 Jan 1 [cited 2020 May 
17];5(1):71–81. PMID:31067411 
29.  
Tumasjan. A, Sprenger TO, Sandner. PG, Welpe IM. Predicting Elections with 
Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Political Sentiment. Proc Fourth 
Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media Predict 2010; PMID:16046402 
30.  
Budiharto W, Meiliana M. Prediction and analysis of Indonesia Presidential 
election from Twitter using sentiment analysis. J Big Data SpringerOpen; 2018 
Dec 1;5(1). [doi: 10.1186/s40537-018-0164-1] 
31.  
Tjong E, Sang K, Bos J. Predicting the 2011 Dutch Senate Election Results with 
Twitter. 13th Conf Eur Chapter Assoc Comput Linguist 2012;(53):65–72.  
32.  
Oyebode O, Orji R. Social Media and Sentiment Analysis: The Nigeria 
Presidential Election 2019. 2019 IEEE 10th Annu Inf Technol Electron Mob 
Commun Conf IEMCON 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
Inc.; 2019. p. 140–146. [doi: 10.1109/IEMCON.2019.8936139] 
33.  
Bright J, Hale S, Ganesh B, Bulovsky A, Margetts H, Howard P. Does 
Campaigning on Social Media Make a Difference? Evidence From Candidate 
Use of Twitter During the 2015 and 2017 U.K. Elections. Communic Res 
[Internet] SAGE Publications Inc.; 2019 Sep 11 [cited 2020 May 
17];009365021987239. [doi: 10.1177/0093650219872394] 
34.  
Ma J, Tse YK, Wang X, Zhang M. Examining customer perception and 
behaviour through social media research – An empirical study of the United 
Airlines overbooking crisis. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev Elsevier Ltd; 
2019 Jul 1;127:192–205. [doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2019.05.004] 
35.  
Ibrahim NF, Wang X. Decoding the sentiment dynamics of online retailing 
customers: Time series analysis of social media. Comput Human Behav 
Elsevier Ltd; 2019 Jul 1;96:32–45. [doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.02.004] 
36.  
Archinect. corona virus covid-19 and you | Forum [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr 
2]. Available from: https://archinect.com/forum/thread/150187455/corona-
virus-covid-19-and-you 
37.  
Archinect. COVID - 19 Thread Central | Forum | Archinect [Internet]. [cited 
2020 
Apr 
2]. 
Available 
from: 
https://archinect.com/forum/thread/150188615/covid-19-thread-central 
38.  
Future US Inc. Coronavirus & Epidemiology | Live Science Forums [Internet]. 
[cited 
2020 
Apr 
2]. 
Available 
from: 
https://forums.livescience.com/forums/coronavirus-epidemiology.42/ 
39.  
Nlife Media. Corona Virus Panic/Discussion Thread - General Discussion 
Forum 
[Internet]. 
[cited 
2020 
Apr 
2]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pushsquare.com/forums/ps_general_discussion/corona_virus_
panicdiscussion_thread 
40.  
Abdalla M, Abdalla M, Hirst G, Rudzicz F. Exploring the Privacy-Preserving 
Properties of Word Embeddings: Algorithmic Validation Study. J Med Internet 
Res [Internet] Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2020 Jul 15 [cited 2020 
Jul 20];22(7):e18055. [doi: 10.2196/18055] 
41.  
Bekhuis T, Kreinacke M, Spallek H, Song M, O’Donnell JA. Using natural 
language processing to enable in-depth analysis of clinical messages posted to 
an Internet mailing list: a feasibility study. J Med Internet Res [Internet] 
Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2011 Nov 23 [cited 2020 Jul 
20];13(4):e98. PMID:22112583 
42.  
Grajales FJ, Sheps S, Ho K, Novak-Lauscher H, Eysenbach G. Social media: A 
review and tutorial of applications in medicine and health care. J Med Internet 
Res [Internet] Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2014 Feb 11 [cited 2020 
Jul 20];16(2):1–68. PMID:24518354 
43.  
Conway M, Hu M, Chapman WW. Recent Advances in Using Natural Language 
Processing to Address Public Health Research Questions Using Social Media 
and ConsumerGenerated Data. Yearb Med Inform [Internet] NLM (Medline); 
2019 Aug 1 [cited 2020 Jun 24];28(1):208–217. [doi: 10.1055/s-0039-
1677918] 
44.  
Park A, Conway M. Tracking Health Related Discussions on Reddit for Public 
Health Applications. AMIA . Annu Symp proceedings AMIA Symp [Internet] 
NLM (Medline); 2017 [cited 2020 Jun 24];2017:1362–1371. PMID:29854205 
45.  
Jelodar H, Wang Y, Orji R, Huang H. Deep Sentiment Classification and Topic 
Discovery on Novel Coronavirus or COVID-19 Online Discussions: NLP Using 
LSTM Recurrent Neural Network Approach. IEEE J Biomed Heal Informatics 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); 2020 Jun 9;1–1. [doi: 
10.1109/jbhi.2020.3001216] 
46.  
Nobles AL, Dreisbach CN, Keim-Malpass J, Barnes LE. “Is This an STD? Please 
Help!’’’ Online Information Seeking for Sexually Transmitted Diseases on 
Reddit” [Internet]. Twelfth Int AAAI Conf Web Soc Media. 2018 Jun. Available 
from: https://www.cdc.gov/std/hiv/default.htm. 
47.  
Paul MJ, Dredze M. You Are What You Tweet: Analyzing Twitter for Public 
Health [Internet]. Fifth Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media. 2011 Jul. Available 
from: www.aaai.org 
48.  
McNeill A, Harris PR, Briggs P. Twitter Influence on UK Vaccination and 
Antiviral Uptake during the 2009 H1N1 Pandemic. Front Public Heal 
[Internet] Frontiers Media SA; 2016 Feb 22 [cited 2020 Jun 24];4:26. [doi: 
10.3389/fpubh.2016.00026] 
49.  
Oyebode O, Alqahtani F, Orji R. Using Machine Learning and Thematic 
Analysis Methods to Evaluate Mental Health Apps Based on User Reviews. 
IEEE Access Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); 2020 Jun 
12;1–1. [doi: 10.1109/access.2020.3002176] 
50.  
Dave K, Varma V. Pattern based keyword extraction for Contextual 
Advertising. Int Conf Inf Knowl Manag Proc [Internet] New York, New York, 
USA: ACM Press; 2010 [cited 2020 Jun 24]. p. 1885–1888. [doi: 
10.1145/1871437.1871754] 
51.  
Ahmed W, Bath PA, Sbaffi L, Demartini G. Novel insights into views towards 
H1N1 during the 2009 Pandemic: a thematic analysis of Twitter data. Heal Inf 
Libr J [Internet] Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2019 Mar 1 [cited 2020 Jun 
24];36(1):60–72. [doi: 10.1111/hir.12247] 
52.  
Twitter Inc. Consuming streaming data [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 20]. 
Available from: https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/tutorials/consuming-
streaming-data 
53.  
Google Inc. YouTube Data API [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 20]. Available from: 
https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3 
54.  
Slang Words Dictionary [Internet]. [cited 2019 Jun 19]. Available from: 
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sifei/Dictionary-for-Sentiment-
Analysis/master/slang/acrynom.csv 
55.  
Slang Lookup Table [Internet]. [cited 2019 Jun 19]. Available from: 
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/felipebravom/StaticTwitterSent/master
/extra/SentiStrength/SlangLookupTable.txt 
56.  
Liu B. Sentence Subjectivity and Sentiment Classification. Sentim Anal Min 
Opin Sentim Emot 2015. p. 70–88.  
57.  
Nelson G. English: An Essential Grammar [Internet]. Taylor & Francis; 2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://books.google.ca/books?id=xTiDDwAAQBAJISBN:9781351122733 
58.  
Santorini B. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the penn treebank project 
(3rd revision). Tech Reports 1990;570.  
59.  
Asmuth JA, Gentner D. Context sensitivity of relational nouns. Proc 27th Annu 
Meet Cogn Sci Soc 2005. p. 163–168.  
60.  
Chesley P, Vincent B, Xu L, Srihari RK. Using verbs and adjectives to 
automatically classify blog sentiment. Training 2006;580(263):233.  
61.  
nltk.tokenize package — NLTK 3.5 documentation [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 
23]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html?highlight=tokenizer#nltk.tokeni
ze.punkt.PunktSentenceTokenizer 
62.  
Taylor A, Marcus M, Santorini B. The Penn Treebank: An Overview. Treebanks 
Build Using Parsed Corpora Springer, Dordrecht; 2003. p. 5–22. [doi: 
10.1007/978-94-010-0201-1_1] 
63.  
Witten IH, Paynter GW, Frank E, Gutwin C, Nevill-Manning CG. KEA: Practical 
Automatic Keyphrase Extraction. 1999 Feb 4 [cited 2020 Jun 24]; Available 
from: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/9902007 
64.  
Han P, Shen S, Wang D, Liu Y. The influence of word normalization in English 
document clustering. CSAE 2012 - Proceedings, 2012 IEEE Int Conf Comput 
Sci Autom Eng 2012. p. 116–120. [doi: 10.1109/CSAE.2012.6272740] 
65.  
NLTK’s list of english stopwords [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 26]. Available 
from: https://gist.github.com/sebleier/554280 
66.  
Hutto CJ, Gilbert E. VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-based Model for Sentiment 
Analysis of Social Media Text. Eighth Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media 
[Internet] 
2014. 
p. 
216–225. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/viewPaper/
8109 
67.  
McHugh ML. Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochem Medica 
Croatian Society for Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine; 
2012;22(3):276–282. PMID:23092060 
68.  
Onder G, Rezza G, Brusaferro S. Case-Fatality Rate and Characteristics of 
Patients Dying in Relation to COVID-19 in Italy. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 
American Medical Association; 2020. p. 1775–1776. PMID:32203977 
69.  
Xiang YT, Yang Y, Li W, Zhang L, Zhang Q, Cheung T, Ng CH. Timely mental 
health care for the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak is urgently needed. The 
Lancet Psychiatry. Elsevier Ltd; 2020. p. 228–229. PMID:32032543 
70.  
Hick JL, Biddinger PD. Novel Coronavirus and Old Lessons - Preparing the 
Health System for the Pandemic. N Engl J Med [Internet] NLM (Medline); 2020 
May 14 [cited 2020 Jun 16];382(20):e55. PMID:32212515 
71.  
Dar KA, Iqbal N, Mushtaq A. Intolerance of uncertainty, depression, and 
anxiety: Examining the indirect and moderating effects of worry. Asian J 
Psychiatr 
Elsevier 
B.V.; 
2017 
Oct 
1;29:129–133. 
[doi: 
10.1016/j.ajp.2017.04.017] 
72.  
Yao H, Chen JH, Xu YF. Patients with mental health disorders in the COVID-19 
epidemic [Internet]. The Lancet Psychiatry. Elsevier Ltd; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 
20]. p. e21. PMID:32199510 
73.  
Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R, Thome B, Parker M, Glickman A, Zhang C, 
Boyle C, Smith M, Phillips JP. Fair Allocation of Scarce Medical Resources in 
the Time of Covid-19. N Engl J Med [Internet] Massachussetts Medical Society; 
2020 
May 
21 
[cited 
2020 
Jun 
19];382(21):2049–2055. 
[doi: 
10.1056/NEJMsb2005114] 
74.  
Ji Y, Ma Z, Peppelenbosch MP, Pan Q. Potential association between COVID-19 
mortality and health-care resource availability. Lancet Glob Heal. Elsevier Ltd; 
2020. p. e480. PMID:32109372 
75.  
Hall G, Laddu DR, Phillips SA, Lavie CJ, Arena R. A tale of two pandemics: How 
will COVID-19 and global trends in physical inactivity and sedentary behavior 
affect one another? [Internet]. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. W.B. Saunders; 2020 
[cited 2020 Jun 20]. [doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2020.04.005] 
76.  
Kivimäki M, Singh-Manoux A, Pentti J, Sabia S, Nyberg ST, Alfredsson L, 
Goldberg M, Knutsson A, Koskenvuo M, Koskinen A, Kouvonen A, Nordin M, 
Oksanen T, Strandberg T, Suominen SB, Theorell T, Vahtera J, Väänänen A, 
Virtanen M, Westerholm P, Westerlund H, Zins M, Seshadri S, Batty GD, Sipilä 
PN, Shipley MJ, Lindbohm J V., Ferrie JE, Jokela M. Physical inactivity, 
cardiometabolic disease, and risk of dementia: An individual-participant 
meta-analysis. BMJ BMJ Publishing Group; 2019 Apr 17;365. PMID:30995986 
77.  
Brooks SK, Webster RK, Smith LE, Woodland L, Wessely S, Greenberg N, Rubin 
GJ. The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review 
of the evidence. Lancet. Lancet Publishing Group; 2020. p. 912–920. 
PMID:32112714 
78.  
Lippi G, Henry BM, Sanchis-Gomar F. Physical inactivity and cardiovascular 
disease at the time of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [Internet]. Eur J 
Prev Cardiol. SAGE Publications Inc.; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 19]. p. 906–908. 
PMID:32270698 
79.  
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, 
Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu J, Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H, Cao B. Clinical course and risk 
factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a 
retrospective cohort study. Lancet Lancet Publishing Group; 2020 Mar 
28;395(10229):1054–1062. PMID:32171076 
80.  
He X, Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, Lau YC, Wong JY, Guan Y, Tan X, 
Mo X, Chen Y, Liao B, Chen W, Hu F, Zhang Q, Zhong M, Wu Y, Zhao L, Zhang F, 
Cowling BJ, Li F, Leung GM. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and 
transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat Med [Internet] Nature Research; 2020 May 
1 [cited 2020 Jun 20];26(5):672–675. PMID:32296168 
81.  
Jin J-M, Bai P, He W, Wu F, Liu X-F, Han D-M, Liu S, Yang J-K. Gender 
Differences in Patients With COVID-19: Focus on Severity and Mortality. Front 
Public Heal [Internet] Frontiers Media S.A.; 2020 Apr 29 [cited 2020 Jun 
20];8:152. [doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00152] 
82.  
Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin DY, Chen L, Wang M. Presumed Asymptomatic 
Carrier Transmission of COVID-19 [Internet]. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 
American Medical Association; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p. 1406–1407. 
PMID:32083643 
83.  
Cao X. COVID-19: immunopathology and its implications for therapy 
[Internet]. Nat Rev Immunol. Nature Research; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p. 
269–270. PMID:32273594 
84.  
Zheng YY, Ma YT, Zhang JY, Xie X. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system 
[Internet]. Nat Rev Cardiol. Nature Research; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p. 
259–260. PMID:32139904 
85.  
Chow N, Fleming-Dutra K, Gierke R, Hall A, Hughes M, Pilishvili T, Ritchey M, 
Roguski K, Skoff T, Ussery E. Preliminary estimates of the prevalence of 
selected underlying health conditions among patients with coronavirus 
disease 2019 - United States, February 12-March 28, 2020 [Internet]. Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. Department of Health and Human Services; 2020 [cited 
2020 Jun 20]. p. 382–386. PMID:32240123 
86.  
Scarabel F, Pellis L, Bragazzi NL, Wu J. Canada needs to rapidly escalate public 
health interventions for its COVID-19 mitigation strategies. Infect Dis Model 
KeAi 
Communications 
Co.; 
2020 
Jan 
1;5:316–322. 
[doi: 
10.1016/j.idm.2020.03.004] 
87.  
Stephanie B, Virginia B, Nancy C, Aaron C, Ryan G, Aron H, Michelle H, Tamara 
P, Matthew R, Katherine R, Benjamin S, Tami S, Preethi S, Emily U, Michael V, 
Hilary W, John W, CDC COVID-19 Response Team. Geographic differences in 
COVID-19 cases, deaths, and incidence - United States, February 12-April 7, 
2020. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. Department of Health and Human Services; 
2020. p. 465–471. PMID:32298250 
88.  
Yuan J, Li M, Lv G, Lu ZK. Monitoring transmissibility and mortality of COVID-
19 in Europe. Int J Infect Dis Elsevier B.V.; 2020 Jun 1;95:311–315. 
PMID:32234343 
89.  
Kobia F, Gitaka J. COVID-19: Are Africa’s diagnostic challenges blunting 
response effectiveness? AAS Open Res [Internet] F1000 Research Ltd; 2020 
Apr 17 [cited 2020 Jun 20];3:4. [doi: 10.12688/aasopenres.13061.1] 
90.  
Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, Rocklöv J. The reproductive number of 
COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. J Travel Med 
2020;27(2):taaa021. [doi: 10.1093/jtm/taaa021] 
91.  
Mahase E. Coronavirus covid-19 has killed more people than SARS and MERS 
combined, despite lower case fatality rate. BMJ [Internet] NLM (Medline); 
2020 Feb 18 [cited 2020 Jun 21];368:m641. [doi: 10.1136/bmj.m641] 
92.  
Gottlieb C, Grobovšek J, Poschke M. Working from home across countries. 
Covid Econ 2020;1(8):71–91.  
93.  
Dockery M, Bawa S. Working from home in the COVID-19 lockdown [Internet]. 
Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre, Curtin University; 2020 May. Report No.: 
5. 
Available 
from: 
https://bcec.edu.au/assets/2020/05/BCEC-COVID19-
Brief-4_Working-from-home.pdf 
94.  
Thomas LT, Ganster DC. Impact of Family-Supportive Work Variables on 
Work-Family Conflict and Strain: A Control Perspective. J Appl Psychol 
[Internet] 1995 [cited 2020 Jun 22];80(1):6–15. [doi: 10.1037/0021-
9010.80.1.6] 
95.  
Foulds GA. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Br J Psychiatry Cambridge 
University Press; 1963;109(458):164–165.  
96.  
Tsai J, Ford ES, Li C, Zhao G, Balluz LS. Physical activity and optimal self-rated 
health of adults with and without diabetes. BMC Public Health BioMed 
Central; 2010 Jun 23;10(1):1–9. [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-365] 
97.  
Li S, Wang Y, Xue J, Zhao N, Zhu T. The Impact of COVID-19 Epidemic 
Declaration on Psychological Consequences: A Study on Active Weibo Users. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet] MDPI AG; 2020 Mar 19 [cited 2020 
Jun 22];17(6):2032. [doi: 10.3390/ijerph17062032] 
98.  
Bodas M, Peleg K. Self-Isolation Compliance In The COVID-19 Era Influenced 
By Compensation: Findings From A Recent Survey In Israel. Health Aff 
[Internet] NLM (Medline); 2020 Jun 1 [cited 2020 Jun 21];39(6):936–941. 
[doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00382] 
99.  
Wright AL, Sonin K, Driscoll J, Wilson J. Poverty and Economic Dislocation 
Reduce Compliance with COVID-19 Shelter-in-Place Protocols. SSRN Electron 
J [Internet] Elsevier BV; 2020 Apr 16 [cited 2020 Jun 21]; [doi: 
10.2139/ssrn.3573637] 
100.  Plohl N, Musil B. Modeling compliance with COVID-19 prevention guidelines: 
the critical role of trust in science. Psychol Health Med [Internet] Informa UK 
Limited; 
2020 
Jun 
1 
[cited 
2020 
Jun 
21];1–12. 
[doi: 
10.1080/13548506.2020.1772988] 
101.  Bradbury‐Jones C, Isham L. The pandemic paradox: The consequences of 
COVID‐19 on domestic violence. J Clin Nurs [Internet] Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd; 2020 Jul 22 [cited 2020 Jun 21];29(13–14):2047–2049. [doi: 
10.1111/jocn.15296] 
102.  Taub A. A New Covid-19 Crisis: Domestic Abuse Rises Worldwide [Internet]. 
2020. 
Available 
from: 
https://chescocf.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/Domestic-Abuse-Rises-Worldwide-New-York-
Times.pdf 
103.  Mazza M, Marano G, Lai C, Janiri L, Sani G. Danger in danger: Interpersonal 
violence during COVID-19 quarantine. Psychiatry Res Elsevier Ireland Ltd; 
2020 Jul 1;289:113046. PMID:32387794 
104.  Piquero AR, Riddell JR, Bishopp SA, Narvey C, Reid JA, Piquero NL. Staying 
Home, Staying Safe? A Short-Term Analysis of COVID-19 on Dallas Domestic 
Violence. Am J Crim Justice [Internet] Springer; 2020 Jun 14 [cited 2020 Jun 
21];1–35. [doi: 10.1007/s12103-020-09531-7] 
105.  Boserup B, McKenney M, Elkbuli A. Alarming trends in US domestic violence 
during the COVID-19 pandemic [Internet]. Am J Emerg Med. W.B. Saunders; 
2020 [cited 2020 Jun 21]. PMID:32402499 
106.  Tessler H, Choi M, Kao G. The Anxiety of Being Asian American: Hate Crimes 
and Negative Biases During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Am J Crim Justice 
[Internet] Springer; 2020 Jun 10 [cited 2020 Jun 21];1–11. [doi: 
10.1007/s12103-020-09541-5] 
107.  Crockett D, Grier SA. Race in the Marketplace and COVID-19. J Public Policy 
Mark [Internet] SAGE Publications Ltd; 2020 May 28 [cited 2020 Jun 
21];074391562093144. [doi: 10.1177/0743915620931448] 
108.  Hu JR, Wang M, Lu F. COVID-19 and Asian American Pacific Islanders 
[Internet]. J Gen Intern Med. Springer; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 21]. p. 1–2. [doi: 
10.1007/s11606-020-05953-5] 
109.  Chen HA, Trinh J, Yang GP. Anti-Asian sentiment in the United States – COVID-
19 and history. Am J Surg [Internet] Elsevier BV; 2020 May [cited 2020 Jun 
21]; [doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2020.05.020] 
110.  Torkamaan 
H, 
Ziegler 
J. 
Rating-based 
preference 
elicitation 
for 
recommendation of stress intervention. ACM UMAP 2019 - Proc 27th ACM 
Conf User Model Adapt Pers 2019;46–50. [doi: 10.1145/3320435.3324990] 
111.  Ziems C, He B, Soni S, Kumar S. Racism is a Virus: Anti-Asian Hate and 
Counterhate in Social Media during the COVID-19 Crisis. 2020 May 25 [cited 
2020 Jun 21]; Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12423 
112.  Singh RP, Javaid M, Kataria R, Tyagi M, Haleem A, Suman R. Significant 
applications of virtual reality for COVID-19 pandemic. Diabetes Metab Syndr 
Clin Res Rev Elsevier Ltd; 2020 Jul 1;14(4):661–664. PMID:32438329 
113.  Ha SW, Kim J. Designing a Scalable, Accessible, and Effective Mobile App Based 
Solution for Common Mental Health Problems. Int J Human–Computer 
Interact [Internet] Taylor and Francis Inc.; 2020 Apr 26 [cited 2020 Jun 
24];1–14. [doi: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1750792] 
114.  Torous J, Keshavan M. COVID-19, mobile health and serious mental illness 
[Internet]. Schizophr Res. Elsevier B.V.; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 24]. [doi: 
10.1016/j.schres.2020.04.013] 
115.  Ellahham S. Artificial Intelligence: The Future for Diabetes Care. Am J Med. 
Elsevier Inc.; 2020. [doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2020.03.033] 
116.  Bachtiger P, Plymen CM, Pabari PA, Howard JP, Whinnett ZI, Opoku F, Janering 
S, Faisal AA, Francis DP, Peters NS. Artificial Intelligence, Data Sensors and 
Interconnectivity: Future Opportunities for Heart Failure. Card Fail Rev 
[Internet] Radcliffe Group Ltd; 2020 May 12 [cited 2020 Jun 24];6. [doi: 
10.15420/cfr.2019.14] 
117.  Hoffman DA. Increasing Access to Care: Telehealth During COVID-19. J Law 
Biosci [Internet] 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 24]; [doi: 10.1093/JLB/LSAA043] 
118.  Kim H-N, Seo K. Smartphone-Based Health Program for Improving Physical 
Activity and Tackling Obesity for Young Adults: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet] MDPI AG; 2019 Dec 
18 [cited 2020 Jun 24];17(1):15. [doi: 10.3390/ijerph17010015] 
119.  Ali MY, Bhatti R. COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Pandemic: Information Sources 
Channels for the Public Health Awareness. Asia-Pacific J Public Heal [Internet] 
SAGE 
Publications 
Inc.; 
2020 
[cited 
2020 
Jul 
9]; 
[doi: 
10.1177/1010539520927261] 
120.  Ashrafi-Rizi H, Kazempour Z. Information Typology in Coronavirus (COVID-
19) Crisis; a Commentary. Arch Acad Emerg Med [Internet] Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences; 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 9];8(1):e19. 
PMID:32185370 
121.  Facebook Inc. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Information Center [Internet]. [cited 
2020 Jul 13]. Available from: https://www.facebook.com/coronavirus_info 
122.  Google LLC. COVID-19 Information and Resources [Internet]. [cited 2020 Jul 
13]. Available from: https://www.google.com/covid19/ 
123.  Clark PY, Joseph DM, Humphreys J. Cultural, psychological, and spiritual 
dimensions of palliative care in humanitarian crises. A F Man Palliat Care 
Humanit Cris [Internet] Oxford University Press, Incorporated; 2019. p. 1–
160. Available from: https://books.google.ca/books?id=eXC9DwAAQBAJ 
 
