Title: Natural Language Processing in the Patent Domain: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04105v3
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing in the Patent Domain: A Survey
Lekang Jiang and Stephan M. Goetz
University of Cambridge
{lj408, smg84}@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Patents, which encapsulate crucial technical
and legal information in text form and refer-
enced drawings, present a rich domain for natu-
ral language processing (NLP) applications. As
NLP technologies evolve, large language mod-
els (LLMs) have demonstrated outstanding ca-
pabilities in general text processing and gener-
ation tasks. However, the application of LLMs
in the patent domain remains under-explored
and under-developed due to the complexity of
patents, particularly their language and legal
framework. Understanding the unique char-
acteristics of patent documents and related re-
search in the patent domain becomes essen-
tial for researchers to apply these tools effec-
tively.
Therefore, this paper aims to equip
NLP researchers with the essential knowledge
to navigate this complex domain efficiently.
We introduce the relevant fundamental aspects
of patents to provide solid background infor-
mation. In addition, we systematically break
down the structural and linguistic characteris-
tics unique to patents and map out how NLP
can be leveraged for patent analysis and gener-
ation. Moreover, we demonstrate the spectrum
of text-based and multimodal patent-related
tasks, including nine patent analysis and four
patent generation tasks.1
1
Introduction
Patents, a form of intellectual property (IP), grant
the holder temporary rights to suppress competing
use of an invention in exchange for a complete
disclosure of the invention.
It was once estab-
lished to promote and/or control technical inno-
vation and progress (Frumkin, 1947). The surge
in global patent applications and the rapid tech-
nological progress pose formidable challenges to
patent offices and related practitioners (Krestel
1This is an updated version of the preprint. The final ver-
sion is published in Artificial Intelligence Review. Please refer
to and cite the final version: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10462-025-11168-z.
et al., 2021). These challenges overwhelm tradi-
tional manual methods of patent drafting and anal-
ysis. Consequently, there is a significant need for
advanced computational techniques to automate
patent-related tasks. Such automation not only en-
hances the efficiency of patent and IP management
but also facilitates the extraction of valuable infor-
mation from this extensive knowledge base (Abbas
et al., 2014).
Researchers have investigated machine learning
(ML) and natural language processing (NLP) meth-
ods for the patent field with highly technical and
legal texts (Krestel et al., 2021). In addition, the
recent large language models (LLMs) have demon-
strated outstanding capabilities across a wide range
of general domain tasks (Zhao et al., 2023; Min
et al., 2023). Moreover, the expansion of the latest
general LLMs with a graphical component to form
multimodal models (Huang et al., 2024) may fur-
ther enhance the capabilities in processing patents,
which include text and drawings. These models are
promising to become valuable tools in managing
and drafting patent literature, the crucial resource
that documents technological advances.
However, compared to the significant success
of LLMs in the general domain, the application
of LLMs in patent-related tasks remains under-
explored due to the texts’ and the field’s complex-
ity. NLP and multimodal model researchers need
to deeply understand the unique characteristics of
patent documents to develop useful models for the
patent field. Therefore, we aim to equip researchers
with the essential knowledge by presenting this
highly auspicious but widely neglected field to the
NLP community.
Previous surveys reported the early stages of
smart and automated methods for patent analysis
(Abbas et al., 2014), first deep learning methods,
which opened a wider range of still simpler patent
tasks (Krestel et al., 2021), or specific individual
patent tasks, such as patent retrieval (Shalaby and
1
arXiv:2403.04105v3  [cs.AI]  23 Apr 2025
Patent Tasks
Analysis
Classification
Subject 
Classification
Predict categories of the patent
Information 
Retrieval
Patent Retrieval
Retrieve target documents from database
Information 
Extraction
Extract target information from texts
Quality 
Assessment
Novelty 
Prediction
Predict whether the patent is novel
Granting 
Prediction
Predict whether the patent will be granted by patent office
Litigation 
Prediction
Predict whether the patent will be involved in litigation process
Valuation
Measure the value of the patent
Technology 
Insights
Technology 
Forecasting
Predict future technological developments
Innovation 
Recommendation
Suggest new ideas in the technology context
Generation
Summarization
Create concise and informative summaries of patent documents
Translation
Convert patent texts from one language to another
Simplification
Convert complex and technical patent documents into simpler language
Patent Writing
Create texts for sections of patent documents
Figure 1: Patent-related tasks
Zadrozny, 2019). The recent advancements in lan-
guage and multimodal models were unforeseen,
particularly the performance boost when models
are massively scaled up (Kaplan et al., 2020). Ac-
cordingly, we specifically delineate a survey of
popular methodologies for patent documents with a
special focus on the most recent and evolving tech-
niques. We have included the two applications of
patent analysis and generative patent tasks (Fig. 1).
Whereas analysis focuses on understanding and
usage of individual patent documents or a group
of patents, generation tasks aim at automatically
generating patent texts.
We provide a systematic survey of NLP appli-
cations in the patent domain, including fundamen-
tal concepts, insights on patent texts, development
trends, datasets, tasks, and future research direc-
tions to serve as a reference for both novices and
experts. Specifically, we cover the following top-
ics:
1. We provide an introduction to the fundamen-
tal aspects of patents in Section 2, including
the composition of patents and the patent life-
cycle. This section is particularly for those
readers still unfamiliar with it and a refresher
for others.
2. We analyze the unique structural and linguis-
tic characteristics of patent texts with lan-
guage processing and multimodal techniques
to process these texts in Section 3. Readers
will readily understand the challenges of auto-
mated patent processing and the development
trends of NLP in the patent field.
3. We present a detailed synthesis of patent data
sources, alongside tailored datasets specifi-
cally designed for different patent tasks, in
Section 4. With the collection of these ready-
to-use datasets, we aim to eliminate the exten-
sive time and effort for data preparation in the
patent domain.
4. We evaluate nine patent analysis tasks (subject
classification, patent retrieval, information ex-
traction, novelty prediction, granting predic-
tion, litigation prediction, valuation, technol-
ogy forecasting, and innovation recommenda-
tion) in Section 5 and four generation tasks
(summarization, translation, simplification,
and patent writing) in Section 6. Specifically,
we systematically demonstrate task definitions
and relevant methodologies in detail.
We
show a comprehensive yet accessible insight
into this area, which should enable readers to
grasp the nuances of the field more effectively.
5. We identify current challenges and point out
potential future research directions in Sec-
tion 7. By highlighting these areas, we hope to
encourage further research and development
2
Title
Abstract
Citations
Classification
Drawings
Bibliometric
Publication 
Information
Background
Detailed Description
Detailed Description
Claims
Figure 2: An example of granted patent document (US Patent 11,824,732 B2). This is a US patent, and other
countries have their own patent systems with largely similar requirements.
in automated patent tasks to stimulate more
efficient and effective methods in the future.
2
Brief Background
2.1
Patent Document
Patent documents are central elements for the pro-
tection of intellectual property and also document
inventions. Patents require applicants and/or inven-
tors to publicly disclose their inventions in detail
to secure exclusive rights and obtain benefits in
return. Patent documents describe new inventions
and delineate the scope of patent rights granted
to patent holders. These documents are key parts
of the patenting process and are publicly acces-
sible typically 18 months after the application or
the first filing date. The format and content can
vary by jurisdiction but normally include the fol-
lowing elements. Fig. 2 displays an example patent
document.
Publication information includes the file number
and date of patent (application) publication.
Title is the concise description of the invention.
Bibliometric information includes details about
applicants, inventors, assignees, examiners, attor-
neys, etc.
Patent classification code defines the category of
the patent. We introduce detailed information on
patent classification schemes in Section 5.1.2.
Citations are lists of prior arts and other patents
referenced in the document or by examiners.
Abstract is a brief summary of the invention and
its purpose.
Background contains basic information on the
field of the invention and is supposed to list and
appreciate the prior art, particularly in the patent
literature.
Detailed description provides comprehensive de-
tails about the invention and specific embodiments,
typically discussing the drawings.
Claims define the legal scope of the patent. Each
claim is a single sentence, which describes the in-
vention in specific features that make the invention
novel and not easily derivable (obvious) from the
state of the art (described by any source, not only
patent documents).
Drawings are visual representations of the inven-
tion, disclosing important aspects of the invention
as well as embodiments to support the textual de-
scription. Fig. 3 shows an example patent drawing.
Apart from patent texts, researchers also use patent
drawings for patent analysis, which is introduced
in Appendix A.
2.2
Patent Life Cycle
The patent life cycle encompasses several stages,
from the initial conception of an invention to its
eventual expiration. It can be broadly divided into
pre-grant and post-grant phases (Fig. 4).
Pre-Grant Stage.
In the beginning, inventors
conceptualize, design, and develop their invention.
If inventors hope to obtain patent protection for
their invention, they need to apply to the patent
office. To ensure novelty and inventiveness (non-
obviousness), inventors may preventively search
for existing patents and public disclosures to avoid
unnecessary cost and effort in case of prior disclo-
sures. Additionally, patent documents need draft-
3
Figure 3:
An example drawing from patent US
10,854,933. Many figures in patents are generic with-
out the corresponding description. Drawings tend to
be less generic in patents on pharmaceuticals or me-
chanics, often consisting of graphs, images, or models.
Some drawings are also of poor resolution, pixelation,
or low quality. The reference numbers indicate specific
elements introduced in the patent description. The ref-
erence numbers have to be named by the same term
consistently throughout the patent application, which
can also substantially deviate from conventions in the
field. The reference numbers are typically used for in-
vention features and listed in the claims.
ing to describe the invention in detail, including its
specifications, claims, abstract, and accompanying
drawings. The drafting process typically requires
the expertise of a patent professional, such as a
patent engineer, attorney, or agent. After the patent
application is submitted to the patent office, ex-
aminers at the office will screen and evaluate the
application for compliance with formal, legal, and
technical requirements. This examination typically
involves correspondence of the examiner with the
inventor or their representation, where clarifica-
tions, amendments, or arguments are submitted.2
Notably, an assessment will determine if the inven-
tion meets the criteria for patentability, including
novelty, inventiveness (non-obviousness), and typi-
2Amendments must not introduce novel features, i.e., in-
ventive content, to avoid losing the original date stamp or the
entire file.
Pre-grant Stage                                                                                  Post-grant Stage
Patent Draft                              Patent Office                            Granted Patent
Patentability Assessment
Grant
Submit
Comment
Classification
Maintenance
Litigation
Post-analysis
Expiration
Idea Conception
Prior Art Search
Invention Design
Patent Drafting
Revision
Figure 4: Patent life-cycle from pre-grant to post-grant
stage
cally less strictly commercial utility. The require-
ment of utility may be less strict as offices may see
that as the applicant’s problem, except for certain
cases. The substantive examination compares the
invention with similar documents from the patent
literature or any other public source dated earlier,
which were found in an initial search by the office.
Upon examination and potential resolution of any
objections, the patent is either granted—rarely in
its original, more frequently in a restricted form
based on the identified prior art—or rejected. If
the original priority date should be maintained, the
invention must not be extended during the exami-
nation.3
Post-Grant Stage. The granted patent is published,
disclosing the details of the invention to the pub-
lic potentially accompanying a previous applica-
tion publication. As a remnant of previous pre-
computer and pre-AI-search times, the offices clas-
sify patents by field of technology for easier search
and management. Maintenance fees need to be paid
regularly to keep the patent in force. The patent
owner can enforce patent rights through legal ac-
tion when infringement occurs. In addition, third
parties can question the validity of patents, and
patent owners would need to defend the challenges.
Furthermore, companies can analyze patents for
technology insights and derive strategies. Finally,
the invention enters the public domain after the
expiration of patents, allowing anyone to use it
without infringement if no other rights cover those
aspects.
2.3
Related Surveys
Patent Analysis. Various surveys in the past sum-
marized certain aspects of patent analysis from a
knowledge or procedural perspective. The work
3Such additional material should not be added casually
but would require proper announcement with a new filing that
typically claims the priority of the base filing for all aspects
already described in the latter. Otherwise, the inadmissibly
extended file may be rejected or later challenged in the granted
stage.
4
of Abbas et al. (2014) represents early research
on patent analysis. These early methods included
text mining and visualization approaches, which
paved the way for future research. Deep learn-
ing for knowledge and patent management started
more recently. Krestel et al. (2021) identified eight
types of sub-tasks attractive for deep learning meth-
ods, specifically supporting tasks, patent classifica-
tion, patent retrieval, patent valuation, technology
forecasting, patent text generation, litigation anal-
ysis, and computer vision tasks. Some surveys
reviewed specific topics of patent analysis. For
example, Shalaby and Zadrozny (2019) surveyed
patent retrieval, i.e., the search for relevant patent
documents, which may appear similar to a web
search but has substantially different objectives as
well as constraints and has a legally-defined formal
character. A concurrent survey introduced the lat-
est development of patent retrieval and posed some
challenges for future work (Ali et al., 2024). In
addition, Balsmeier et al. (2018) highlighted how
machine learning and NLP tools could be applied to
patent data for tasks such as innovation assessment.
It focused more on methodological advancement in
patent data analysis that complements the broader
survey of tools and models used in NLP for patent
processing.
Patent Usage. The patent literature records major
technological progress and constitutes a knowledge
database. It is well known that the translation of
methods from one domain to another or the combi-
nation of technology from various fields can lead
to major innovation. Thus, the contents of the
patent literature appear highly attractive for sys-
tematic analysis and innovation design. However,
the language of modern patents has substantially
evolved and diverged from normal technical writ-
ing. Recent patent documents are typically hardly
digestible for the normal reader and also contain de-
ceptive elements added for increasing the scope or
to camouflage important aspects. Appropriate data
science techniques need to consider such aspects
to mine patent databases for engineering design
(Jiang et al., 2022b). Data science applied to this
body of codified technical knowledge cannot only
inform design theory and methodology but also
form design tools and strategies. Particularly in
early stages of innovation, language processing can
help with ideation, trend forecasting, or problem–
solution matching (Just, 2024).
Patent-Related Language Generation. Whereas
the above-listed techniques harvest the existing
patent literature for external needs, the strong text-
based patent field suggests the use of language
models in a generative way. Language processing
techniques can, for instance, translate the pecu-
liar patent language to more understandable tech-
nical texts, summarize texts, or generate patent
texts based on prompts (Casola and Lavelli, 2022).
The recent rapid development of generative lan-
guage models, especially large language models
(LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2023) may stimulate more
patent-related generation tasks.
Related Topics. A variety of other tasks and ap-
plications also have close ties to the patent domain.
For example, intellectual property (IP) includes
copyrights, trademarks, designs, and a number of
more special rights beyond patents. The combined
intellectual property literature allows concordant
knowledge management, technology management,
economic value estimation, and information extrac-
tion (Aristodemou and Tietze, 2018). The patent
field is closely related to the general legal domain,
because they share procedural aspects and the preci-
sion of language. Likewise, most patent profession-
als have substantial legal training or a law degree,
and their work often involves legal aspects. Accord-
ingly, NLP techniques in the more general field of
law may influence patent-related techniques in the
future (Katz et al., 2023).
3
Insights into Patent Texts
Patent text can differ from normal text in multiple
aspects, which stimulates a variety of research and
entails challenges for the field.
3.1
Long Context
Most research so far has focused on short texts,
such as patent abstracts and claims. However, titles
and abstracts of patents can be surprisingly generic.
Therefore, using patent descriptions that provide
comprehensive details and specific embodiment of
the invention for patent analysis is highly important,
which is neglected by most of the current research.
A possible reason is that previous language mod-
els cannot handle such long inputs. According to
a recently proposed patent dataset (Suzgun et al.,
2023), the average number of tokens of a patent
description exceeds 11,000, which is longer than
the context limit of many previous language mod-
els. For example, Llama-2 supports the context
length of 4,000 tokens (Touvron et al., 2023). The
reason for the limited context length of many lan-
5
guage models is the rapid growth of computational
complexity associated with self-attention. It grows
because the number of attention relationships in-
creases with the context length. As self-attention
often considers every pair of tokens, the computa-
tional complexity can grow with the context length
squared (O(n2)). The long context of patent de-
scriptions causes critical challenges for patent anal-
ysis.
Notably, researchers have investigated increas-
ing or otherwise handling the context length of
LLMs (Chen et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023a; Xiong
et al., 2023). Xiong et al. (2023), for example, in-
troduced a series of long-context LLMs, which can
support the context windows up to 32,768 tokens.
A mix of reduced short-range and long-range at-
tention instead of exhaustive attention can reduce
the computational and memory burden (Kovaleva
et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020). Moreover, the
latest very large models, such as GPT-44 (OpenAI,
2023) and Llama-3.15 (Dubey et al., 2024) even
naturally support a context length of 128,000 to-
kens, which appears promising to process the long
patent descriptions. Other LLMs also showed a
trend towards long context capabilities, such as
Falcon-180B (Almazrouei et al., 2023), Gemini
1.56 (Reid et al., 2024) and Claude 3.57 (Anthropic,
2024).
3.2
Technical Language
The patent language is highly technical and ar-
tificial, including specialized terminology, legal
phrases, and sometimes newly coined terms to de-
scribe new concepts that may not yet have been
widely recognized. Patents regularly define their
own terms, which may substantially deviate from
everyday language usage and the technical field.
Such self-defined terms are often highly artificial
and not likely to occur in other relevant documents
or even in any dictionary.
Hence, the technical language causes significant
challenges for general LLMs for patent analysis,
which are trained on normal texts and a large share
of more colloquial language. Thus, LLMs may
not capture the patent context information effec-
4https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
gpt-4-and-gpt-4-turbo
5https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3-1/?_
fb_noscript=1
6https://blog.google/technology/ai/
google-gemini-next-generation-model-february-2024/
7https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-3-5-sonnet
tively, because the important technical terms can
be completely new to the LLMs or have different
meanings from its pre-training corpora. Embed-
dings based on distance metrics for synonymity or
semantic relationships of terms may not work if
terms are defined contrary to their normal use or
are entirely new.
3.3
Precision Requirement
The precision requirement and information den-
sity of patent texts are higher than in everyday
language.8 The patent language focuses more on
precision and accuracy than on readability. Patent
texts must be precise and meticulously described to
ensure the patent is both defensible and enforceable.
Such precision requirement typically leads to high
repetitiveness in both terminology and structure of
sentences, paragraphs, and sections. Furthermore,
sentences are often overburdened because they use
relative or adverbial clauses to include specifica-
tions for precision or add examples for a wider
scope. Additionally, each terminology must be
used consistently throughout the document. That
means a technical term must not be replaced by
other words unless the patent explicitly states that
both are identical. In contrast, everyday texts and
academic literature tend to vary and paraphrase
the wording for better readability. In addition, the
patent claim is carefully crafted to define the pre-
cise scope and boundaries of the invention’s protec-
tion, ensuring that the patent can withstand legal
scrutiny.
The precision requirement of patent texts com-
plicates the patent generation tasks because LLMs
are likely to generate slightly different words or
phrases. Due to the requirement for large quantities
of data, most pre-training corpora for LLMs tend
to be colloquial and relatively informal. Another
smaller portion comes from literary texts, which
may be of higher quality but typically prioritize
style and linguistic originality over precision and
accuracy.
8It is worth mentioning that the high importance of legal
and formal aspects can tip the balance away from the sciences.
Prophetic examples or experiments in patent documents de-
scribe anticipated results or theoretical experiments that have
not been physically conducted. These are hypothetical sce-
narios intended to demonstrate the scope of an invention or
to anticipate and complicate any competing patent filing for
competitors with wild speculations. While many offices only
require a basic feasibility of the invention per the claims,
such documents can receive incorrect citations and let these
prophecies or speculations appear as factual, which can lead
to misinformation (Freilich, 2019).
6
3.4
LLMs for Patent Processing
Patent texts are distinct from everyday texts with
respect to long context length, in-depth technical
complexity, and high precision to ensure the patent
can be granted, defended, and enforced. This type
of language often necessitates specific training and
experience in patents for accurate reading and inter-
pretation. However, human readers usually strug-
gle with certain aspects of patent texts, such as
ambiguous names, phrases that conflict with their
prior understanding, or numerous terms that the de-
scription redefines within the context of the specific
patent itself. The dense, specialized terminology
and unconventional syntactic structures common
in patents often pose significant barriers to compre-
hension, even for those with experience in technical
fields. In contrast, LLMs trained on datasets specif-
ically tailored to patent language are theoretically
well-equipped to handle these challenges. They are
designed to process complex syntactic structures,
manage long-range dependencies, and incorporate
newly coined terms or domain-specific jargon that
diverges from everyday language. By leveraging
the specialized vocabulary of experts in the field,
these models can navigate the nuanced require-
ments of patent texts with a level of consistency and
scope that may exceed human capabilities. There-
fore, the recent advancements in LLMs (Zhao et al.,
2023) for generative tasks and language processing
appear ideally suited for the unique characteristics
of patent literature. They promise large benefits in
areas, such as patent drafting, prior art search, and
examination.
Despite the apparent fundamental compatibility
of LLMs for knowledge extraction and language
processing, the application of LLMs in the patent
domain remains underdeveloped and not yet highly
prominent. Previous studies used word embed-
dings (e.g., Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013)) and
deep learning models (e.g., LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997)) for patent analysis tasks. As
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) showed sig-
nificant potential in text processing, researchers
started to develop transformer-based language mod-
els, such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and GPT
(Radford et al., 2018). The recent large-sized mod-
els with outstanding capabilities have not been ex-
tensively investigated in the patent field. Some
representative general LLMs that are worth ex-
ploring include the Llama-3 family (Dubey et al.,
2024), Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023a), Mixtral (Jiang
et al., 2024a), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Claude 3
(Anthropic, 2024), DeepSeek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024),
and Gemini 1.5 (Reid et al., 2024). Researchers
have also developed patent-specific LLMs, such as
PatentGPT-J (Lee, 2023) and PatentGPT (Bai et al.,
2024). However, PatentGPT-J has shown limited
performance in patent text generation tasks (Jiang
et al., 2024c), and PatentGPT, though promising, is
a recent development that is not yet publicly avail-
able. Significant work related to patent-specific
LLMs remains to be done. Moreover, since patents
represent a type of legal document, law-specific
LLMs are also worth investigating, such as SaulLM
(Colombo et al., 2024).
Previous research efforts have included patent
analysis, data extraction, and automation of proce-
dures. However, the lack of benchmark tests, such
as reference datasets and established metrics, hin-
ders performance evaluation and comparison across
different methods. The effectiveness of LLMs de-
pends on the quality of training data. To this end,
we have compiled sources and databases of patents
with curated datasets tailored for various patent-
related tasks in Section 4. Although patent offices
have released raw documents for years, publicly
available datasets for specific tasks remain scarce.
Numerous studies continue to use closed-source
data for training and evaluation.
Furthermore,
patent offices do not provide pre-processed data
or broad access to well-structured documents from
the process around patents. Although in many coun-
tries, patent documents as the disclosure of inven-
tions are considered public domain, they offer only
the manual review of individual documents.9 The
9This aspect may reflect an important discussion to be led
by the field and society. As in other domains, there may be a
missing or unclear consensus on which data can be used for
machine learning. In stark contrast to other domains, where
even books and copyrighted materials may be processed in
large numbers, sometimes to create new works that compete
with the originals, the patent system is a bit different. The
entire modern patent system was developed and is justified as
a social contract, trading invention disclosure for temporary
exclusion from competition. The descriptions are often public
domain and related correspondence with patent offices is made
public to ensure transparency. Thus, imposing paywalls would
typically violate the mission of patent offices. Admittedly,
big-data methods and artificial intelligence were not consid-
erations during the establishment of these legal frameworks.
Patent offices may still restrict or complicate larger-scale data
access to parts or all contents to avoid commercial exploita-
tion. Some patent offices offer costly paid database access
as a stream of revenue, which can be prohibitively expen-
sive for academic research. Important context to know is that
in many places patent offices need to fund their own oper-
ating expenses (United States Patent and Trademark Office,
2023; President of the European Patent Office and Adminis-
7
pre-processing steps to formulate structured patent
datasets generally involve: segmenting patent doc-
uments into clearly defined sections to enhance
downstream tasks, such as abstract, claims, descrip-
tion, etc; and rectifying irregularity issues, such as
missing fields, erroneous characters, or formatting
issues.
Previous research prominently focuses on short
text parts of patents, such as titles and abstracts.
However, these texts are typically highly generic
and include the least specific texts with little infor-
mation about the actual invention. These texts also
take little time during drafting, making the auto-
mated creation of these parts less helpful. By con-
trast, patent descriptions need to include all details
of an invention, and patent claims clearly define
the legal boundaries of the invention’s protection,
the so-called scope. Since these texts are longer
and contain much more useful information, they
are worth more attention for both patent analysis
and generation.
3.5
Multimodal Techniques
A patent is not merely a text document but can
include drawings, i.e., visual components. Thus,
multimodal methods such as CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) and Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy, 2020)
may unlock this potential. Multimodal methods in
patent processing integrate diverse data types, such
as text, images, and quantitative information, to
enhance tasks such as classification and retrieval.
The combination of their complementary strengths
of different modalities may lead to more compre-
hensive and accurate results. Lee et al. (2022) for
instance introduced a multimodal deep-learning
model that combined textual content with quantita-
tive patent information, which resulted in improved
performance for patent classification tasks. Addi-
tionally, multimodal approaches that integrate tex-
tual descriptions with visual content have shown
promise in enhancing patent retrieval (Lo et al.,
2024). Furthermore, Lin et al. (2023) proposed
multimodal methods to extract structural and visual
features to effectively measure patent similarity.
Such multimodal similarity detection may improve
the efficiency of patent examination. However, as
trative Council of the European Patent Organisation, 2021;
van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie and François, 2009; Frakes
and Wasserman, 2014). Therefore, society—which the patent
offices are ultimately meant to serve—must reach a consensus
on how to manage data access for commercial versus aca-
demic purposes, potentially leading to both proprietary and
open-source models.
illustrated in Fig. 3, many drawings in patents are
generic without the corresponding description, and
some drawings suffer from poor resolution, pixela-
tion, or low quality. This may be one of the reasons
why current multimodal methods in patent process-
ing are scarce. Moreover, textual elements, espe-
cially the claims and descriptions, are the primary
carriers of legally binding information in patents,
particularly features. While drawings provide valu-
able support and document embodiments, the text
is essential for defining the scope, novelty, and
context of each invention. Consequently, the sur-
vey particularly examines NLP approaches and in-
cludes representative multimodal methods where
available.
4
Data
4.1
Data Sources
Patent applications are submitted to and granted
by patent offices.
To stimulate innovation and
serve the society, patent offices provide detailed
information about existing patents, patent applica-
tions, and the legal status of patents—previously
on paper, nowadays online. Large patent offices
include the United States Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO) and the European Patent Office
(EPO). These offices also provide access to down-
load bulk datasets or tools to explore and analyze
patent data. For example, PatentsView is a plat-
form developed by the USPTO, providing acces-
sible and user-friendly interfaces to explore US
patent data, with various tools for visualization
and analysis. Apart from patent offices, there are
searchable databases that contain patents from mul-
tiple countries and offices, such as Google Patents.
We list a broad range of patent offices and databases
in Table 1.
4.2
Curated Data Collections
Datasets. Patent offices provide large-scale raw
data in the patent domain.
Developers and re-
searchers rely on well-curated datasets for develop-
ment and research. We summarize representative
publicly available curated patent datasets in Ta-
ble 2. We aim to reduce the time and effort for data
searching in the patent domain by presenting these
ready-to-use datasets.
The number of curated datasets for patent clas-
sification and patent retrieval is typically larger
than others because the data collection process is
simple. Each granted patent is assigned classifica-
8
Patent Office & Database
Brief Description
USPTO
United States Patent and Trademark Office is a comprehensive source
for US patents and applications. https://www.uspto.gov/
EPO
European Patent Office offers a variety of tools, such as Espacenet, for
searching European and also foreign patents, which the tools can link to
patent families. https://www.epo.org/en
WIPO
World Intellectual Property Organization includes global patent docu-
ments and applications from participating national and regional patent
offices. https://www.wipo.int/portal/en/index.html
CNIPA / SIPO
State Intellectual Property Office, formerly China National Intellectual
Property Administration, provides a database for searching Chinese
patents. http://english.cnipa.gov.cn/
JPO
Japan Patent Office provides information on Japanese patents and utility
models. https://www.jpo.go.jp/e/
UK IPO
United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office gives access to UK, Jersey,
and Guernsey patents, . https://www.ipo.gov.uk/
KIPO
Korea Intellectual Property Office includes the Korean Patent System
and Utility Model System. https://www.kipo.go.kr/
Auspat
The Australian patent database. https://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/
Google Patents
This is a free and searchable database of patents and patent applications
from multiple countries. https://patents.google.com/
PatentsView
A platform developed by the USPTO, providing interfaces for exploring
U.S. patent data. https://patentsview.org/
Espacenet
Espacenet allows free access to over 140 million patent documents pro-
vided by EPO. https://worldwide.espacenet.com/
Patentscope
Patentscope belongs to WIPO, allowing searches in international patent
collections. https://www.wipo.int/patentscope/en/
Global Dossier
Global Dossier is developed and maintained by a collaboration of USPTO,
EPO, JPO, KIPO, and SIPO to provide a shared database and access
point to IP registers and the corresponding procedural files. https:
//globaldossier.uspto.gov
Lens
Lens integrates scholarly and patent knowledge, providing patent search
and analysis tools. https://www.lens.org/
Table 1: Patent offices and databases with brief descriptions.
9
Dataset
Source
Task
Size
Brief description
USPTO-2M (Li et al., 2018)
USPTO
Classification
2M
Utility
patent
documents
classified
into
637
classes. Original link: http://mleg.cse.sc.edu/
DeepPatent/
USPTO-3M (Lee and Hsiang, 2020b)
USPTO
Classification
3M
Collected from Google Patents Public Datasets using
SQL. Data information at: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.wpi.2020.101965
WIPO-Alpha (Fall et al., 2003)
WIPO
Classification
75K
Documents classified into 114 classes and 451 sub-
classes.
Original link: https://www.wipo.int/
ibis/datasets
Crop Protection
Industry dataset (Christofidellis et al., 2023)
Classification
10K
A patent dataset focusing on the crop industry do-
main. Available at: https://github.com/GT4SD/
domain-adaptive-patent-classifier
DeepPatent (Kucer et al., 2022)
USPTO
Patent
retrieval
45K
Image-based patent retrieval benchmark.
Avail-
able at:
https://github.com/GoFigure-LANL/
DeepPatent-dataset
PatentMatch (Risch et al., 2020a)
EPO
Patent
retrieval
6.3M
Pairs of claims and text passages from cited
patents. Available at: https://hpi.de/naumann/
s/patentmatch
Helmers et al. (2019)
Patent
retrieval
2.5M
Patent pairs with labels of cited/random.
Avail-
able at: https://github.com/helmersl/patent_
similarity_search
TFH (Chen et al., 2020)
USPTO
Information
extraction
40K
Labeled
patent
dataset
for
entities
and
the
semantic
relations
extraction.
Available
at:
https://github.com/awesome-patent-mining/
TFH_Annotated_Dataset
Arts et al. (2021)
Novelty
prediction
Patents with high and low novelty. Available at:
https://zenodo.org/records/3515985
Jiang et al. (2023b)
USPTO
Acceptance
prediction
5.5M
Granted and rejected patent applications. Available
at: https://github.com/Catchy1997/DLPAP
Wu et al. (2023)
USPTO
Litigation
prediction
117K
Triples of a plaintiff, defendant, and a patent.
Available at:
https://github.com/USTCwuhan/
MANTF-master
BigPatent (Sharma et al., 2019)
USPTO
Summarization
1.3M
Patent documents with human-written abstractive
summaries.
Available at:
https://evasharma.
github.io/bigpatent/
Casola et al. (2023)
Simplification
0.2M
Silver
standard
dataset
for
patent
simplifica-
tion. Available at: https://github.com/slvcsl/
patentSilverStandard
GED (Wirth et al., 2023)
EPO
Translation
19K
Patent language pairs French–English, and Ger-
man–English. Available at: https://huggingface.
co/datasets/mwirth-epo/epo-nmt-datasets
EuroPat (Heafield et al., 2022)
EPO
Translation
51M
6 official European languages paired with English.
Available at:
https://opus.nlpl.eu/EuroPat.
php
Lee and Hsiang (2020a)
USPTO
Patent writing
0.6M
Patent claims of the granted U.S. utility patents in
2013. Data information at: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.wpi.2020.101983
HUPD (Suzgun et al., 2023)
USPTO
Multi-purpose
4.5M
A large-scale patent corpus containing 34 data fields.
Available at: https://patentdataset.org/
Table 2: Curated patent datasets.
10
tion codes and contains referenced patents. Hence,
researchers can formulate the datasets by collect-
ing and filtering patents without further labeling.
For patent novelty quantification and prediction,
Arts et al. (2021) considered patents connected to
awards such as the Nobel Prize as novel because
they radically impacted technological progress and
patenting. In contrast, patents were considered
lacking novelty if they were granted by the United
States Patent and Trademark Office but simultane-
ously rejected by both the European Patent Office
and Japan Patent Office. However, this collection
may deviate from the formal definition of novelty
introduced in Section 5.4.1. For patent simplifica-
tion, there is only a silver standard dataset (Casola
et al., 2023). In text generation tasks, texts written
by humans are usually considered the gold stan-
dard. Since patent simplification requires exten-
sive expertise and effort, it is expensive and time-
consuming to obtain a gold standard for patent sim-
plification. Thus, Casola et al. (2023) adopted au-
tomated tools to generate simpler texts for patents
and named it the silver standard.
Notably, the Harvard USPTO Patent Dataset
(HUPD) (Suzgun et al., 2023) is a recently pre-
sented large-scale multi-purpose dataset. It con-
tains more than 4.5 million patent documents with
34 data fields, providing opportunities for various
tasks. The corresponding paper demonstrates four
types of usages of this dataset, including granting
prediction, subject classification, language model-
ing, and summarization.
Shared Tasks.
Some organizations proposed
shared tasks and workshops in the patent domain
to facilitate related research. Every participant
worked on the same task with the same dataset to
enable comparisons between different approaches.
The intellectual property arm of the Conference
and Labs of the Evaluation Forum (CLEF-IP)10
focuses on evaluation tasks related to intellectual
property, particularly in patent retrieval and anal-
ysis. Each task usually contains a curated patent
dataset for desired aims, including various informa-
tion such as text, images, and metadata (Piroi and
Hanbury, 2017).
The Japanese National Institute of Informatics
Testbeds and Community for Information access
Research (NTCIR)11 provides datasets and orga-
nizes shared tasks to facilitate research in infor-
10CLEF: https://www.clef-initiative.eu/
11NTCIR:
https://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/
index-en.html
mation retrieval, natural language processing, and
related areas. Patent-related tasks at the NTCIR
range from patent retrieval and classification to
text mining and machine translation (Utiyama and
Isahara, 2007; Lupu et al., 2017).
TREC-CHEM12 is a part of the Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC) series, specializing in chemi-
cal information retrieval. It contains patent datasets
that are rich in chemical information. For exam-
ple, the dataset from TREC-CHEM 2009 contains
2.6 million patent files registered at the European
Patent Office, United States Patent and Trademark
Office, and World Intellectual Property Organiza-
tion (Lupu et al., 2009).
5
Patent Analysis Tasks
Patent analysis tasks focus on understanding and us-
age of patents. We divide patent analysis tasks into
four main types, subject classification, information
retrieval, quality assessment, and technology in-
sights. Patent subject classification (Section 5.1) is
one of the most widely studied topics in the patent
domain, where the categories of patents are pre-
dicted based on their content. Information retrieval
tasks consist of two sub-tasks, specifically patent
retrieval (Section 5.2) and information extraction
(Section 5.3). While patent retrieval aims at retriev-
ing target documents from databases, information
extraction focuses on extracting desired informa-
tion from patent texts for further applications. Qual-
ity assessment refers to evaluating the quality of
patents, which includes novelty prediction (Sec-
tion 5.4), granting prediction (Section 5.5), litiga-
tion prediction (Section 5.6), and patent valuation
(Section 5.7). As novelty is essential for patents,
early prediction of novelty and auxiliary methods
for novelty assessments could ensure patent qual-
ity before filing and improve efficiency. Granting
prediction forecasts whether the patent office will
grant a patent application. The process involves
further aspects beyond novelty and inventiveness,
such as formal requirements of the language, fig-
ures, and documents. A low-quality patent is likely
to be rejected by the examiner. Litigation predic-
tion measures the odds that the file may at some
point become the subject of litigation. For exam-
ple, patents with unclear or ambiguous claims or
very scarce descriptions tend to be more likely to
cause litigation cases. Patent valuation refers to
12TREC-CHEM:
https://trec.nist.gov/data/
chem-ir.html
11
Structure
Label
Description
Section
F
Mechanical engineering ; Lighting; Heating; Weapons; Blasting
Class
F02
Combustion engines; hot-gas or combustion-product engine plants
Sub-class
F02D
Controlling combustion engines
Group
F02D 41
Electrical control of supply of combustible mixture of its constituents
Sub-group
F02D 41/02
Circuit arrangements for generating control signals
Table 3: Example of International Patent Classification (IPC) scheme
Top Prediction
Prediction
Truth
1
…
n
MC
IC-1
Top N Guesses
All Categories
2
IC-m
…
Prediction
Truth
1
…
n
MC
IC-1
2
IC-m
…
Prediction
Truth
1
…
n
MC
IC-1
2
IC-m
…
Figure 5: Illustration of three evaluation methods for patent classification, where 1, 2, ..., n are the top-n predictions,
MC stands for main class, and IC is incidental class (Fall et al., 2003).
measuring the value of the patents, which is a re-
flection of patent quality and scope. Technology
insights are the usage of patents, consisting of tech-
nology forecasting (Section 5.8) and innovation
recommendation (Section 5.9). Since patents con-
tain extensive emerging technology information,
researchers can analyze patents to predict future
technological development trends or suggest new
ideas for technological innovation.
5.1
Automated Subject Classification
5.1.1
Task Definition of Subject Classification
The automated subject classification task is a
multi-label classification task.
The aim is to
predict patents’ specific categories or classes
based on patent content, including title, abstract,
and claims.
Given a sequence of inputs x =
[w1, w2, . . . , wn], the objective is to predict the
label y ∈{y1, y2, . . . , ym}. Since patents may
belong to multiple classes, sometimes more than
one label needs predicting. This classification is
crucial for organizing patent databases, facilitating
patent searches, and assisting patent examiners in
evaluating the novelty.
5.1.2
Classification Scheme
Two of the most popular classification schemes
are the International Patent Classification (IPC)
and Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) sys-
tems. These IPC/CPC codes are hierarchical and
divided into sections, classes, sub-classes, main
groups, and sub-groups. For example, we list the
breakdown of the F02D 41/02 label using the IPC
scheme in Table 3.
5.1.3
Evaluation
Most research uses one or more evaluation mea-
sures originated from Fall et al. (2003). As Fig. 5
illustrates, there are three different evaluation meth-
ods, namely top prediction, top N guesses, and all
categories. Top prediction only checks whether the
top-1 prediction is the same as the main class. In
top N guesses, the result is successful if one of the
top-n predictions matches the main class, which is
more flexible compared to the top-1 prediction. On
the other hand, the all-categories method checks
whether the top-1 prediction is included in the set
of the main class and all incidental classes.
12
Feature Extraction 
and Classification 
Fine-tuning 
Transformer-based 
Language Models
Hybrid Methods
Data
Model 1
Model 2
Ensemble method
Result 1
Result 2
Label
Texts
Language Model 
Label
Data
Feature sets
Label
Classifier
Figure 6: Three mainstream methods for patent classification
5.1.4
Methodologies for Automated Subject
Classification
We summarize the mainstream techniques for
patent classification and categorize them into three
types, including feature extraction and classifica-
tion, fine-tuning transformer-based language mod-
els, and hybrid methods (Fig. 6).
Feature Extraction and Classifier.
Re-
searchers extract various features from patent docu-
ments and adopted a classifier for prediction based
on the features (Shalaby et al., 2018; Hu et al.,
2018; Abdelgawad et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020).
Most of the research used text content for pre-
diction. The commonly used text representation is
word embedding. Roudsari et al. (2021) compared
five different text embedding approaches, includ-
ing bag-of-words, GloVe, Skip-gram, FastText, and
GPT-2. Bag-of-words is based on word frequency
and ignores semantic information. GloVe, Skip-
gram, and FastText are deep learning methods that
capture word meaning but not word contexts. In
contrast, GPT-2 is based on transformer architec-
ture and is capable of capturing complex contextual
information. The results demonstrated that GPT-
2 performed the best with a precision of 80.52%,
indicating that transformer-based embedding ap-
proaches may perform better than other traditional
or deep-learning embeddings. In addition, word
embeddings are typically pre-trained on heteroge-
neous corpora, such as Wikipedia, making them
lack domain awareness. Therefore, Risch and Kres-
tel (2019) trained a domain-specific word embed-
ding for patents and incorporated recurrent neural
networks for patent classification. This method
improved the precision by 4% compared to nor-
mal word embedding, demonstrating the effective-
ness of domain adaptation. Apart from word em-
beddings, researchers also adopted sentence em-
bedding for feature extraction (Bekamiri et al.,
2021). Other research calculated the semantic sim-
ilarity between patent embeddings obtained from
Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019)
and used the k-nearest neighbors (KNN) method
for classification with a precision of 74%.
Al-
though the performance was not strong enough,
the use of similarity and KNN provided a different
view of the classification approach.
In addition, some research studied variations
of network architecture and optimization methods.
Shalaby et al. (2018) improved original paragraph
vectors (Le and Mikolov, 2014) to represent patent
documents. The authors used the inherent structure
to derive a hierarchical description of the docu-
ment, which was more suitable for capturing patent
content. In addition, Abdelgawad et al. (2019)
analyzed hyper-parameter optimization methods
for different neural networks, such as CNN, RNN,
and BERT. The results illustrate that optimized
networks could sometimes yield 6% accuracy im-
provement. Similarly, Zhu et al. (2020) used a sym-
metric hierarchical convolutional neural network
and improved the F1 score by approximately 2%
on the Chinese short text patent classification task
compared to a conventional convolutional neural
network.
Alternatively, images can also serve for auto-
mated patent classification, which is introduced in
Appendix A.1.
Fine-Tuning Transformer-Based Language
Model. Fine-tuning tailors the pre-trained model
to the patent classification task. Lee et al. fine-
tuned the BERT model for the patent classifica-
tion task and achieved 81.75% precision (Lee and
Hsiang, 2020b), which was more than 7% higher
than traditional machine learning under the same
setting, using word embedding and classifiers (Li
et al., 2018). Moreover, Haghighian et al. (2022)
compared multiple transformer-based models, in-
cluding BERT, XLNet, RoBERTa, and ELECTRA,
indicating that XLNet performed the best regard-
13
Paper
Data
source
Dataset
size
Parts used
Number of
classes
Methods
Metric
Results
(Top prediction)
Feature Extraction and Classification
(Risch and Krestel, 2019)
USPTO-2M
1.95, 0.05
Title, abstract
637
Domain-specific
word embedding + RNN
P
53.00
(Li et al., 2018)
USPTO-2M
1.95, 0.05
Title, abstract
637
Skip-gram + CNN
P
73.88
(Roudsari et al., 2021)
USPTO
0.24, 0.04
Title, abstract
89
GPT-2 + CNN
P
80.52
(Bekamiri et al., 2021)
USPTO
1.37, 0.12
Title, abstract, claims
663
SBERT + KNN
P
74.00
(Jiang et al., 2021)
USPTO
0.35, 0.05
Image
8
CNN
A
54.32
Fine-tuning Transformer-based Language Models
(Lee and Hsiang, 2020b)
USPTO-2M
1.95, 0.05
Title, abstract
637
BERT
P
81.75
(Haghighian et al., 2022)
USPTO-2M
1.95, 0.05
Title, abstract
544
XLNET
P
82.72
(Christofidellis et al., 2023)
USPTO
0.24, 0.04
Title, abstract
89
SciBERT + Domain-adaptive
training + adapters
P
84.53
(Risch et al., 2020b)
USPTO-2M
1.95, 0.05
Title, abstract
632
Transformer
A
56.70
Hybrid Methods
(Jiang et al., 2022a)
USPTO
0.72, 0.08
Title, abstract, image
622
Multimodal
A
65.50
(Zhang et al., 2022)
Chinese
0.61, 0.15
Title, abstract
8
Multi-view learning
A
85.21
(Kamateri et al., 2023)
CLEFIP-0.54M
0.49, 0.05
Title, abstract, description,
claims, applicants, inventors
731
Ensemble methods
A
70.71
Table 4: List of representative papers for patent classification. Note: The first number in dataset size is the sum
of training and validation samples, and the second number is the size of the test set. The unit here is million. The
metric P stands for precision, while A stands for accuracy. There are multiple results from each paper, and methods
with the best performance are selected.
ing precision, recall, and F1 score. Furthermore,
research found that incorporating further train-
ing approaches can optimize the fine-tuning pro-
cess. For example, Christofidellis et al. (2023)
integrated domain-adaptive pre-training and used
adapters during fine-tuning, which improved the
final classification results by about 2% of F1 score.
Transformer-based language models have shown
better effectiveness than traditional text embedding
and become the mainstream method for text-based
problems.
Another study addressed this hierarchical clas-
sification task as a sequence generation task.
Risch et al. (2020b) implemented the transformer-
based models to follow the sequence-to-sequence
paradigm, where the input was patent texts and the
output was the class, such as F02D 41/02. However,
the highest accuracy tested on their datasets was
only 56.7%, which demonstrated that the sequence-
to-sequence paradigm for patent classification was
mediocre.
Hybrid Methods.
Hybrid methods refer to
combining different approaches to make predic-
tions. TechDoc (Jiang et al., 2022a) is a multimodal
deep learning architecture, which synthesizes con-
volutional, recurrent, and graph neural networks
through an integrated training process. Convolu-
tional and recurrent neural networks served to pro-
cess image and text information respectively, while
graph neural networks served for the relational in-
formation among documents. This multimodal ap-
proach was able to reach greater classification accu-
racy than previous unimodal methods. The advan-
tage of multimodal models is to leverage different
modalities for a comprehensive prediction.
Additionally, Zhang et al. (2022) used a multi-
view learning method (Zhao et al., 2017) for patent
classification. Multi-view learning integrates and
learns from multiple distinct feature sets or views
of the same data, aiming to improve model per-
formance by leveraging the complementary infor-
mation available in different views. In a general
multi-view learning pipeline, developers specify a
model in each view. They aggregate and train all
models collaboratively based on multi-view learn-
ing algorithms. Zhang et al. (2022) used the two
views of patent titles and patent abstracts and tested
multi-view learning on a Chinese patent dataset,
demonstrating its effectiveness and reliability.
Moreover, a recent study investigated ensemble
models that can combine multiple classifiers for
classification (Kamateri et al., 2023). While multi-
view learning exploits diverse information from
different data sources for a more comprehensive
understanding, ensemble methods focus on combin-
ing predictions from multiple models to improve
prediction accuracy and robustness by reducing the
models’ variance and bias, which may all use the
same data view. The authors experimented with
different ensemble methods and finally achieved
70.71% accuracy, which was higher than using only
one classifier.
For a synopsis, we list some representative pa-
pers in Table 4, including data sources, dataset size,
14
parts used for training, number of classes, methods,
and results. The table shows that researchers use
different datasets and metrics to test their models,
which complicates the comparison of various meth-
ods. Hence, we call for standard benchmarks for
patent classification to facilitate the development.
In addition, LLMs demonstrate more promising re-
sults compared to traditional ML models. However,
most research is still based on outdated models,
such as GPT-2. The application of recent large-
sized LLMs to this task would enhance the effec-
tiveness. Additionally, most research has focused
on short texts for patent classification, such as ab-
stracts and claims. Nonetheless, titles and abstracts
of patents are generic and do not disclose much rel-
evant information. We recommend future research
focus more on detailed patent descriptions that con-
tain detailed and specific information about an in-
vention. Furthermore, domain-adaptive methods
that adapt standard LLMs to the patent domain are
worth investigating to optimize the performance.
5.2
Patent Retrieval
There are three types of retrieval tasks, prior-art
search, patent landscaping, and freedom to operate
search. Since previous research mainly focused
on prior-art search, we introduce this task first in
Section 5.2.1 with its corresponding methods in
Section 5.2.2, followed by patent landscaping in
Section 5.2.3 and freedom to operate search in Sec-
tion 5.2.4.
5.2.1
Task Definition of Prior-Art Search
Prior-art search refers to, given a target patent doc-
ument X, automatically retrieving K documents
that are the most relevant to X from a patent
database.13 This process is crucial for patent exam-
iners to assess the patentability of a new patent
application.
Prior-art search is not trivial, due
to the intricate patent language and the different
terms used in various patent descriptions. In princi-
ple, documents from distant fields, including both
patent literature and other sources, can compromise
the novelty of a new application if they disclose
the same combination of patent features. However,
these different fields often use distinct nomencla-
ture across all word classes, including nouns, verbs,
and adjectives. Additionally, many patents and
patent applications create their own terms, which
13While most research retrieved patent documents as out-
puts, prior art can also be other types of published (oral or
visual) information.
can significantly differ from everyday language
and even from the terminology used in the tech-
nical field. This creation of terms is not always
intentional. Attorneys and patent professionals,
who may not be deeply familiar with a specific
field, might need precise terms for their descrip-
tions and claims and thus decide to invent names
spontaneously. These self-defined terms are often
highly artificial and may not appear in any other
relevant documents. Such terms do not need to be
listed in any dictionary.
5.2.2
Methodologies for Prior-Art Search
Researchers have intensively invested in patent re-
trieval tasks and achieved some encouraging ac-
complishments.
We summarize the general re-
trieving process in Fig. 7. Data types for further
pre-processing include text, metadata, and images.
Multiple methods can transform patent data into nu-
merical features, such as the statistical method term
frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF),
which is widely known from text-based search sys-
tems, and deep-learning-based word embedding.
Relevance ranking algorithms to retrieve the most
relevant documents include best-matching BM25,
which is a bag-of-word-type method, and cosine
similarity derived from the inner vector product.
We focus on text-based patent retrieval in
this section and introduce other methods in Ap-
pendix A.2.
Traditional methods are keyword-
based searching and statistical approaches that can
rank document relevance, such as the BM25 al-
gorithm (Robertson et al., 2009). Keyword-based
methods refer to a search for exact matches in the
target corpus according to the input query. A pre-
vious survey summarized all keyword-based meth-
ods into three categories, namely query expansion,
query reduction, and hybrid methods (Shalaby and
Zadrozny, 2019). On the other hand, statistical
methods exploit a document’s statistics, such as
the frequency of specific terms, to calculate a rel-
evance score based on the inputs. For example,
the BM25 algorithm calculates the sore using the
occurrence of the query terms in each document.
These methods are straightforward but the signifi-
cant semantic and context information has not been
explored. Furthermore, each patent document may
use its own nomenclature, which may be defined
in the description counter-intuitively to daily use.
Researchers proposed two types of improvement
to enhance the patent retrieving performance, from
keyword-based to full-text-based and from statisti-
15
Target Document
Text 
(e.g., keyword, semanteme)
Metadata 
(e.g., citation, category, inventor)
BM25
TF-IDF
Bag-of-Words
Patent Documents
Data Types                          Numerical Feature            Relevance Ranking   
Word Embedding
Cosine Similarity
Euclidean Distance
Database
Image
…
…
Figure 7: Illustration of the patent retrieval process
cal methods to deep-learning methods. Errors oc-
cur inherently in keyword-based methods because
different keywords can represent the same tech-
nical concepts across various disciplines. Hence,
(Helmers et al., 2019) adopted entire patent texts
for similarity comparison and evaluated various
feature extraction methods, such as bag-of-words,
Word2Vec, and Doc2Vec. The results demonstrated
that full-text similarity search could bring better re-
trieving quality. Moreover, a large body of research
studied different deep learning-based embeddings
that transfer texts to numerical values for similarity
calculation (Sarica et al., 2019; Hain et al., 2022;
Hofstätter et al., 2019; Deerwester et al., 1990;
Althammer et al., 2021; Trappey et al., 2021; Vow-
inckel and Hähnke, 2023). Since word embed-
dings cannot capture contextual information at a
higher level, (Hofstätter et al., 2019) improved the
Word2Vec model by incorporating global context,
yielding up to 5% increase in mean average preci-
sion (MAP). At the paragraph level, (Althammer
et al., 2021) evaluated the BERT-PLI (paragraph-
level interactions), which is specifically designed
for legal case retrieval (Shao et al., 2020), in both
patent retrieval and cross-domain retrieval tasks.
However, the authors showed that the performance
did not surpass the BM25 baseline and indicated
that BERT-PLI was not beneficial for patent docu-
ment retrieval. In another research, (Trappey et al.,
2021) trained the Doc2Vec model, an embedding
that can capture document-level semantic informa-
tion, based on patent texts for patent recommen-
dation. Patent recommendation aims to retrieve
target patent documents from the database. The
results showed that Doc2Vec led to more than 10%
improvement compared to bag-of-words methods
or word embeddings. This research suggests that
document-level embeddings are more promising
for document retrieval because they can effectively
capture context information.
LLMs have demonstrated effectiveness in text
retrieval tasks (Ma et al., 2023). Thus, using LLMs
for patent prior-art search is a promising research
direction. In addition, studies have shown that
integrating retrieval into LLMs can improve factual
accuracy (Nakano et al., 2021), downstream task
performance (Izacard et al., 2023), and in-context
learning capabilities (Huang et al., 2023). These
retrieval-augmented LLMs are well-established for
handling question-answering tasks (Xu et al., 2024).
The application of retrieval-augmented generation
in the patent domain is another interesting research
direction.
5.2.3
Patent Landscaping
Patent landscaping aims to retrieve patent docu-
ments related to a particular topic. Landscaping
might have a larger overall strategic value for com-
panies and be more related to the machine learning
topic. However, patent landscaping is much less
investigated compared to prior-art search.
It is straightforward to relate landscaping to
prior-art search in two ways. Firstly, we can con-
sider the target topic as a keyword for patent re-
trieval and use keyword-based methods to retrieve
documents from the database. Alternatively, we
can find seed patents to represent the topic and re-
trieve documents that are related to the seed patents
as the result (Abood and Feltenberger, 2018).
Furthermore, researchers developed classifica-
tion models for patent landscaping, which classify
whether a patent belongs to a given topic (Choi
et al., 2022; Pujari et al., 2022). (Choi et al., 2022)
concatenated text embedding of abstracts and graph
embedding of subject categories for patent repre-
sentations. Subsequently, the authors added a sim-
ple output layer to conduct the necessary binary
classification task. To stimulate the research on
16
patent-landscaping-oriented classification, (Pujari
et al., 2022) released three labeled datasets with
qualitative statistics.
5.2.4
Freedom-to-Operate Search
The freedom-to-operate (FTO) search, also known
as the clearance search, is a specific type of patent-
related research. The aim is to determine if a par-
ticular technology or product would be covered by
any active intellectual property rights of another
party. This search is critical for companies before
launching a new product or service in the market
and may be requested by investors as part of a due-
diligence process.
This task shares similarities with a prior-art
search but has an important difference: The search
for prior art takes the technology in question and
checks if any prior record (not limited to patent doc-
uments or active patents) alone (novelty) or in com-
bination (inventiveness/obviousness) contains all
the features of the technology. Thus, the search an-
alyzes if the technology is entirely part of the prior
art. The documents or other records of the prior art
anticipating the technology may also contain more
features in their claims. In contrast, the search for
freedom-to-operate checks if there is any active
patent (or application still in examination), where
an independent claim has fewer features (constitut-
ing a more general invention) than the technology
in question requires. Thus, individual claims of
relevant prior-art documents are practically in their
entirety included in the technology. Accordingly,
while a technology might be patentable due to its
novelty and inventiveness, it could still be covered
by an earlier patent or pending application if it in-
corporates the features of the prior art alongside
some additional nonobvious features. Therefore,
the new invention would be classified as a more
specific dependent invention.
Following the task definition, a freedom-to-
operate search needs to analyze the claims of poten-
tially relevant patents (applications) in detail and
break down the technology in question. Hence, the
automated retrieval of targeted patent claims is the
core of this task. Few studies have investigated this
type of retrieval task. Freunek and Bodmer (2021)
trained BERT for the freedom-to-operate search
process. They cut patent descriptions into pieces
and use BERT to retrieve relevant claims from a
constructed dataset. Their report demonstrated that
BERT was able to identify relevant claims in small-
scale experiments. As this task is important but
widely neglected by the community, we introduce
it here and suggest it for future research.
5.3
Information Extraction
5.3.1
Task Definition of Information
Extraction
The process of extracting specific information from
a text corpus is called information extraction. The
goal of information extraction is to transform tex-
tual data into a more structured format that can be
easily processed for various applications, such as
data analysis. Hence, researchers usually use infor-
mation extraction as a support task for patent analy-
sis. Fig. 8 demonstrates how information extraction
is applied in the patent domain. Rule-based and
deep-learning-based methods are two main streams
of information extraction. The extracted informa-
tion can be entities, relations, or knowledge graphs,
which are constructed based on entities and rela-
tions. This information can serve for further tasks,
such as patent analysis and patent recommenda-
tions for companies.
5.3.2
Methodologies for Information
Extraction
Rule-Based Methods.
Traditional extraction
methods are rule-based. Researchers manually pre-
define a set of rules and extract desired information
based on the rules. Chiarello et al. (2019) designed
a rule-based system to extract affordances from
patents. For example, one of the rules was “The
term user followed by can and adverbs, such as
readily efficiently, quickly and easily”. The authors
used the extracted results to evaluate the quality of
engineering design. Another study devised rules
according to the syntactic and lexical features of
claims to extract facts (Siddharth et al., 2022a).
The authors integrated and aggregated these facts
to obtain an engineering knowledge graph, which
could support inference and reasoning in various
engineering tasks.
Well-defined rules can lead to precise extraction
so that this process is transparent and interpretable.
However, creating and maintaining rules can be
time-consuming, difficult, and biased. Moreover,
rule-based methods may struggle with the variabil-
ity and complexity of natural language.
Deep-Learning-Based Methods. Deep learn-
ing methods require labeled datasets that include
entities or relations for training. There are differ-
ent network architectures for model training, such
as long short-term memory (LSTM) (Chen et al.,
17
Patent 
Data
Rule-based
Deep Learning-based
Patent Analysis
Entity
Relation
Methods
Extraction Types                      Applications
Knowledge Graph
Patent Recommendation
Engineering Design
Figure 8: Demonstration of information extraction process in patent domain
2020) and transformers (Son et al., 2022; Puccetti
et al., 2023; Giordano et al., 2022). Notably, Son
et al. (2022) stated that most patent analysis re-
search focused on claims and abstracts, neglecting
description parts that contain essential technical
information. The reason may be the notably larger
length of the description, which requires appropri-
ate models that can load such text length. Thus,
the authors proposed a framework for information
extraction through patent descriptions based on the
T5 model.
Deep-learning methods can handle a wide vari-
ety of language expressions and are easily scalable
with more data and computational power. More-
over, deep learning can capture complex patterns
and dependencies in language. Nonetheless, deep
learning requires large amounts of high-quality an-
notated data and computation resources for train-
ing.
5.3.3
Applications of Information Extraction
Patent Analysis.
Patent analysis involves the
analysis of patents with respect to multiple as-
pects, such as evaluating patent novelty or quality,
and forecasting technology trends. For example,
Chiarello et al. (2019) extracted sentences with
a high likelihood of containing affordance from
patents to evaluate the quality of engineering de-
sign, for example: “The user can easily navigate a
set of visual representations of the earlier views.”
Puccetti et al. (2023) identified technologies men-
tioned in patents to anticipate trends for an accurate
forecast and effective foresight.
Patent Recommendation. Patent recommen-
dation refers to suggesting relevant patents to users
based on their interests, research, or portfolio.
Deng and Ma (2021) extracted the semantic in-
formation between keywords in the patent domain
and constructed weighted graphs of companies and
patents. The authors compared the distance based
on weighted graphs to generate recommendations.
Chen and Deng (2023) extracted connectivity and
quality attributes for pairs of patents and compa-
nies. Based on knowledge graphs and deep neural
networks, the authors designed an interpretable
recommendation model that improved the mean
average precision of best baselines by 8.6%.
Engineering Design.
Engineering design is
a creative process that involves defining a prob-
lem, conceptualizing ideas, and implementing so-
lutions. The goal is to develop functional, effi-
cient, and innovative solutions to meet specific
requirements. Designers can gain insight by an-
alyzing problems and principal solutions extracted
from patent documents. Giordano et al. (2022)
adopted transformer-based models to extract tech-
nical problems, solutions, and advantageous effects
from patent documents and achieved an F1 score
of 90%. The extracted information helps reveal
valuable information hidden in patent documents
and generate novel engineering ideas. Similarly,
Jiang et al. (2023c) used pre-trained models to iden-
tify the motivation, specification, and structure of
inventions with the accuracy of 63%, 56%, 44%
respectively compared to expert analysis. From
design intent to specific solutions, designers can re-
view patents from a systematic perspective to gain
better design insights.
The recent LLMs have shown outstanding capa-
bilities in information extraction, such as in com-
plex scientific texts (Dunn et al., 2022) and medical
domain (Goel et al., 2023). Therefore, we antici-
pate the application of LLMs in the patent field to
improve the quality of information extraction.
18
5.4
Novelty and Inventiveness Prediction
5.4.1
Definition of Patent Feature, Novelty,
and Inventiveness
Novelty and inventiveness have a clear legal defini-
tion in most jurisdictions,14 which may strongly de-
viate from common associations (European Patent
Office, 2000; United States Patent and Trademark
Office, 2022). An invention is conceived as a com-
bination of features. It is novel if there is no older
document or other form of disclosure15 that alone
includes and/or describes all essential features of
the invention. Moreover, an invention may be con-
sidered novel for two more reasons. (1) The aggre-
gation of prior disclosures does not reveal all its
essential features. (2) Experts in the field would
not find it obvious to integrate any missing features,
for instance, according to their standard practice
within the field.
Thus, the assessment of novelty critically relies
on the concept of features. The features are the
elements the invention needs to comprise to be
the invention and are outlined in the patent claims.
The independent claims list the essential features.
For example, features can be physical elements
and objects (typically nouns together with further
specifiers), properties (often adjectives), or pro-
cessing steps in a method. Importantly, features
in many jurisdictions cannot be negative, i.e., a
missing property. Some offices allow the exclusion
of a specific technology from the prior art through
negative limitations if the description clearly states
the absence of the feature. Later exclusion of fea-
tures in the claims based on an absence in the de-
scription is not possible. The same feature can
have very different names in different documents
or even be denoted by a neologism well-defined
in corresponding invention descriptions. The high
variability of terminology between different doc-
uments is a major challenge for the examination
and also for LLMs. Therefore, novelty prediction
is a well-specified task by law and exhibits a high
level of mathematical precision atypical of other
language-related tasks. In contrast, inventiveness,
determining whether the addition of certain fea-
tures to existing technology is obvious to an expert,
can often be ambiguous.
14See Articles 54 and 56 of the European Patent Convention
(EPC), Sections 2 and 3 of the UK Consolidated Patent Act,
or §102 and §103 of the United States patent law codified in
Title 35 Code of Laws (USC) as examples.
15They collectively refer to the prior art or state of the art.
5.4.2
Task Definition of Novelty and
Inventiveness Prediction
Novelty and inventiveness prediction is a binary
classification task, aiming to determine whether
a new patent is novel, given the existing patent
database.16 Novelty is one of the essential require-
ments of patent applications and takes a vast of
resources and time for human assessment. In addi-
tion, the process of reviewing patents is complex
and detail-oriented. Even experienced examiners
can overlook critical information or fail in judg-
ment. Automated patent novelty evaluation sys-
tems can be used as an auxiliary tool for novelty
examination. Therefore, this system is critical, be-
cause it can not only improve the quality of patents
but also enhance the efficiency of patent exami-
nation. Since novelty prediction is substantially
based on text analysis, the recent LLMs appear
well-suited for this complex task.
5.4.3
Methodologies for Novelty and
Inventiveness Prediction
Indicator-Based Methods.
Indicator-based ap-
proaches rely on pre-defined indicators to measure
patent novelty compared to prior art (Verhoeven
et al., 2016; Plantec et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2024; Schmitt and Denter, 2024). Re-
searchers define indicators from various aspects,
such as the citations, and assign each indicator a
score or weight based on its importance to calculate
novelty scores.
For example, Verhoeven et al. (2016) proposed
three dimensions to evaluate technological nov-
elty, including novelty in recombination, novelty
in technological origins, and novelty in scientific
origins. They involved patent classification codes
and citation information to analyze each indica-
tor, showing that technological novelty in each di-
mension was interrelated but conveyed different
information. Additionally, Plantec et al. (2021)
investigated technological originality, which was
defined as the degree of divergence between un-
derlying knowledge couplings embedded in the
invention and the predominant design. The au-
thors used proximity indicators of direct citations,
co-citation, cosine similarity, co-occurrence, and
co-classification, with normalization methods to
balance different indicators.
Notably, most research focused on evaluating
16While researchers consider this task as a binary classifica-
tion task, it may also be useful to assess the level of novelty
of an invention.
19
Indicator 1
Indicator 2
…
Indicator N
Indicator-based Methods
Weighted score
Supervised Learning
Outlier Detection
Similarity Measurement
𝐶𝑂𝑆𝐴, 𝐵=
𝐴∙𝐵
𝐴
𝐵
Figure 9: Methods for patent novelty prediction
technological novelty and originality, which was
different from the formal definition of patent nov-
elty. While patent novelty is assessed based on
prior art and disclosures in a legal context, tech-
nological novelty and originality are analyzed in a
technical context, focusing on the advancement and
uniqueness of the technological contribution. In
addition, indicator-based methods also pose some
limitations. The selection and weighting of indica-
tors can be subjective, and the indicator may not
fully capture the nuanced aspects of inventions.
Outlier Detection. Outlier detection is based
on the assumption that novel inventions can be seen
as outliers within the landscape of existing patents
(Wang and Chen, 2019; Zanella et al., 2021; Jeon
et al., 2022). Researchers used text embeddings to
represent patents and applied outlier detection al-
gorithms to identify patents that are different from
the majority.
Researchers used local outlier factor (LOF) for
novelty outlier detection, which measured how iso-
lated the object is with respect to the surrounding
neighborhood (Breunig et al., 2000). For exam-
ple, Zanella et al. (2021) used Word2Vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013) to obtain text embedding based on
patent titles and abstracts. Wang and Chen (2019)
extracted semantic information by using latent se-
mantic analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al., 1990)
based on patent titles, abstracts, and claims. These
embeddings served as the input for LOF to mea-
sure the novelty of patents. However, this method
deviates from the definition of patent novelty, be-
cause it does not measure outliers strictly by the
features as suggested by the legal definition. Thus,
these methods may correlate with the formal patent
novelty but are not equivalent and therefore not
necessarily useful for an automated examination
process.
Furthermore, Jeon et al. (2022) used Doc2Vec
(Le and Mikolov, 2014) to process patent claims as
input for LOF. Since patent claims describe features
of inventions, this method seems plausible accord-
ing to the legal definition of novelty. Nonetheless,
there are still some questions that are not explained.
For instance, the difference between text embed-
dings may not stand for a feature difference of
inventions. Therefore, using LLMs to explicitly
extract and compare features between the target
patent and the prior art is a more sensible approach
for novelty prediction.
Another limitation of LOF is that it sometimes
flags patents that are unusual but not necessarily
novel or original in a meaningful way. For exam-
ple, a patent combining existing technologies in a
statistically rare way may be classified as an out-
lier. However, such an outlier for statistical reasons
without actual technical novelty does not represent
a significant technological advancement.
Similarity Measurements.
Researchers cal-
culate similarities between the target patent and
existing patents for novelty assessment (Siddharth
et al., 2020; Beaty and Johnson, 2021; Arts et al.,
2021; Shibayama et al., 2021). They used word
embeddings based on the patent text, such as ab-
stracts, and adopted various metrics to calculate
the similarities, for example, cosine similarity and
Euclidean distance. A patent with a low similarity
score is considered more novel.
Previous studies have investigated different text
representation methods for similarity calculation.
For example, Arts et al. (2021) extracted keywords
that related to the technical content of patents from
titles, abstracts, and claims. Each patent is repre-
sented in a 1,362,971 dimension vector, where each
dimension was the frequency of a keyword. How-
ever, the authors considered patents with major
impacts on technological progress as novel, which
was different from the legal definition.
Additionally, Shibayama et al. (2021) compared
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) embeddings be-
tween the target patent and its cited patents based
on abstracts, keywords, and titles. Nonetheless,
patent titles and abstracts are generic and do not
disclose patent features, thereby failing to assess
20
patent novelty in the legal sense.
Supervised Learning.
Supervised learning
refers to training models to classify whether a given
patent is novel, based on target patent texts and
the prior art (Chikkamath et al., 2020; Jang et al.,
2023).
Chikkamath et al. (2020) investigated a series
of machine learning models for novelty detection.
The authors conducted comprehensive empirical
studies to evaluate the performance, including var-
ious text embeddings (e.g., Word2Vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013), GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014)),
different classifiers (e.g., support vector machine,
naive Bayes), and multiple network architectures
(e.g., LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997),
GRU (Chung et al., 2014)). The inputs are target
patent claims and cited paragraph texts from prior
art that are related to the target patent. This process
makes sense because cited paragraphs possibly in-
clude features relevant to target patent claims, pro-
viding an implicit ground check for novelty. How-
ever, it is questionable whether the model detects
novelty by comparing features rather than other
aspects as deep learning models are typically black-
box methods and lack explainability.
To address the problem, Jang et al. (2023) pro-
posed an explainable model based on BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2018) to evaluate novelty. The authors
aimed to follow the legal definition by comparing
the claims of a target patent with its prior art. The
model could output the novelty prediction result,
along with claim sets with high relevance as an
explanation, which achieved 79% accuracy under
the experimental settings. This paper presented a
great idea, but BERT is nowadays outdated and
outperformed by larger and more powerful LLMs.
Suggestions for Future Work. Based on the
review of previous studies, we provide three sug-
gestions for future research. (1) Researchers should
differentiate between patent novelty and other sim-
ilar terms, such as technology originality. Patent
novelty focuses on the invention’s features com-
pared to the prior art in a legal context, whereas
technological originality refers to the advancement
and uniqueness of the technological contribution
in the technical context. (2) Researchers should
concentrate on specific patent content for assessing
novelty. Using patent claims for prediction is a sen-
sible approach as they include essential features for
comparison. In contrast, studies that leverage titles
and/or abstracts are not necessarily useful for an
automated examination process, because they are
usually generic and vain. (3) Researchers should
explore the effectiveness of powerful LLMs, such
as GPT-4, in this field. While LLMs have revolu-
tionized the field of NLP, current studies on novelty
prediction are still largely based on old-fashioned
methods, such as word embeddings. Using LLM-
based methods may significantly stimulate the au-
tomation of novelty prediction.
5.4.4
Patentability Assessment
Patentability refers to a set of criteria that
an invention must meet to be eligible for a
patent. The key criteria typically include novelty,
inventiveness/non-obviousness, and utility. Nov-
elty that has been discussed above means the in-
vention has not been known or used in the prior
art. Non-obviousness indicates that a patent should
include a sufficient inventive step beyond what is
already known, and should not be obvious to an
expert in the field. Utility means the invention is
useful and has some practical applications. There-
fore, patentability assessment is a more compre-
hensive and challenging task compared to novelty
prediction.
While most works focused on novelty predic-
tion, Schmitt et al. (2023) investigated patentability
assessment by examining both novelty and non-
obviousness following the legal definition. The
authors used a mathematical-logical approach to
decompose patent claims into features and formu-
late a feature combination. They compared the
target patent feature combination with its prior art
to evaluate novelty and non-obviousness based on
the legal definition. Since the authors only pro-
cessed one example patent for proof-of-concept,
the effectiveness and efficiency of this method on
large-scale patent applications are unknown. They
pointed out another limitation that this method
could not detect homonyms or synonyms. The
recent LLMs with outstanding capability would un-
doubtedly contribute to this task both effectively
and efficiently.
5.5
Granting Prediction
5.5.1
Task Definition of Granting Prediction
Patent granting prediction refers to predicting
whether a patent application will be granted or ter-
minally rejected by examiners17. Previous works
17A patent is typically terminally rejected if the inventors or
their representatives cannot find any more features to establish
novelty and inventiveness. Practically any good patent appli-
cation is rejected in the first cycle. If a patent application is
21
named this task “patent acceptance prediction”
(Suzgun et al., 2023), but we correct it to “grant-
ing prediction” in this paper because patents are
granted at best but not accepted. Such an automated
method could support patent examiners, patent ap-
plicants, and external investors. Due to the com-
plexity of patent examination, this process typi-
cally requires a long time. Some cases have still
not achieved the final decision after two decades,
when they typically expire at last. Thus, the au-
tomation of this process can help patent offices
manage their workload more efficiently. If auto-
mated examination procedures achieve to be bias-
free, artificial intelligence could reduce the existing
examiner dependence and also likely speed up the
procedure. Furthermore, such automated exami-
nation promises to increase the quality of exami-
nation, particularly its existing bias and variability.
The quality of examination has been and is such a
severe issue that it, for instance, led to the Amer-
ica Invents Act of 2011. In addition, patent appli-
cants can gain valuable insight, be less exposed
to bias and individuality of patent examiners, and
improve the invention based on the prediction of
the outcome. NLP may reduce the excessive cost,
particularly for small companies, to participate in
the intellectual property system. Currently, draft-
ing applications and sending them for examination
can generate overwhelming costs of thousands of
dollars every round for small businesses without
internal resources. Such bills further increase if an
examiner shows little support and a hearing needs
to be arranged in the process. Thus, automation of
the intellectual property process has the chance to
stimulate technology development and increase the
overall technological competitiveness of a society.
Similarly, investors can make better-informed de-
cisions and create strategic plans according to the
predicted outcome of patent applications.
5.5.2
Methodologies for Granting Prediction
Only few studies have investigated grating predic-
tion, probably because of the difficulty of the task.
Suzgun et al. (2023) provided baselines for patent
granting prediction by training various models on
patent abstracts and claims, such as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and BERT. None of the
accuracy was higher than 64%, indicating a clear
not rejected but granted based on the first draft of the claims,
the patent attorneys—except for a few rare cases—should
potentially contemplate if they did not potentially phrase the
independent claims too restrictively so that they lost scope by
not first testing a more general claim version.
need for improvement. In addition, Jiang et al.
(2023b) proposed the PARCEL framework, which
combines text data and metadata for patent grant-
ing prediction. PARCEL learns text representa-
tions from patent abstracts and claims by using the
contextual bidirectional long short-term memory
(LSTM) method and captures context information
based on active heterogeneous network embedding
(ActiveHNE) (Chen et al., 2019). The authors in-
corporated attention mechanisms when combining
text and network attributes for final prediction. The
results showed that this method could achieve ap-
proximately 75% accuracy, which exceeded many
previous models, such as PatentBERT (Lee and
Hsiang, 2020b). It is important to note that the
datasets used in the above two studies are different,
so the results are not comparable directly. Nonethe-
less, the studies published their datasets for future
research on related topics. In summary, the pre-
diction performance in any of the reported settings
is far from satisfactory. Due to the high formal-
ity, intensive future research on this complex topic
promises improvement.
Classification Model
Patent Document
Yes
No
Figure 10: Pipeline of patent granting prediction and
litigation prediction
5.6
Litigation Prediction
5.6.1
Task Definition of Litigation Prediction
Litigation prediction aims to predict whether a
patent will cause litigation, typically between two
companies. Patent litigation involves various types.
For example, one of the most common scenarios
in patent litigation is infringement, where patent
holders claim that their patent rights are infringed.
Additionally, third parties can question the patent
validity, such as pointing out prior art that can prove
the patent’s claims are not novel and/or inventive.18
An early identification of whether a patent might
become the subject of litigation can help compa-
nies manage the quality of their patent portfolio
18Strategically, most defendants immediately trigger cross
action going after the validity of the respective rights when
they receive an infringement indictment when the case is not
rock solid.
22
(Wu et al., 2023).
5.6.2
Methodologies for Litigation Prediction
Manual litigation prediction is an expensive and
time-consuming task faced by companies, which is
based on intensive reading and experience, and typ-
ically does not exceed mere speculation. Hence, re-
searchers developed different methods to automate
the process and reduce costs. Campbell et al. (2016)
adopted multiple pieces of patent information to
predict litigation with machine learning models.
The authors combined metadata (e.g., number of
claims, patent type), claim texts, and graph features
that summarized patent citations to inform their pre-
dictions. The results demonstrated that the meta-
data has the highest impact on litigation prediction.
Apart from using patent contents, such as metadata
and texts, Liu et al. (2018) incorporated lawsuit
records of companies to collaboratively predict lit-
igation between companies. The authors trained
deep learning models that integrated patent content
feature vectors and tensors for lawsuit records. This
method brought more than 10% gain in precision
compared to using text inputs only. Moreover, Wu
et al. (2023) improved the numerical representa-
tions of patents and companies to capture the com-
plex relations among plaintiffs, defendants, and
patents more effectively. The authors demonstrated
that this method could increase the performance by
up to 10% compared to the previous approach and
show robustness under various data-sparse situa-
tions.
5.7
Patent Valuation
5.7.1
Task Definition of Patent Valuation
The value of a single patent, patent applications, or
an entire portfolio is highly important for young
companies, where investment relies. However, the
value of patents is not obvious and can reflect ex-
pectations as most immaterial assets do. Firstly,
the single patents of a portfolio can have a lower
value than the portfolio. Thus, patents owned by
a third party may influence the value of a patent,
e.g., if one depends on the other or if they solve
the same problem with alternative solutions, i.e.,
feature sets. Furthermore, the value may depend
on the function the specific patent(s) are supposed
to fulfill and therefore also be different depending
on the (potential) owner.
For blocking competitors or enforcing licensing
deals, a single patent of a portfolio can be highly
valuable if all the features of an independent claim
are unavoidable. A single patent can thus turn into
a road block for others. If, however, a patent appli-
cation for the same purpose is significantly tattered
during the examination that the independent claim
requires substantial avoidable features, the patent
is granted but without much value.
However, for the freedom-to-operate, patents
should not contain dependencies, which means that
active patents owned by others would need to be
used to exploit the invention. Thus, in this case, the
patent has only value in combination with rights to
previous patents. Furthermore, the portfolio should
ideally not leave too many gaps where others could
establish themselves. In all those cases, however,
the scope of the patent, i.e., how wide of a range the
independent claims in the granted state after exami-
nation can cover, is an essential factor determining
the value, although not the only one.
Early identification of high-value patents can
help various industries and stakeholders establish
optimal strategies. This task can be either a re-
gression or classification problem. The regression
task aims to predict the actual number of the value.
For example, Lin et al. (2018) used the number of
citations as a measure of patent quality, because
previous works have indicated that the number of
citations is closely related to the patent value (Al-
bert et al., 1991; Harhoff et al., 1999). However,
the globally existing correlation between citations
and patent value appears to include large variabil-
ity, so it may not be the best individual predictor.
More importantly, the citations typically trickle in
after years, often when an assessment of the value
of a patent is no longer needed. Other simpler and
more accurate indicators may be already available,
such as assigned revenue share in actual products,
licensing fees, or sale of the patents.
In the context of binary classification, the pur-
pose is to predict whether a patent is of high quality
(Hu et al., 2023). Additionally, researchers clas-
sify the value of patents into different levels. For
example, Zhang et al. (2024) graded the quality of
patents into four classes based on expert consulta-
tion and questionnaire surveys.
5.7.2
Methodologies for Patent Valuation
Previous studies usually adopted pre-defined indi-
cators for patent valuation. Hu et al. (2023) de-
signed four dimensions to evaluate patent quality,
including legal value, technological value, compet-
itiveness value, and scientific value. The authors
extracted and transformed the indicators into nu-
23
Classification Model
Patent Document
Regression Model
Patent Value
Binary Classification
(High-quality patent or not)
Multi-class Classification 
(Value in different levels)
Figure 11: Specifics of patent valuation tasks
merical values for training machine learning mod-
els. Additionally, Du et al. (2021) incorporated
patent inventors’ reputations as a new indicator and
proved the effectiveness for patent quality evalua-
tion.
Text data are also important for patent valua-
tion. Researchers applied NLP to extract seman-
tic features of patent texts for quality assessment,
which contained detailed contextual information
(Lin et al., 2018; Chung and Sohn, 2020). Lin
et al. (2018) used attention-based CNNs to ex-
tract semantic representation from patent texts,
and adopted GNNs to represent patent citation
networks and attributes.
These feature vectors
were concatenated to predict the quality of new
patents. This method outperformed baseline ap-
proaches, such as using CNNs alone. Chung and
Sohn (2020), on the other hand, used both CNNs
and bidirectional LSTM for patent valuation classi-
fication based on abstracts and claims. The authors
transformed texts into word embeddings as inputs
and classified patents into three quality levels for
prediction. The model achieved over 75% precision
and recall in identifying high-value semiconductor
patents.
Moreover, Liu et al. (2023) proposed a multi-task
learning method that jointly trained classification
models for the identification of high-value patents
and standard-essential patents, i.e., patents that are
required to implement a specific industry standard.
These two tasks were related, which made the col-
laborative training effective. The results showed
that the average performance improvement was
around 1–2% compared to single-task learning.
5.8
Technology Forecasting
Technology forecasting refers to predicting fu-
ture technological developments based on exist-
ing patent data. Many businesses, researchers, and
policymakers consider it important to understand
the direction of technological innovation, design
strategies, and adjust their investment. As technol-
ogy forecasting is a broad concept, we summarize
and categorize existing studies into three sub-types,
including emerging technology forecasting, tech-
nology life cycle prediction, and patent application
trend prediction.
5.8.1
Emerging Technology Forecasting
Emerging technology forecasting is a binary clas-
sification task, which predicts whether a patent
contains emerging technologies. This task may
share similarities with some forms of patent valu-
ation because high-value patents are more likely
to become emerging. Due to the similarity with
valuation, previous work identified emerging tech-
nologies by assessing the quality of patents (Lee
et al., 2018). In addition, studies developed more
elaborate machine-learning models for this task.
Kyebambe et al. (2017) labeled a cluster of patents
as emerging technology if it demonstrated evidence
of possessing features that could introduce a new
technological class shortly. The authors extracted
patent information, such as patent class and num-
ber of citations, and trained various models (e.g.,
support vector machine, naive Bayes) that achieved
approximately 70% precision.
As machine learning methods usually require
large datasets for training, Zhou et al. (2020) aimed
to evade this issue with a generative adversarial net-
work (GAN). The authors labeled emerging tech-
nologies based on Gartner’s emerging technology
hype cycles (GETHC), which aims to describe a
specific stage of development of an emerging tech-
nology. They selected and extracted some patent at-
tributes, such as the number of backward citations,
to train machine learning models for prediction.
Importantly, they incorporated a GAN to generate
synthetic samples in the form of feature vectors for
training. The synthetic data finally improved the
prediction precision to 77% on the real test set.
While the above studies investigated emerging
technologies from a technological perspective, re-
searchers also evaluated social impacts based on
related website articles (Zhou et al., 2021). The au-
thors measure social impact through the frequency
of patent-related keywords found in website arti-
cles, where “website articles” encompass all arti-
cles on emerging technology-related websites, and
“patent keywords” are non-virtual words present in
patent titles. They collected a multi-source dataset,
including 129,694 patents and 35,940 website arti-
cles. They selected 11 patent indicators as inputs
24
Is the technology emerging?
Emerging Technology 
Forecasting
Technology Life 
Cycle Prediction
Patent Application 
Trend Prediction
Maturity
Introduction
Growth
Saturation
Patent
Yes
Classification model
No
What is the type?
Patent Application
Physics
Classification model
Chemistry
…
or
or
or
?
Figure 12: Specifics of technology forecasting tasks
and classified social impacts into three levels as
labels. Subsequently, they trained a deep learning
model that achieved 74% accuracy.
5.8.2
Technology Life Cycle Prediction
The aim of technology life cycle prediction is to
estimate the stages of a particular technology from
its inception to the eventual decline.
In estab-
lished classifications, the typical stages of a technol-
ogy life cycle include introduction, growth, matu-
rity, and saturation (Mansouri and Mohammadpour,
2023). The technology life cycle and the related
technology adoption (as well as the hype cycle)
are important aspects of innovation and product
management.
The first stage involves the conception and initial
development of the technology. If the technology
proves viable, it will be adopted and developed
rapidly, with an increase in market acceptance. As
the technology becomes widely adopted, it enters a
maturity stage. Finally, in the saturation stage, the
previous technology will be replaced by a new one
soon. Understanding and predicting the life cycle
of a technology is a key part of strategic planning
and market analysis, especially in fast-evolving
fields like artificial intelligence. The phase of a
technology affects the types of problems for a man-
ufacturer (e.g., maturity, field experience, not es-
tablished design rules as well as design optima,
and reliability in early stages vs. mere cost focus
later on), the type of customers (smaller customer
segment of high-tech enthusiasts and soon early
adopters vs. the later mass market), and also the
company strategy (low volume, high-profit high-
tech companies vs. mass-market).
Previous studies used a hidden Markov model
(HMM) for technology life cycle prediction (Lee
et al., 2016; Mansouri and Mohammadpour, 2023).
Researchers extracted several indicators from
patents, such as patent class and citations, and in-
vestigated the state transferring probabilities. They
trained the hidden Markov model to predict the
probability of each phase in the future. However,
using intrinsic indicators from patents as the sole
predictor of technology life cycles may not be
sufficient. The adoption and success of patents
are heavily influenced by social needs and user
acceptance. In addition, other extrinsic factors,
such as market trends, competitive landscape, and
strategic decisions, can influence the pace of tech-
nology adoption and development. Therefore, a
multi-dimensional approach that combines intrin-
sic patent data with extrinsic information will likely
provide a more accurate and holistic prediction of
technology life cycles.
5.8.3
Patent Application Trend Prediction
Patent application trend prediction aims to pre-
dict patent classification codes for which a com-
pany will apply in the future, given a sequence of
patents that were previously applied by the same
company.
Precise forecasts of trends in patent
applications can enable businesses to devise ef-
fective development strategies and identify poten-
tial partners or competitors in advance (Zou et al.,
2023). Researchers implemented and tested dy-
namic graph representation learning methods for
this task under various experimental conditions to
demonstrate the effectiveness (Zou et al., 2023).
Although the authors significantly improved the
performance compared to machine learning base-
lines, the recall was hardly higher than 20% on
overall experiments, suggesting substantial room
for improvement. Company-dependent patent ap-
plication prediction is a newly proposed task and
only few papers have investigated solutions.
25
Innovation
Recommendation
Concept Association Analysis
Technologies and Applications
Extract
Compare and obtain novel ideas
Technology Gap Detection
Technology Network
Explore on white space
Novel ideas
Cross-domain Analysis
Domain A
…
Domain B
…
Technologies and Applications
Novel ideas
Idea Generation
Language Model
Input instruction
Novel ideas
Figure 13: Methods of innovation recommendation task
5.9
Innovation Recommendation
5.9.1
Task Definition of Innovation
Recommendation
Innovation recommendation refers to the process
of suggesting new ideas or methods in a technology
context. The automation of this task can enhance
competitiveness, efficiency, or user experience. In-
novation recommendations should help companies
to identify novel research and development oppor-
tunities.19
5.9.2
Methodologies for Innovation
Recommendation
Concept Association Analysis. Researchers used
NLP techniques to identify key concepts in patent
documents and analyze their associations to dis-
cover novel combinations of concepts and suggest
potential directions for innovation. For example,
Song et al. (2017) identified technologies with tech-
nical attributes similar to a target technology. Thus,
the authors could obtain novel technology ideas
by applying these similar but distinct technical at-
tributes to the target technology. From a patent-
19Strictly speaking, the use of AI to generate inventions
may raise legal issues, notably around inventorship and own-
ership. The use of AI for writing a patent could do so if the
AI starts to add information or hallucinate so that it could
be considered inventive, not considering copyright and au-
thorship rights. Traditionally, patents are granted to human
inventors, i.e., natural persons. The US Patent and Trademark
Office, at present, does not consider AI-generated inventions
as patentable, which limits how technology gap detection
and idea generation can be used to create patentable inven-
tions. Practically, natural co-inventors might suppress the
co-inventorship of an AI until technical means are available to
detect AI contributions. No precedence seems available if that
would collide the inventors’ oath filed with the application or
would set an inventor into bad faith. These issues highlight the
need for evolving legal standards to accommodate the rapid
advancements of AI technology in the patent system.
law perspective, it would be naturally interesting
whether and how such technology ideas were syn-
thesized out of existing patents. Potentially, the
inclusion of intentional variability through higher
temperature may lead to a more creative tool.
Technology Gap Detection. Technology gap
detection algorithmically searches for areas within
a technology field that are underdeveloped or unex-
plored. Such technology gaps can indicate new op-
portunities for research and innovation. TechNet is
a large-scale network consisting of technical terms
retrieved from patent texts and associated accord-
ing to pair-wise semantic distances (Sarica et al.,
2020). Sarica et al. (2021) focused on white space
surrounding a focal design domain and adopted se-
mantic distance to guide the inference of new tech-
nical concepts in TechNet. However, the strong de-
pendency of TechNet on the terminology in patents
may need further research because quite a number
of patents form their own world of terminology and
technical terms.
Cross-Domain Analysis. Cross-domain anal-
ysis links patents across different technological
fields to find proper cross-domain techniques. Such
cross-domain innovations can sometimes lead to
breakthrough developments. Wang et al. (2023)
applied causal extraction with a BERT-derived
model to patents from different domains to out-
put cause–effect matches to represent technology–
application relationships that can undergo similar-
ity comparison afterwards. The results are con-
nections between patents from different fields that
appear to have similarities in causality, presumably
technology–application links, and may be good
candidates to stimulate each other’s field. It sup-
ports cross-domain comparisons of technologies
and applications to identify prospects for multiple
26
w1
i
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Language Generation Model
Input word sequence
Input embedding
Network architecture
Output embedding
Output word sequence
w2
i
w3
i
…
wn
i
w1
o
w2
o
…
wm
o
Figure 14: Illustration of text generation tasks
applications of a specific technology. However, this
approach may depend strongly on the terminology
used in both patent texts.
Idea Generation. Researchers developed gen-
erative language models to output innovative ideas
automatically. A previous study fine-tuned the
GPT-2 model to generate idea titles based on in-
put keywords in a specific domain (Zhu and Luo,
2022). The authors collected patent titles and ex-
tracted keywords from them. They used keywords
as inputs and fine-tuned GPT-2 to generate titles.
However, patent titles are often generic for legal
reasons. For example, “charging station and meth-
ods to control it” covers almost any conceivable
detail of a car charger.
6
Patent Generation Tasks
Patent text generation tasks aim to automatically
create coherent and contextually relevant texts
based on input prompts or requirements. As shown
in Fig. 14, language generation is a sequence-to-
sequence mapping of texts. The input and output
are both word sequences, x = [wi
1, wi
2, . . . , wi
n]
and y = [wo
1, wo
2, . . . , wo
m]. There are four types
of patent text generation tasks according to dif-
ferent objectives, including summarization (Sec-
tion 6.1), translation (Section 6.2), simplification
(Section 6.3), and patent writing (Section 6.4).
6.1
Summarization
6.1.1
Task Definition of Summarization
Patent summarization aims to create concise and
informative summaries of patent documents. Given
the complex and technical nature of patents, sum-
marization helps in extracting the most important
information and paraphrasing in more accessible
language depending on the audience. The target
audience may be as diverse as patent examiners,
researchers, development engineers, and legal pro-
fessionals. Additionally, summarization can extract
the gist of patent subgroups within classification
systems, which is essential for organizing and man-
aging large patent datasets (Souza et al., 2021). The
summarization process involves understanding and
condensing the key aspects of a patent, such as
claims, background, and detailed descriptions of
the invention.
6.1.2
Methodologies for Summarization
Extractive and abstractive summarization are two
primary approaches for text summarization.
Extractive Summarization. Extractive methods
refer to selecting and extracting key phrases or sen-
tences directly from the text of the patent. The goal
is to retain the most significant and representative
parts of the original document without altering the
text. For instance, (Souza et al., 2019) used dif-
ferent approaches, such as term frequency-inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) and latent semantic
analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al., 1990), to choose
the most representative sentence for each classifi-
27
Model
Architecture
R-1
R-2
R-L
Seq2Seq (Sharma et al., 2019)
LSTM
28.74
7.87
24.66
SentRewriting (Sharma et al., 2019)
LSTM
37.12
11.87
32.45
PEGASUS (Zhang et al., 2020)
Transformer
43.55
20.43
31.80
BigBird-PEGASUS (Zaheer et al., 2020)
Transformer
60.64
42.46
50.01
LongT5 (Guo et al., 2022)
Transformer
76.87
66.06
70.76
Table 5: Comparison of representative models on the BigPatent benchmark (Sharma et al., 2019) for patent
summarization as measured by ROUGE score (Lin, 2004)
cation subgroup20.
Compared to abstractive summarization, extrac-
tive methods are simpler to implement, as they do
not require complex language generation capabili-
ties. In addition, since the extracted sentences are
taken verbatim, the original context, meaning, and
particularly the wording of texts are well-preserved.
However, this method may lack coherence, because
extractive summaries can sometimes be disjointed.
Moreover, it is hard to capture the essence of the
text if the key information is not explicitly stated.
In that sense, the summary can have the same
limitations as the claims, which only contain the
essence of the invention (in features) but are often
poorly intelligible without the description as their
dictionary.
Abstractive Summarization.
Abstractive sum-
marization involves rephrasing original documents
into shorter texts that retain essential information,
a process demanding a deeper understanding of the
text and the ability to generate coherent summaries.
Researchers commonly use sequence-to-sequence
models for this task, where the models receive orig-
inal texts as inputs and produce summarized texts
as outputs.
(Trappey et al., 2020) trained a summarization
model based on long short-term memory (LSTM),
i.e., a sequential deep learning network, with at-
tention mechanisms to extract essential knowledge
from patent documents. Although promising, the
performance was surpassed by the recently pro-
posed transformer-based models. Concretely, fine-
tuning transformer-based language models for sum-
marization has shown remarkable performance in
both general and patent domains (Zhang et al.,
2020; Zaheer et al., 2020). Whereas the focus of
most research has been on single patent summariza-
tion, (Kim and Yoon, 2022) introduced a method
for multi-document summarization. The authors
showed that their models enabled high-quality in-
20Patent sub-groups are the most specific level in the patent
classification hierarchy, see Section 5.1.2
formation summary for a large number of patent
documents, which could be used to facilitate the
activities of researchers and decision-makers.
Abstractive summarization can produce more
concise, fluent, and cohesive summaries, by con-
densing and synthesizing information from multi-
ple parts of the source text. Nonetheless, there is
a higher risk of distorting facts, confusing mean-
ings of terms that may deviate from everyday lan-
guage on which the embedding of language models
was trained, or misrepresenting the original text
because of the involvement of paraphrasing and re-
wording. Additionally, abstractive summarization
can be resource-intensive in terms of computational
power and training data.
Table 5 compares representative models on the
BigPatent benchmark (Sharma et al., 2019) for
patent summarization. Transformer-based mod-
els outperform previous LSTM-based methods. In
addition, models with long input lengths, such as
LongT5 (Guo et al., 2022), significantly increase
the performance, because patent descriptions usu-
ally contain more than 10,000 tokens (Suzgun et al.,
2023).
LLMs have achieved satisfactory performance
on most summarization tasks in the general do-
main, even surpassing the benchmark of reference
summaries (Pu et al., 2023). The state-of-the-art
method for text summarization is to use LLMs for
abstractive summarization (Rao et al., 2024). How-
ever, how these LLMs, such as GPT-4, perform
on patent summarization is still worth investigat-
ing. The technical content and legal information in
patents may pose some challenges to LLMs com-
pared to normal summarization.
6.2
Translation
6.2.1
Task Definition of Translation
Patent translation refers to the process of converting
patent texts from one language to another, which
is crucial in the global landscape of intellectual
property. Translation can make patents accessible
28
to individuals, companies, and researchers across
different linguistic regions, fostering cross-border
innovation and cooperation. In addition, transla-
tion can ensure that patents comply with the legal
requirements of different countries and obtain pro-
tection under the law.
Automated translation is maybe one of the ear-
liest language-processing applications in the intel-
lectual property domain and has become a highly
established tool in the field already, which is used
by patent offices routinely. Patent offices can lever-
age the large body of meticulously translated docu-
ments in many languages for model training. For
instance, the European Patent Office (EPO) de-
scribed their approach to identify parallel patent
documents and sentences to generate training and
evaluation datasets for patent translation (Wirth
et al., 2023). The EPO offers machine transla-
tion on its free database interface, Espacenet. The
engine in the back, called Patent Translate, was
initially developed in 2012 in collaboration with
Google. It initially started with the most frequent
six languages and enhanced to now understand all
of the office’s languages in addition to many oth-
ers, such as Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. At
a similar time, the World International Patent Of-
fice (WIPO) introduced a machine translation tool,
WIPO Translate, integrated into their search engine
Patentscope. It was reported to outperform stan-
dard machine translators for everyday texts, such
as Microsoft Translate (Pouliquen, 2015). Standard
translators tend to vary terms and use synonyms in
translations, which are acceptable or even desired
in everyday language. However, the substitution is
not acceptable and can render a patent worthless
when it involves features or feature-relevant lan-
guage. Therefore, in designing generative models,
the tendency to introduce variations, often referred
to as the temperature in LLMs, must be carefully
managed.
6.2.2
Methodologies for Translation
Machine translation has been widely studied and
gained significant progress in the general domain,
such as statistical methods and neural machine
translation (Wang et al., 2022). However, these
models may not achieve strong performance in
patent translation, because patents contain highly
specialized technical jargon and precise terminol-
ogy, challenging accurate translation. Therefore,
researchers focused on the adaptation of general
machine translation models to the patent domain.
Patent Translation Datasets.
A feasible ap-
proach is to train the translation model on the
above-mentioned multi-language patent data. For
example, (Heafield et al., 2022) proposed the Eu-
roPat corpus, which includes patent-specific paral-
lel data for official European languages: English,
German, Spanish, French, Croatian, Norwegian,
and Polish. In addition, the European Patent Of-
fice described their approach to identify parallel
patent documents and sentences to generate train-
ing and evaluation datasets for patent translation
(Wirth et al., 2023).
Fixing Specific Errors. Since accurate language
is crucial in patent texts while language models are
even designed to vary based on distance metrics of
word meanings, for instance, research has studied
pre- and post-processing methods for fixing com-
mon problems. As an example for terminology er-
rors, (Ying et al., 2021) identified eight types of ter-
minology errors in patent translation from English
into Chinese and suggested solving these errors
by pre-editing the source texts. In addition, (Lar-
royed, 2023) compared ChatGPT (Ray, 2023) and
the Patent Translate system of the European Patent
Office on patent translation task. In their analy-
sis, Patent Translate could exploit its training on
patent corpora and specialization in patent transla-
tion to outperform ChatGPT in accuracy. ChatGPT,
however, performed better on language structure
and overall textual coherence. In linguistics, these
two qualities might refer to paradigmatic versus
syntagmatic properties. Such results suggest that a
combination of both advantages may open new op-
portunities. One part of the solution may be on the
model side, where transformers or a combination
of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and trans-
formers may improve structural, i.e., syntagmatic
shortcomings. Further deriving a domain-specific
model through training and/or fine-tuning to patent
corpora promises to enhance both syntagmatic and
paradigmatic performance through the incorpora-
tion of more patent-typical language structures as
well as sharper control over terminology-related
issues.
While translation systems, such as Patent Trans-
late, offer valuable tools for understanding patent
documents in various languages, it is important to
recognize that machine translations may not always
achieve the precision required for legal or formal
purposes. Therefore, for critical applications such
as patent filings or legal proceedings, consultation
with professional human translators is advisable
29
to ensure the highest level of accuracy. From the
above studies, we can conclude that training spe-
cific LLMs on extensive patent translation datasets
is highly promising to further improve translation
accuracy and language precision.
6.3
Simplification
6.3.1
Task Definition of Simplification
Patent simplification refers to the process of trans-
lating complex and technical patent documents into
more straightforward readable language. The dif-
ficulty of patent texts is often two-fold: First, the
content is supposed to be at the forefront of science
and technology and/or refer to particular details that
require an exceptionally good understanding of the
context. Second, the language that describes the
invention focuses on precision, accuracy, and some-
times intentional flexibility to avoid unnecessary
reduction of the scope instead of readability. This
precision typically leads to high repetitiveness in
both terminology and structure of sentences, para-
graphs, and sections. Especially, sentences are of-
ten overburdened with specifications for precision
(typically relative or adverbial clauses) or examples
and alternatives for a wide enough scope.
Different from patent summarization, all infor-
mation should ideally be retained in simplified texts
in the task of patent simplification. The aim is to
improve readability and make patent texts more
accessible to a wider audience, such as technical
experts without an interest in legal language. Sim-
plification can involve multiple aspects, such as
summarizing key concepts, removing jargon, and
rephrasing technical terms in layman’s terms.
6.3.2
Methodologies for Simplification
Formatting. Original documents undergo format-
ting to enhance accessibility without modifying the
texts. Patent offices, for instance, often structure
claims in their interfaces. On the macro level, the
dependency on claims can be automatically derived
from the claims (e.g., Invention of one of the pre-
vious claims, wherein ...) to form a tree structure
of claims. An example claims tree is shown in
Fig. 15. Within a claim, the individual features can
be separated so that a graphical representation can
indicate which features get added by each claim.
The independent claims may further have a two-
part structure (e.g., European Patent Regulations
Rule 43, PCT Regulations Rule 6.3, US 37 CFR
1.75(e)) where the first part (preamble) lists the fea-
tures of the prior art and the second part (typically
introduced with an adverb as whereby, a participle
as comprising or characterized by, or a relative pro-
noun) refines it with further features (characterizing
portion).
While the European Patent Office uses explicit
references in the text to other claims to generate
claim trees, such as according to claim 1, (Ander-
sson et al., 2013) developed a dependency claim
graph to exploit implicit references by detecting
discourse references. The authors defined rules to
extract and use linguistic information to build the
tree, including part-of-speech, phrase boundaries,
and discourse theory. The claim tree simplified the
connection and relation between complex claims to
improve patent accessibility. In addition, (Shereme-
tyeva, 2014) designed two levels of visualization of
patent documents. The macro-level simplification
involved the development of claim trees based on
pre-defined rules. Meanwhile, micro-level simpli-
fication used both rule-based and statistical tech-
niques that rely on linguistic knowledge. The au-
thors highlighted nominal terms with the reference
in patent description, aiming to improve readability
by providing terminology at a glance. They also
segmented complex claims into simple sentences to
increase accessibility. This hierarchy visualization
system effectively increases the overall productiv-
ity in processing patent documents.
To simplify patent claim texts, (Ferraro et al.,
2014) proposed some rules to segment the origi-
nal claims into three components, consisting of the
preamble, transitional phrase, and body. Although
the clearer presentation of patent claims improved
the readability and accessibility, the original com-
plicated texts were not modified. Thus, it could still
be challenging to read and understand the technical
documents.
Paraphrasing.
Paraphrasing refers to rewriting
the original complex sentences into simpler ver-
sions with the text meaning unchanged. (Kang
et al., 2018) proposed a simplification system based
on the analysis of patent syntactic and lexical pat-
terns.
This simplification system could detect
complex sentences and simplify those sentences
through splitting, dropping, and modifying. Para-
phrasing can break down complex concepts into
simpler language to be accessible to a broader au-
dience. Nonetheless, paraphrasing may lose subtle
nuances and specific terminologies, which are cru-
cial in some contexts.
Additionally, some studies focused on sequence-
to-sequence models for text simplification in the
30
Claim 1:
An access port (10) for providing subcutaneous access to a patient, comprising:
a body (20) defining a fluid cavity (36) accessible via a septum (18); and
a substrate (440) attached to the body (20) and molded into the access port (10) 
via injection molding, the substrate including an inner surface whereon an ink-
based radiopaque identification feature is disposed such that the identification 
feature (200) is encapsulated between the substrate (440) and the body (20) of the 
access port (410).
access port (10) 
body (20)
substrate (440) 
inner surface 
identification feature (200)
comprise
fluid cavity (36)
define
attached to
include
disposed on
encapsulated 
between
molded into
(a)                                                                                         (b)
Figure 15: (a) The claims tree of EP 2 346 553 (specifically version A1 of it, i.e., the not granted (therefore A and
not B, C or similar) first (accordingly counter 1) filing of the applicant), which can be generated from the text based
on the logical relationship between the 20 claims. (b) Claim 1 of patent EP 2 346 553 B1. Each claim can further be
split into features, e.g., all elements that a device collectively has to contain to be considered an embodiment of the
invention.
general domain. For example, (Martin et al., 2020)
proposed to use explicit control tokens for at-
tributes, such as length, lexical complexity, and
syntactic complexity, to tailor simplifications for
the needs of different audiences. However, these
models were rarely used for patent simplification
because of the lack of in-domain datasets. (Ca-
sola et al., 2023) aimed to break the boundary by
proposing data generation methods for patent sim-
plification. The authors used a Pegasus-based—a
transformer-based model for abstractive summa-
rization (Zhang et al., 2020)—paraphraser trained
on general-domain datasets in a zero-shot fash-
ion to obtain simplification candidates from com-
plex patent sentences. Subsequently, the authors
discussed filtering to select appropriate candidate
patent documents for simplification only and ob-
tained the first large-scale dataset for patent sen-
tence simplification.
In contrast to well-established tasks of patent
summarization and translation, patent simplifica-
tion is less investigated and worth more attention.
Particularly, established benchmarks to compare
different models and approaches are important to
accelerate the development of this topic. LLMs
appear an ideal tool for this task, despite the chal-
lenges of processing complex technical documents
with legal requirements.
6.4
Patent Writing
6.4.1
Task Definition of Patent Writing
Patent writing refers to the automated creation of
patent texts, including various sections such as
abstracts, claims, and descriptions. The primary
goal of patent text generation is to assist inven-
tors, patent agents, and attorneys in drafting patent
applications more efficiently and effectively. Text
generation is a difficult task, especially in the patent
domain due to the linguistic, technical, and legal
complexities. These facts pose significant chal-
lenges for language models to handle complex legal
jargon and terminology while ensuring accuracy
and adherence to technical norms.
6.4.2
Methodologies for Patent Writing
A few studies have investigated patent writing for
different sections based on fine-tuning LLMs. Lee
and Hsiang (2020a) provided an initial proof-of-
concept study for patent claim generation. The
authors fine-tuned the GPT-2 model to generate
patent claims, but the quality of generated claims
was not measured, which reduced the actual value
31
Task
Method
Data
Claim generation (Lee and Hsiang, 2020b)
Fine-tunning GPT-2
555,890 patent claims from granted
U.S. utility patents in 2013 (Claims
are the first and independent claims)
Title, abstract, and claim generation (Lee,
2020)
Fine-tuning transformer-based
models
404,975,822 utility patent from 1976
to 2017-08 in Google Patents Public
Datasets
Description-based claim generation (Jiang
et al., 2024c)
Fine-tuning Llama-3-8B, GPT-4
(zero-shot)
9,500 pairs of patent descriptions and
claims
Claim generation, text infilling (Christofi-
dellis et al., 2022)
Fine-tuning GPT-2 with Multi-
task Learning
11,600,000 patents published between
1998 and 2020
Claim revision (Jiang et al., 2024b)
Fine-tuning Llama-3.1-8B, GPT-
4 (zero-shot)
22.6K pairs of application-level and
granted versions of patent claims
Specification generation (Wang et al.,
2024a)
Fine-tuning GPT-J and T5
13,725 patents from USPTO in CPC
code of G06N
Paper to patent generation (Knappich et al.,
2024)
Fine-tuning Llama-3-8B
1,800 pairs of academic papers and
corresponding patent documents (out-
lines)
Table 6: Previous studies for patent writing task.
of the work. In further research, Lee (2020) trained
the GPT-2 model to map one section to another,
such as generating abstracts based on title and gen-
erating claims from abstracts. Nonetheless, patent
professionals may raise concerns about the valid-
ity of the tasks. Patent titles only include a few
words and lack specificity, which makes title-based
generation unfounded. In contrast, abstract-based
claim generation sometimes makes sense because
the abstract in some patents is just a paraphrased
version of the first independent claim (without the
legal phraseology). Hence, this task is straightfor-
ward by extracting and revising the abstract. How-
ever, abstracts are typically crafted to be general
and reveal minimal details of the invention, adher-
ing to requirements of patent offices (European
Patent Office, 2000; World Intellectual Property
Organization, 2022). Consequently, it is almost
impossible to generate detailed invention features
required by claims based solely on general and vain
abstracts. Therefore, both title-based and abstract-
based generation tasks are not well-conditioned.
Alternatively, patent descriptions include all de-
tails and specific embodiments of the invention,
which makes description-based patent generation
notably promising for future research. Recent re-
search constructed a dataset with 9,500 examples
and evaluated the performance of various LLMs
in patent claim generation. The results demon-
strated that description-based claim generation out-
performed previous research, which relied on ab-
stracts (Jiang et al., 2024c). Moreover, fine-tuning
can enhance the claims’ completeness, concep-
tual clarity, and logical linkage. GPT-4 achieved
the best performance among all tested LLMs and
uniquely grouped alternative embodiments within
dependent claims logically. Despite promising ca-
pabilities, comprehensive revisions are still neces-
sary for LLM-generated claims to pass rigorous
patent scrutiny. Follow-up work further explored
the ability of LLMs to revise patent claims. The
findings indicate that LLMs often introduce in-
effective edits that deviate from the intended re-
visions, whereas fine-tuning can improve perfor-
mance (Jiang et al., 2024b). Conversely, Wang
et al. (2024a) appear to be the first to investigate
the generation of patent specifications from claim
and drawing texts. They fine-tuned GPT-J (Wang,
2021) and T-5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and demon-
strated their ability to produce human-like patent
specifications that adhere to a legal writing style.
However, their approach still relies on certain sim-
plifying assumptions that deviate from real-world
patent drafting practices, such as the assumption
that each specification paragraph corresponds to
only one claim feature and a single drawing. While
their work lays a solid foundation for specification
generation, significant challenges remain before
achieving practical applicability.
In addition, Christofidellis et al. (2022) pro-
posed a prompt-based generative transformer for
the patent domain, which used GPT-2 as backbone
and trained with multi-task learning (Maurer et al.,
2016) on part-of-patent generation, text infilling,
and patent coherence evaluation tasks. Specifically,
the training processes involved two text generation
tasks, generating patent titles based on abstracts
and suggesting words for masked tokens in the
32
given abstracts. The performance was better than
the baseline, specifically BERT and GPT-2 on a
single task. This paper indicates that multi-task
learning may be a promising method for patent
text generation in the future. A recent report fo-
cused on the drafting of patent sections from aca-
demic papers, such as background, summary, and
description (Knappich et al., 2024). The authors
highlighted the potential of LLMs in patent draft-
ing and revealed the main challenges, including
handling content repetition, retrieving contextually
relevant data, and adapting the system for longer
documents.
Recent studies have explored the application of
LLM-based agents in various aspects of patent
drafting, analysis, and management. An agent in
this context refers to an autonomous system that
leverages LLMs to perform specialized tasks, of-
ten in a structured, multi-agent framework where
different agents collaborate to achieve complex ob-
jectives. For example, Wang et al. (2024c) pro-
posed EvoPat, a multi-LLM-based agent designed
for patent summarization and analysis.
Wang
et al. (2024b) introduced AutoPatent, a multi-
agent framework comprising an LLM-based plan-
ner agent, writer agents, and an examiner agent,
which work together for patent application draft-
ing. Additionally, Chu et al. (2024) presented an
LLM-based recommender system specifically de-
signed to assist with patent office action responses.
PatExpert (Srinivas et al., 2024) in turn suggested
a meta-agent that orchestrates task-specific expert
agents for various patent-related tasks, such as clas-
sification, claim generation, and summarization. It
also includes a critique agent for error handling
and feedback provision to enhance adaptability and
reliability.
While LLMs have shown outstanding perfor-
mance on generation tasks, their application in
the patent domain is under-explored. Future work
needs comprehensive evaluations of LLMs on
patent generation tasks. The highly specialized
and technical nature of patent texts may pose sig-
nificant challenges for applying general LLMs to
patent tasks.
7
Future Research Directions
7.1
Data and Benchmarks
Machine-learning models for the patent field, par-
ticularly LLMs, require extensive pre-structured
and pre-processed high-quality data for training,
testing, and knowledge extraction. Although patent
databases contain vast amounts of raw data accumu-
lated over the years, there is a lack of labeled patent
datasets for different tasks. We summarize exist-
ing curated patent data collections in Section 4.2,
showing that the number of publicly accessible
datasets for some tasks is limited, such as patent
novelty prediction and patent text simplification.
To stimulate the development of better methods,
patent offices might consider providing more of
their internal pre-processed databases.
Additionally, benchmarks consist of labeled
datasets and established metrics for performance
evaluation, such as accuracy and precision. These
benchmarks serve as a foundational framework
that ensures researchers can assess the strengths
and limitations of their methods against a stan-
dardized set of conditions to promote transparency
and fairness in comparison. In the context of the
patent domain, many tasks have relied on closed-
source datasets, which limits the ability of other
researchers to replicate and validate findings. More-
over, general text evaluation metrics may not be
suitable for patent text assessment (Jiang et al.,
2024c). The absence of well-defined benchmarks
for these tasks renders it challenging to assess and
compare the effectiveness of various models fairly
and comprehensively.
7.2
Use of Large Language Models
Since texts are the key ingredient to patent docu-
ments, promising methods to analyze and generate
patent texts are worth investigating. Large lan-
guage models (LLMs) have dramatically changed
the field and achieved remarkable performance in
a wide range of tasks in the general domain (Min
et al., 2023), such as information retrieval, transla-
tion, and summarization. However, few works have
evaluated and investigated the usage of LLMs on
patent-related tasks, leaving a large research gap.
Patents include a distinct category of text, charac-
terized by their formal language, dense technical
content, and legal implications. The exploitation
of LLMs to handle the intricacies of patent texts
could yield considerable benefits in understanding
and managing intellectual property. LLMs could
identify more intricate and nuanced patterns and
relationships within patent texts, facilitating the ef-
fectiveness in patent analysis tasks, such as patent
classification and novelty prediction. Furthermore,
LLMs could assist in generating and refining patent
texts based on a comprehensive understanding of
33
existing patent literature.
For example, LLMs
could assist inventors and patent attorneys in draft-
ing initial claims, expanding descriptions, or adapt-
ing texts to align with jurisdictional requirements.
The integration of LLMs into patent tasks cannot
only enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of
patent analysis but also improve the quality of the
patent drafting process. As these models continue
to evolve, LLMs appear significantly promising in
the patent domain.
7.3
Long Sequence Modeling
Most patent analysis tasks are based on short texts,
such as titles, claims, and abstracts, ignoring the
patent description. One of the potential reasons is
that the average length of patent descriptions far ex-
ceeds the context length of many transformer mod-
els. It is difficult to deal with such long-range de-
pendencies and context retention. Whereas patent
titles and abstracts are usually generic and vain,
patent descriptions have to provide details of the
invention and disclose the invention in all aspects.
Hence, integrating detailed descriptions for patent
analysis tasks may significantly improve perfor-
mance. Therefore, a closer investigation of long-
sequence modeling approaches appears to lead to a
promising tool for patent descriptions. It is worth
noting that the latest LLMs can support longer in-
puts with currently more than 100,000 tokens con-
text length as the benchmark. As discussed in Sec-
tion 3, LLMs would unlock the potential of using
the patent description part.
7.4
Patent Text Generation
Patent text generation tasks are much less inves-
tigated, probably due to the complexity and dif-
ficulty. Automated patent-text generation poses
several challenges because of its highly specialized
and technical nature. Firstly, patent documents
require a specific style of language and use of ter-
minology. Secondly, the language must be formal,
unambiguous, and follow legal requirements to be
granted. Thirdly, the language of the description
and the claims must be precise, accurate, and clear.
Lack of language precision, accuracy, and clarity
hampers examination, risks a small scope and may
provide leverage for litigation.
Although deep-learning models, especially large
language models, have demonstrated previously
unexpected performance in text generation in the
general domain, patent text generation methods are
still scarce. The development and refinement of
patent text generation models are not only helpful
to the patent application process but also advanta-
geous to research in natural language processing
and related domains, such as law and technology.
Furthermore, we see an important research need
for evaluation metrics for patent texts. We included
common text evaluation methods in Appendix B.3.
However, patent texts have specific language re-
quirements. Hence, previous evaluation metrics
may not be appropriate for patent text assessment.
7.5
Multimodal Methods
Apart from text, patent documents themselves and
their context include other useful information, such
as drawings and citations. Multimodal models can
combine multiple data types to improve the perfor-
mance of patent analysis (Huang et al., 2024). Re-
search explores model architectures such as CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021) and Vision Transformers
(Dosovitskiy, 2020) to bridge the gap between tex-
tual descriptions and visual data to enhance patent
processing. Given the only recently increased per-
formance gains in general multimodal methods,
there are only few studies for patent applications
yet, for example in patent classification (Jiang et al.,
2022a) and patent image retrieval (Pustu-Iren et al.,
2021). Ideally, researchers can adopt multimodal
methods in other patent tasks as well. For example,
multimodal models can assist in patent drafting
from design figures, ensuring the textual descrip-
tions and figures are aligned. Furthermore, multi-
modal methods can create more informative and
intuitive visualizations of patent data, providing a
clearer understanding of the patent landscape. A
multimodal approach appears promising and de-
serves more attention.
8
Conclusion
Patent texts are different from mundane texts in
various aspects. They must be precise to ensure
the patent is grantable, defensible, and enforceable.
The topic, on the other hand, refers to intricate
technical aspects. The requirement for precision in
combination with technical complexity has led to
a highly artificial language. Reading and correct
interpretation of those texts require a high level of
concentration, specific patent training, and experi-
ence. Whereas patent tasks are highly manual and
the knowledge contained in the patent literature
is widely unused, NLP appears as an ideal solu-
tion. It can deal with complicated structures and
34
learn definitions (terms) that deviate from every-
day language or even the vocabulary of experts in
the specific field.
As NLP techniques critically rely on high-
quality training data, we collected patent data
sources and databases, with curated datasets specif-
ically designed for different patent tasks. Although
patent offices have provided raw patent documents
for years, publicly accessible curated datasets for
specific tasks are limited. Offices only offer man-
ual reading of individual documents, instead of
pre-processed data or large-scale access to well-
structured legal process documents of the file (reg-
ister). The field needs high-quality data for training
to optimize the model performance. In addition,
the proposal of novel patent tasks should suggest
open-sourced datasets and benchmarks for future
research.
NLP techniques play a prominent role in the
automation of patent processing tasks. Text embed-
dings can extract word and semantic information
for patent analysis. Sentence/paragraph embed-
dings are preferable to word embeddings because
they can capture more nuanced contextual infor-
mation from entire sentences or paragraphs. From
the model perspective, most traditional machine-
learning models, such as feature-based neural net-
works, support vector machines, or random forests,
have already been outdated. Deep learning mod-
els, particularly convolutional and recurrent neu-
ral networks, are still used in some circumstances,
for example when the computing power is limited.
However, larger transformer-based models, such
as the BERT and the GPT series, have almost rev-
olutionized the field despite their excessive need
for computational resources. Furthermore, scaling
the model size to LLMs has led to an explosion in
performance on numerous general tasks.
Research has prominently focused on short text
parts of patents, such as titles and abstracts, e.g., for
patent analysis or generation tasks. However, these
texts are the least specific texts with little infor-
mation about the actual invention. Since they are
highly generic and take little time during drafting,
the automation of these short texts is not necessar-
ily helpful. Among the shorter parts of patents, the
claims would be an exception, defining the legal
scope of patent protection. The tasks of claim gen-
eration, description generation, and LLM-based
patent agents are worth investigating.
The most studied and developed topics are au-
tomated patent classification and retrieval, which
are routine tasks in patent offices. Transformer-
based language models have shown better effec-
tiveness in leveraging text information compared
to traditional machine learning models and deep
word embeddings. A more promising direction is
to hybridize methods so that they can use multi-
ple sources from patents, including texts, images,
and metadata. Information extraction serves as a
primer to support various patent-related applica-
tions. State-of-the-art language models can help in
precise extraction to improve the performance in
further applications. Furthermore, we found that
the conception of novelty used in research can sub-
stantially deviate from its strict definition in patent
law. Accordingly, a share of the studies may aim at
predicting the patent novelty but actually generate
some form of metric for oddness, potential creativ-
ity, or perceived originality. Such cases indicate
the often underestimated difficulties when working
with patents. Interestingly, practically no capable
foundation models can deal with the particularities
of the patent domain and simplify the derivation of
usable tools for specific tasks. Granting prediction,
litigation prediction, and patent valuation are com-
parably less investigated. The key acts in patent
examination are almost ignored so far, including
the automated formal novelty and inventiveness de-
tection for higher quality and objectivity, deriving
of arguments, and support in formulating motions.
The exploitation of the knowledge base in the
patent literature appears more developed. Tech-
nology forecasting and innovation recommenda-
tion are pattern search tasks that do not necessarily
need recent language processing techniques but
can already produce reasonable output with old
text-parsing techniques in combination with con-
ventional statistics and machine-learning methods.
Large language models would cause an overwhelm-
ing computational burden if they had to process
such large bodies of text. Thus, these fields depend
more on good problem definitions and mapping
to conventional pattern-identification tasks than on
the latest developments of machine-learning tech-
niques.
Latest language models play a role in generative
tasks around patents and reflect the most recent
trend towards generative artificial intelligence tech-
nology. Apart from the patent analysis tasks, the
language particularities of patents also complicate
generative tasks. Summarization tasks and auto-
mated translation tasks are well-established and
available online. Particularly, automated transla-
35
tion has been studied and in production at patent
offices for more than a decade. Less conspicuous
yet socially beneficial tasks, such as patent simpli-
fication, receive scant attention in research. This
oversight is primarily attributed to the absence of
appropriate datasets. Although patent drafting, es-
pecially the sections on descriptions and claims, is
an obvious task, the available research is limited
and generally unsatisfactory.
The primary obstacles to advancing more effec-
tive techniques are twofold. First, there is a need
for better access and classification of data for train-
ing and analysis. Patent laws in most countries
mandate the publication of patent applications. His-
torically, this was considered a contract between
inventors and society, offering inventors a limited
monopoly in exchange for disclosing their inven-
tions in sufficient detail to permit replication. How-
ever, the current mode of publication presents PDF
documents with text extraction and related registry
documents that are rudimentarily classified, often
accompanied by poor-quality scans, with restric-
tions on automated processing. However, the nec-
essary information would be available in these of-
fices. Second, the field would greatly benefit from
foundational models capable of handling the high
degree of formality in patent language, where chal-
lenges are most prominently observed.
References
Assad Abbas, Limin Zhang, and Samee U Khan. 2014.
A literature review on the state-of-the-art in patent
analysis. World Patent Information, 37:3–13.
Louay Abdelgawad, Peter Kluegl, Erdan Genc, Stefan
Falkner, and Frank Hutter. 2019. Optimizing neural
networks for patent classification. In Joint European
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases, pages 688–703. Springer.
Aaron Abood and Dave Feltenberger. 2018. Automated
patent landscaping. Artificial Intelligence and Law,
26(2):103–125.
Michael B Albert, Daniel Avery, Francis Narin, and
Paul McAllister. 1991. Direct validation of citation
counts as indicators of industrially important patents.
Research policy, 20(3):251–259.
Amna Ali, Ali Tufail, Liyanage Chandratilak De Silva,
and Pg Emeroylariffion Abas. 2024.
Innovating
patent retrieval: A comprehensive review of tech-
niques, trends, and challenges in prior art searches.
Applied System Innovation, 7(5):91.
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Al-
shamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Cojocaru,
Maitha Alhammadi, Mazzotta Daniele, Daniel Hes-
low, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic, Badreddine
Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo.
2023. The falcon series of language models: Towards
open frontier models. Hugging Face repository.
Sophia Althammer, Sebastian Hofstätter, and Allan Han-
bury. 2021. Cross-domain retrieval in the legal and
patent domains: a reproducibility study. In Advances
in Information Retrieval: 43rd European Conference
on IR Research, ECIR 2021, Virtual Event, March 28–
April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part II 43, pages 3–17.
Springer.
Linda Andersson, Mihai Lupu, and Allan Hanbury.
2013.
Domain adaptation of general natural lan-
guage processing tools for a patent claim visualiza-
tion system. In Multidisciplinary Information Re-
trieval: 6th Information Retrieval Facility Confer-
ence, IRFC 2013, Limassol, Cyprus, October 7-9,
2013. Proceedings 6, pages 70–82. Springer.
Anthropic. 2024. The claude 3 model family: Opus,
sonnet, haiku. Preprint.
Leonidas Aristodemou and Frank Tietze. 2018. The
state-of-the-art on intellectual property analytics
(ipa): A literature review on artificial intelligence,
machine learning and deep learning methods for
analysing intellectual property (ip) data.
World
Patent Information, 55:37–51.
Sam Arts, Jianan Hou, and Juan Carlos Gomez. 2021.
Natural language processing to identify the cre-
ation and impact of new technologies in patent text:
Code, data, and new measures.
Research Policy,
50(2):104144.
Dana Aubakirova, Kim Gerdes, and Lufei Liu. 2023.
Patfig: Generating short and long captions for patent
figures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2843–
2849.
Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, et al. 1999.
Modern information retrieval. 463(1999).
Zilong Bai, Ruiji Zhang, Linqing Chen, Qijun Cai, Yuan
Zhong, Cong Wang Yan Fang, Jie Fang, Jing Sun,
Weikuan Wang, Lizhi Zhou, et al. 2024.
Patent-
gpt: A large language model for intellectual property.
arXiv:2404.18255.
Benjamin Balsmeier, Mohamad Assaf, Tyler Chesebro,
Gabe Fierro, Kevin Johnson, Scott Johnson, Guan-
Cheng Li, Sonja Lück, Doug O’Reagan, Bill Yeh,
et al. 2018. Machine learning and natural language
processing on the patent corpus: Data, tools, and new
measures. Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy, 27(3):535–553.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An
automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved cor-
relation with human judgments. In Proceedings of
the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation
measures for machine translation and/or summariza-
tion, pages 65–72.
36
Roger E Beaty and Dan R Johnson. 2021. Automating
creativity assessment with semdis: An open platform
for computing semantic distance. Behavior research
methods, 53(2):757–780.
Hamid Bekamiri, Daniel S Hain, and Roman Jurowet-
zki. 2021. Patentsberta: A deep nlp based hybrid
model for patent distance and classification using
augmented sbert. arXiv:2103.11933.
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan.
2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer.
arXiv:2004.05150.
Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T
Ng, and Jörg Sander. 2000. Lof: identifying density-
based local outliers. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management
of data, pages 93–104.
W Campbell, L Li, C Dagli, K Greenfield, E Wolf, and
J Campbell. 2016. Predicting and analyzing factors
in patent litigation. In NIPS2016, ML and the Law
Workshop.
Silvia Casola and Alberto Lavelli. 2022.
Summa-
rization, simplification, and generation: The case
of patents.
Expert Systems with Applications,
205:117627.
Silvia Casola, Alberto Lavelli, and Horacio Saggion.
2023. Creating a silver standard for patent simplifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 1045–1055.
Guanzheng Chen, Xin Li, Zaiqiao Meng, Shangsong
Liang, and Lidong Bing. 2023. Clex: Continuous
length extrapolation for large language models. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Han Chen and Weiwei Deng. 2023. Interpretable patent
recommendation with knowledge graph and deep
learning. Scientific Reports, 13(1):2586.
Liang Chen, Shuo Xu, Lijun Zhu, Jing Zhang, Xiaop-
ing Lei, and Guancan Yang. 2020. A deep learning
based method for extracting semantic information
from patent documents. Scientometrics, 125:289–
312.
Xia Chen, Guoxian Yu, Jun Wang, Carlotta Domeniconi,
Zhao Li, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2019. Activehne:
active heterogeneous network embedding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 2123–2129.
Filippo Chiarello,
Ilenia Cirri,
Nicola Melluso,
Gualtiero Fantoni, Andrea Bonaccorsi, and Tommaso
Pavanello. 2019. Approaches to automatically ex-
tract affordances from patents. In Proceedings of the
Design Society: International Conference on Engi-
neering Design, volume 1, pages 2487–2496. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Renukswamy Chikkamath, Markus Endres, Lavanya
Bayyapu, and Christoph Hewel. 2020. An empirical
study on patent novelty detection: A novel approach
using machine learning and natural language process-
ing. In 2020 Seventh International Conference on
Social Networks Analysis, Management and Security
(SNAMS), pages 1–7. IEEE.
Seokkyu Choi, Hyeonju Lee, Eunjeong Park, and
Sungchul Choi. 2022.
Deep learning for patent
landscaping using transformer and graph embed-
ding. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
175:121413.
Dimitrios Christofidellis, Marzena Maria Lehmann,
Torsten Luksch, Marco Stenta, and Matteo Manica.
2023. Automated patent classification for crop pro-
tection via domain adaptation. Applied AI Letters,
4(1):e80.
Dimitrios Christofidellis,
Antonio Berrios Torres,
Ashish Dave, Manuel Roveri, Kristin Schmidt,
Sarath Swaminathan, Hans Vandierendonck, Dmitry
Zubarev, and Matteo Manica. 2022. Pgt: a prompt
based generative transformer for the patent domain.
In ICML 2022 Workshop on Knowledge Retrieval
and Language Models.
Jung-Mei Chu, Hao-Cheng Lo, Jieh Hsiang, and Chun-
Chieh Cho. 2024. From paris to le-paris: toward
patent response automation with recommender sys-
tems and collaborative large language models. Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Law, pages 1–27.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence mod-
eling. In NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep Learning,
December 2014.
Park Chung and So Young Sohn. 2020. Early detec-
tion of valuable patents using a deep learning model:
Case of semiconductor industry. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 158:120146.
Pierre Colombo, Telmo Pessoa Pires, Malik Boudiaf,
Dominic Culver, Rui Melo, Caio Corro, Andre FT
Martins, Fabrizio Esposito, Vera Lúcia Raposo, Sofia
Morgado, et al. 2024. Saullm-7b: A pioneering large
language model for law. arXiv:2403.03883.
Scott Deerwester, Susan T Dumais, George W Furnas,
Thomas K Landauer, and Richard Harshman. 1990.
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American society for information science, 41(6):391–
407.
Weiwei Deng and Jian Ma. 2021. A knowledge graph
approach for recommending patents to companies.
Electronic Commerce Research, pages 1–32.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv:1810.04805.
37
Alexey Dosovitskiy. 2020. An image is worth 16x16
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
arXiv:2010.11929.
Wei Du, Yibo Wang, Wei Xu, and Jian Ma. 2021. A per-
sonalized recommendation system for high-quality
patent trading by leveraging hybrid patent analysis.
Scientometrics, 126:9369–9391.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Let-
man, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, An-
gela Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.
arXiv:2407.21783.
Alexander Dunn, John Dagdelen, Nicholas Walker,
Sanghoon Lee, Andrew S Rosen, Gerbrand Ceder,
Kristin Persson, and Anubhav Jain. 2022.
Struc-
tured information extraction from complex scien-
tific text with fine-tuned large language models.
arXiv:2212.05238.
European Patent Office. 2000.
Epc - the european
patent convention.
https://www.epo.org/en/
legal/epc/2020/regulations.html.
Accessed:
2023-06-12.
Caspar J Fall, Atilla Törcsvári, Karim Benzineb, and
Gabor Karetka. 2003. Automated categorization in
the international patent classification. In Acm Sigir
Forum, volume 37, pages 10–25. ACM New York,
NY, USA.
Gabriela Ferraro, Hanna Suominen, and Jaume Nualart.
2014. Segmentation of patent claims for improving
their readability. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for
Target Reader Populations (PITR), pages 66–73.
Michael D Frakes and Melissa F Wasserman. 2014. The
failed promise of user fees: Empirical evidence from
the us patent and trademark office. Journal of Empir-
ical Legal Studies, 11(4):602–636.
Janet Freilich. 2019. Prophetic patents. UC Davis L.
Rev., 53:663.
Michael
Freunek
and
André
Bodmer.
2021.
Bert based freedom to operate patent analysis.
arXiv:2105.00817.
M. Frumkin. 1947.
Early history of patents for in-
novation. Transactions of the Newcomen Society,
26(1):47–56.
Vito Giordano, Giovanni Puccetti, Filippo Chiarello,
Tommaso Pavanello, and Fantoni Gualtiero. 2022.
Unveiling the inventive process from patents by ex-
tracting problems, solutions and advantages with nat-
ural language processing. Solutions and Advantages
with Natural Language Processing.
Akshay Goel, Almog Gueta, Omry Gilon, Chang Liu,
Sofia Erell, Lan Huong Nguyen, Xiaohong Hao,
Bolous Jaber, Shashir Reddy, Rupesh Kartha, et al.
2023. Llms accelerate annotation for medical infor-
mation extraction. In Machine Learning for Health
(ML4H), pages 82–100. PMLR.
Mandy Guo, Joshua Ainslie, David C Uthus, Santiago
Ontanon, Jianmo Ni, Yun-Hsuan Sung, and Yinfei
Yang. 2022.
Longt5: Efficient text-to-text trans-
former for long sequences. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022,
pages 724–736.
Arousha Haghighian, Roudsari, Jafar Afshar, Wookey
Lee, and Suan Lee. 2022. Patentnet: multi-label clas-
sification of patent documents using deep learning
based language understanding. Scientometrics, pages
1–25.
Daniel S Hain, Roman Jurowetzki, Tobias Buchmann,
and Patrick Wolf. 2022. A text-embedding-based
approach to measuring patent-to-patent technologi-
cal similarity. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 177:121559.
Dietmar Harhoff, Francis Narin, Frederic M Scherer,
and Katrin Vopel. 1999. Citation frequency and the
value of patented inventions. Review of Economics
and statistics, 81(3):511–515.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–
778.
Kenneth Heafield, Elaine Farrow, Jelmer Van der Linde,
Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, and Dion Wiggins. 2022.
The europat corpus: A parallel corpus of european
patent data. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
732–740.
Lea Helmers, Franziska Horn, Franziska Biegler, Tim
Oppermann, and Klaus-Robert Müller. 2019. Au-
tomating the search for a patent’s prior art with a full
text similarity search. PloS one, 14(3):e0212103.
Kotaro Higuchi and Keiji Yanai. 2023. Patent image re-
trieval using transformer-based deep metric learning.
World Patent Information, 74:102217.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–
1780.
Sebastian Hofstätter, Navid Rekabsaz, Mihai Lupu,
Carsten Eickhoff, and Allan Hanbury. 2019. Enrich-
ing word embeddings for patent retrieval with global
context. In Advances in Information Retrieval: 41st
European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2019,
Cologne, Germany, April 14–18, 2019, Proceedings,
Part I 41, pages 810–818. Springer.
Jie Hu, Shaobo Li, Jianjun Hu, and Guanci Yang. 2018.
A hierarchical feature extraction model for multi-
label mechanical patent classification. Sustainability,
10(1):219.
Zewen Hu, Xiji Zhou, and Angela Lin. 2023. Evalua-
tion and identification of potential high-value patents
38
in the field of integrated circuits using a multidimen-
sional patent indicators pre-screening strategy and
machine learning approaches. Journal of Informet-
rics, 17(2):101406.
Dawei Huang, Chuan Yan, Qing Li, and Xiaojiang Peng.
2024. From large language models to large multi-
modal models: A literature review. Applied Sciences,
14(12):5068.
Jie Huang, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mohammad Shoeybi,
Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, and Bryan Catanzaro.
2023.
Raven:
In-context learning with re-
trieval augmented encoder-decoder language models.
arXiv:2308.07922.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas
Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-
Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard
Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval
augmented language models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 24(251):1–43.
Hyejin Jang, Sunhye Kim, and Byungun Yoon. 2023.
An explainable ai (xai) model for text-based patent
novelty analysis. Expert Systems with Applications,
page 120839.
Daeseong Jeon, Joon Mo Ahn, Juram Kim, and Changy-
ong Lee. 2022. A doc2vec and local outlier factor ap-
proach to measuring the novelty of patents. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change, 174:121294.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. 2023a. Mistral
7b. arXiv:2310.06825.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine
Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas,
Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. 2024a.
Mixtral of experts. arXiv:2401.04088.
Hongxun Jiang, Shaokun Fan, Nan Zhang, and Bin
Zhu. 2023b.
Deep learning for predicting patent
application outcome: The fusion of text and network
embeddings. Journal of Informetrics, 17(2):101402.
Lekang Jiang, Pascal A Scherz, and Stephan Goetz.
2024b. Patent-cr: A dataset for patent claim revision.
arXiv:2412.02549.
Lekang
Jiang,
Caiqi
Zhang,
Pascal
A
Scherz,
and Stephan Goetz. 2024c.
Can large lan-
guage models generate high-quality patent claims?
arXiv:2406.19465.
Pingfei Jiang, Mark Atherton, and Salvatore Sorce.
2023c. Extraction and linking of motivation, speci-
fication and structure of inventions for early design
use. Journal of Engineering Design, pages 1–26.
Shuo Jiang, Jie Hu, Christopher L Magee, and Jianxi
Luo. 2022a. Deep learning for technical document
classification. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management.
Shuo Jiang, Jianxi Luo, Guillermo Ruiz-Pava, Jie Hu,
and Christopher L Magee. 2021. Deriving design
feature vectors for patent images using convolutional
neural networks.
Journal of Mechanical Design,
143(6):061405.
Shuo Jiang, Serhad Sarica, Binyang Song, Jie Hu, and
Jianxi Luo. 2022b. Patent data for engineering de-
sign: A critical review and future directions. Journal
of Computing and Information Science in Engineer-
ing, 22(6):060902.
Julian Just. 2024. Natural language processing for in-
novation search–reviewing an emerging non-human
innovation intermediary. Technovation, 129:102883.
Eleni Kamateri, Michail Salampasis, and Konstanti-
nos Diamantaras. 2023. An ensemble framework
for patent classification. World Patent Information,
75:102233.
Jeongwoo Kang, Achille Souili, and Denis Cavallucci.
2018. Text simplification of patent documents. In
Automated Invention for Smart Industries: 18th Inter-
national TRIZ Future Conference, TFC 2018, Stras-
bourg, France, October 29–31, 2018, Proceedings,
pages 225–237. Springer.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei.
2020.
Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv:2001.08361.
Daniel Martin Katz, Dirk Hartung, Lauritz Gerlach,
Abhik Jana, and Michael J Bommarito II. 2023.
Natural language processing in the legal domain.
arXiv:2302.12039.
Sunhye Kim and Byungun Yoon. 2022. Multi-document
summarization for patent documents based on gen-
erative adversarial network. Expert Systems with
Applications, 207:117983.
Valentin Knappich, Simon Razniewski, Anna Hätty, and
Annemarie Friedrich. 2024. Pap2pat: Towards au-
tomated paper-to-patent drafting using chunk-based
outline-guided generation. arXiv:2410.07009.
Olga Kovaleva, Alexey Romanov, Anna Rogers, and
Anna Rumshisky. 2019. Revealing the dark secrets
of bert. arXiv:1908.08593.
Ralf Krestel, Renukswamy Chikkamath, Christoph
Hewel, and Julian Risch. 2021. A survey on deep
learning for patent analysis. World Patent Informa-
tion, 65:102035.
Michal Kucer, Diane Oyen, Juan Castorena, and Jian
Wu. 2022. Deeppatent: Large scale patent draw-
ing recognition and retrieval. In Proceedings of the
39
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision, pages 2309–2318.
Moses Ntanda Kyebambe, Ge Cheng, Yunqing Huang,
Chunhui He, and Zhenyu Zhang. 2017. Forecasting
emerging technologies: A supervised learning ap-
proach through patent analysis. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 125:236–244.
Aline Larroyed. 2023. Redefining patent translation:
The influence of chatgpt and the urgency to align
patent language regimes in europe with progress
in translation technology.
GRUR International,
72(11):1009–1017.
Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. 2014. Distributed repre-
sentations of sentences and documents. In Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, pages 1188–
1196. PMLR.
Changyong Lee, Juram Kim, Ohjin Kwon, and Han-
Gyun Woo. 2016. Stochastic technology life cycle
analysis using multiple patent indicators. Technolog-
ical Forecasting and Social Change, 106:53–64.
Changyong Lee, Ohjin Kwon, Myeongjung Kim, and
Daeil Kwon. 2018. Early identification of emerging
technologies: A machine learning approach using
multiple patent indicators. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 127:291–303.
Jieh-Sheng Lee. 2020. Controlling patent text genera-
tion by structural metadata. In Proceedings of the
29th ACM International Conference on Information
& Knowledge Management, pages 3241–3244.
Jieh-Sheng Lee. 2023. Evaluating generative patent lan-
guage models. World Patent Information, 72:102173.
Jieh-Sheng Lee and Jieh Hsiang. 2020a. Patent claim
generation by fine-tuning openai gpt-2. World Patent
Information, 62:101983.
Jieh-Sheng Lee and Jieh Hsiang. 2020b. Patent classi-
fication by fine-tuning bert language model. World
Patent Information, 61:101965.
Juhyun Lee, Junseok Lee, Jiho Kang, Youngho Kim,
Dongsik Jang, and Sangsung Park. 2022. Multimodal
deep learning for patent classification. In Proceed-
ings of Sixth International Congress on Information
and Communication Technology: ICICT 2021, Lon-
don, Volume 4, pages 281–289. Springer.
Shaobo Li, Jie Hu, Yuxin Cui, and Jianjun Hu. 2018.
Deeppatent: patent classification with convolutional
neural networks and word embedding. Scientomet-
rics, 117:721–744.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries.
In Text summarization
branches out, pages 74–81.
Hongjie Lin, Hao Wang, Dongfang Du, Han Wu, Biao
Chang, and Enhong Chen. 2018. Patent quality valua-
tion with deep learning models. In Database Systems
for Advanced Applications: 23rd International Con-
ference, DASFAA 2018, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia,
May 21-24, 2018, Proceedings, Part II 23, pages
474–490. Springer.
Wenguang Lin, Wenqiang Yu, and Renbin Xiao. 2023.
Measuring patent similarity based on text mining and
image recognition. Systems, 11(6):294.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang,
Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi
Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. 2024.
Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv:2412.19437.
Qi Liu, Han Wu, Yuyang Ye, Hongke Zhao, Chuanren
Liu, and Dongfang Du. 2018. Patent litigation predic-
tion: A convolutional tensor factorization approach.
In IJCAI, pages 5052–5059.
Weidong Liu, Shuai Li, Yan Cao, and Yu Wang. 2023.
Multi-task learning based high-value patent and
standard-essential patent identification model. In-
formation Processing & Management, 60(3):103327.
Hao-Cheng Lo, Jung-Mei Chu, Jieh Hsiang, and Chun-
Chieh Cho. 2024. Large language model informed
patent image retrieval. arXiv:2404.19360.
Mihai Lupu, Atsushi Fujii, Douglas W Oard, Makoto
Iwayama, and Noriko Kando. 2017. Patent-related
tasks at ntcir. Current Challenges in Patent Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 77–111.
Mihai Lupu, Jimmy Huang, Jianhan Zhu, and John Tait.
2009. Trec-chem: large scale chemical information
retrieval evaluation at trec. In Acm Sigir Forum, vol-
ume 43, pages 63–70. ACM New York, NY, USA.
Xueguang Ma, Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Furu Wei, and
Jimmy Lin. 2023. Fine-tuning llama for multi-stage
text retrieval. arXiv:2310.08319.
Walid Magdy and Gareth JF Jones. 2010. Pres: a score
metric for evaluating recall-oriented information re-
trieval applications. In Proceedings of the 33rd in-
ternational ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 611–618.
Ali Mansouri and Maryam Mohammadpour. 2023. De-
termining technology life cycle prediction based
on patent bibliometric data. International Journal
of Information Science and Management (IJISM),
21(3):161–185.
Louis Martin, Éric Villemonte De La Clergerie, Benoît
Sagot, and Antoine Bordes. 2020. Controllable sen-
tence simplification. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
pages 4689–4698.
Andreas Maurer, Massimiliano Pontil, and Bernardino
Romera-Paredes. 2016. The benefit of multitask rep-
resentation learning. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 17(81):1–32.
40
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient estimation of word representa-
tions in vector space. arXiv:1301.3781.
Bonan Min,
Hayley Ross,
Elior Sulem,
Amir
Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz,
Eneko Agirre, Ilana Heintz, and Dan Roth. 2023.
Recent advances in natural language processing via
large pre-trained language models: A survey. ACM
Computing Surveys, 56(2):1–40.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu,
Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders,
et al. 2021.
Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-
answering with human feedback. arXiv:2112.09332.
OpenAI.
2023.
Gpt-4
technical
report.
arXiv:2303.08774.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 311–318.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP), pages 1532–1543.
Florina Piroi and Allan Hanbury. 2017. Evaluating in-
formation retrieval systems on european patent data:
The clef-ip campaign. Current Challenges in Patent
Information Retrieval, pages 113–142.
Quentin Plantec, Pascal Le Masson, and Benoît Weil.
2021. Impact of knowledge search practices on the
originality of inventions: A study in the oil & gas
industry through dynamic patent analysis. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change, 168:120782.
Bruno Pouliquen. 2015. Full-text patent translation at
wipo; scalability, quality and usability. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Workshop on Patent and Scientific
Literature Translation.
President of the European Patent Office and Admin-
istrative Council of the European Patent Organisa-
tion. 2021. 2022 budget, estimates for 2023–2026,
ca/50/21add.1b. Technical report, European Patent
Organisation.
Xiao Pu, Mingqi Gao, and Xiaojun Wan. 2023. Sum-
marization is (almost) dead. arXiv:2309.09558.
Giovanni Puccetti, Vito Giordano, Irene Spada, Filippo
Chiarello, and Gualtiero Fantoni. 2023. Technology
identification from patent texts: A novel named entity
recognition method. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 186:122160.
Subhash Pujari, Jannik Strötgen, Mark Giereth, Michael
Gertz, and Annemarie Friedrich. 2022. Three real-
world datasets and neural computational models for
classification tasks in patent landscaping. In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 11498–11513.
Kader Pustu-Iren, Gerrit Bruns, and Ralph Ewerth. 2021.
A multimodal approach for semantic patent image re-
trieval. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings; 2909, vol-
ume 2909, pages 45–49. Aachen, Germany: RWTH
Aachen.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark,
et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International confer-
ence on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya
Sutskever, et al. 2018. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. OpenAI blog.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-
former. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21(1):5485–5551.
Abishek Rao, Shivani Aithal, and Sanjay Singh. 2024.
Single-document abstractive text summarization: A
systematic literature review. ACM Computing Sur-
veys.
Partha Pratim Ray. 2023. Chatgpt: A comprehensive
review on background, applications, key challenges,
bias, ethics, limitations and future scope. Internet of
Things and Cyber-Physical Systems.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan
Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. 2024. Gemini 1.5:
Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions
of tokens of context. arXiv:2403.05530.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert:
Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992.
Julian Risch, Nicolas Alder, Christoph Hewel, and Ralf
Krestel. 2020a. Patentmatch: a dataset for matching
patent claims & prior art. arXiv:2012.13919.
Julian Risch, Samuele Garda, and Ralf Krestel. 2020b.
Hierarchical document classification as a sequence
generation task. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries in 2020, pages
147–155.
Julian Risch and Ralf Krestel. 2019. Domain-specific
word embeddings for patent classification.
Data
Technologies and Applications, 53(1):108–122.
41
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The
probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
yond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Re-
trieval, 3(4):333–389.
Arousha Haghighian Roudsari, Jafar Afshar, Suan Lee,
and Wookey Lee. 2021. Comparison and analysis
of embedding methods for patent documents.
In
2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
and Smart Computing (BigComp), pages 152–155.
IEEE.
Serhad Sarica, Jianxi Luo, and Kristin L Wood. 2020.
Technet: Technology semantic network based on
patent data.
Expert Systems with Applications,
142:112995.
Serhad Sarica, Binyang Song, En Low, and Jianxi Luo.
2019. Engineering knowledge graph for keyword
discovery in patent search. In Proceedings of the
design society: international conference on engineer-
ing design, volume 1, pages 2249–2258. Cambridge
University Press.
Serhad Sarica, Binyang Song, Jianxi Luo, and Kristin L
Wood. 2021. Idea generation with technology seman-
tic network. AI EDAM, 35(3):265–283.
Valentin J Schmitt and Nils M Denter. 2024. Model-
ing an indicator for statutory patent novelty. World
Patent Information, 78:102283.
Valentin J Schmitt, Lothar Walter, and Frank C Schnit-
tker. 2023. Assessment of patentability by means
of semantic patent analysis–a mathematical-logical
approach. World Patent Information, 73:102182.
Marawan Shalaby, Jan Stutzki, Matthias Schubert, and
Stephan Günnemann. 2018. An lstm approach to
patent classification based on fixed hierarchy vec-
tors. In Proceedings of the 2018 SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining, pages 495–503. SIAM.
Walid Shalaby and Wlodek Zadrozny. 2019. Patent
retrieval: a literature review. Knowledge and Infor-
mation Systems, 61:631–660.
Yunqiu Shao, Jiaxin Mao, Yiqun Liu, Weizhi Ma, Ken
Satoh, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma. 2020. Bert-pli:
Modeling paragraph-level interactions for legal case
retrieval. In IJCAI, pages 3501–3507.
Eva Sharma, Chen Li, and Lu Wang. 2019. Bigpatent:
A large-scale dataset for abstractive and coherent
summarization. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 2204–2213.
Svetlana Sheremetyeva. 2014. Automatic text simplifi-
cation for handling intellectual property (the case of
multiple patent claims). In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Automatic Text Simplification-Methods and
Applications in the Multilingual Society (ATS-MA
2014), pages 41–52.
Sotaro Shibayama, Deyun Yin, and Kuniko Matsumoto.
2021. Measuring novelty in science with word em-
bedding. PloS one, 16(7):e0254034.
Homaira Huda Shomee, Zhu Wang, Sathya N Ravi,
and Sourav Medya. 2024. Impact: A large-scale
integrated multimodal patent analysis and creation
dataset for design patents. In The Thirty-eight Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Shreya Shukla, Nakul Sharma, Manish Gupta, and
Anand Mishra. 2025. Patentlmm: Large multimodal
model for generating descriptions for patent figures.
In AAAI.
L Siddharth, Lucienne TM Blessing, Kristin L Wood,
and Jianxi Luo. 2022a.
Engineering knowledge
graph from patent database.
Journal of Com-
puting and Information Science in Engineering,
22(2):021008.
L Siddharth, Guangtong Li, and Jianxi Luo. 2022b. En-
hancing patent retrieval using text and knowledge
graph embeddings: a technical note. Journal of Engi-
neering Design, 33(8-9):670–683.
L
Siddharth,
N
Madhusudanan,
and
Amaresh
Chakrabarti. 2020. Toward automatically assessing
the novelty of engineering design solutions. Journal
of Computing and Information Science in Engineer-
ing, 20(1):011001.
Junyoung Son, Hyeonseok Moon, Jeongwoo Lee, Se-
olhwa Lee, Chanjun Park, Wonkyung Jung, and
Heuiseok Lim. 2022. Ai for patents: A novel yet
effective and efficient framework for patent analysis.
IEEE Access, 10:59205–59218.
Kisik Song, Karp Soo Kim, and Sungjoo Lee. 2017.
Discovering new technology opportunities based on
patents: Text-mining and f-term analysis. Technova-
tion, 60:1–14.
Cinthia M Souza, Magali RG Meireles, and Paulo EM
Almeida. 2021. A comparative study of abstractive
and extractive summarization techniques to label sub-
groups on patent dataset. Scientometrics, 126(1):135–
156.
Cinthia M Souza, Matheus E Santos, Magali RG Meire-
les, and Paulo EM Almeida. 2019. Using summariza-
tion techniques on patent database through compu-
tational intelligence. In Progress in Artificial Intel-
ligence: 19th EPIA Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, EPIA 2019, Vila Real, Portugal, September
3–6, 2019, Proceedings, Part II 19, pages 508–519.
Springer.
Sakhinana Sagar Srinivas, Vijay Sri Vaikunth, and
Venkataramana Runkana. 2024. Towards automated
patent workflows: Ai-orchestrated multi-agent frame-
work for intellectual property management and anal-
ysis. arXiv:2409.19006.
42
Xiaoling Sun, Na Chen, and Kun Ding. 2022. Mea-
suring latent combinational novelty of technology.
Expert Systems with Applications, 210:118564.
Mirac Suzgun, Luke Melas-Kyriazi, Suproteem K
Sarkar, Scott Kominers, and Stuart Shieber. 2023.
The harvard USPTO patent dataset: A large-scale,
well-structured, and multi-purpose corpus of patent
applications. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems Datasets and Bench-
marks Track.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. 2019. Efficientnet: Re-
thinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-
works. In International conference on machine learn-
ing, pages 6105–6114. PMLR.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and
fine-tuned chat models. arXiv:2307.09288.
Amy Trappey, Charles V Trappey, and Alex Hsieh. 2021.
An intelligent patent recommender adopting machine
learning approach for natural language processing:
A case study for smart machinery technology min-
ing. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
164:120511.
Amy JC Trappey, Charles V Trappey, Jheng-Long Wu,
and Jack WC Wang. 2020. Intelligent compilation of
patent summaries using machine learning and natural
language processing techniques. Advanced Engineer-
ing Informatics, 43:101027.
United States Patent and Trademark Office. 2022. Man-
ual of patent examining procedure. https://www.
uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/index.html.
Accessed: 2023-06-12.
United States Patent and Trademark Office. 2023.
United states patent and trademark office fiscal year
2024 ongressional submission. Technical report, De-
partment of Commerce.
Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A japanese-
english patent parallel corpus. In Proceedings of
Machine Translation Summit XI: Papers.
Bruno van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie and Didier
François. 2009. The cost factor in patent systems.
Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 9(4):329–
355.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30.
Dennis Verhoeven, Jurriën Bakker, and Reinhilde
Veugelers. 2016.
Measuring technological nov-
elty with patent-based indicators. Research policy,
45(3):707–723.
Konrad Vowinckel and Volker D Hähnke. 2023. Search-
former: Semantic patent embeddings by siamese
transformers for prior art search. World Patent Infor-
mation, 73:102192.
Ben Wang. 2021.
Mesh-Transformer-JAX: Model-
Parallel
Implementation
of
Transformer
Lan-
guage Model with JAX.
https://github.com/
kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax.
Haifeng Wang, Hua Wu, Zhongjun He, Liang Huang,
and Kenneth Ward Church. 2022. Progress in ma-
chine translation. Engineering, 18:143–153.
Hongsong Wang and Yuqi Zhang. 2023. Learning effi-
cient representations for image-based patent retrieval.
arXiv:2308.13749.
Juanyan Wang, Sai Krishna Reddy Mudhiganti, and
Manali Sharma. 2024a.
Patentformer: A novel
method to automate the generation of patent appli-
cations. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Industry Track, pages 1361–1380.
Juite Wang and Yi-Jing Chen. 2019. A novelty detection
patent mining approach for analyzing technological
opportunities. Advanced Engineering Informatics,
42:100941.
Meiyun Wang, Hiroki Sakaji, Hiroaki Higashitani, Mit-
suhiro Iwadare, and Kiyoshi Izumi. 2023. Discover-
ing new applications: Cross-domain exploration of
patent documents using causal extraction and similar-
ity analysis. World Patent Information, 75:102238.
Qiyao Wang, Shiwen Ni, Huaren Liu, Shule Lu, Guhong
Chen, Xi Feng, Chi Wei, Qiang Qu, Hamid Alinejad-
Rokny, Yuan Lin, et al. 2024b. Autopatent: A multi-
agent framework for automatic patent generation.
arXiv:2412.09796.
Suyuan Wang, Xueqian Yin, Menghao Wang, Ruofeng
Guo, and Kai Nan. 2024c. Evopat: A multi-llm-
based patents summarization and analysis agent.
arXiv:2412.18100.
Tingting Wei, Danyu Feng, Shiling Song, and Cai
Zhang. 2024. An extraction and novelty evaluation
framework for technology knowledge elements of
patents. Scientometrics, pages 1–26.
Matthias Wirth, Volker D Hähnke, Franco Mascia,
Arnaud Wéry, Konrad Vowinckel, Marco del Rey,
Raúl Mohedano del Pozo, Pau Montes, and Alexan-
der Klenner-Bajaja. 2023. Building machine trans-
lation tools for patent language: A data generation
strategy at the european patent office. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th Annual Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation, pages 471–479.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2022. Pct
regulations rule. https://www.wipo.int/pct/en/
texts/rules/rtoc1.html. Accessed: 2023-06-12.
43
Han Wu, Guanqi Zhu, Qi Liu, Hengshu Zhu, Hao Wang,
Hongke Zhao, Chuanren Liu, Enhong Chen, and Hui
Xiong. 2023. A multi-aspect neural tensor factoriza-
tion framework for patent litigation prediction. IEEE
Transactions on Big Data.
Wenhan Xiong, Jingyu Liu, Igor Molybog, Hejia Zhang,
Prajjwal Bhargava, Rui Hou, Louis Martin, Rashi
Rungta, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, Barlas Oguz,
et al. 2023. Effective long-context scaling of founda-
tion models. arXiv:2309.16039.
Peng Xu, Wei Ping, Xianchao Wu, Lawrence McAfee,
Chen Zhu, Zihan Liu, Sandeep Subramanian, Evelina
Bakhturina, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catan-
zaro. 2024. Retrieval meets long context large lan-
guage models. In The Twelfth International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations.
Cheng Ying, Yue Shuyu, Li Jing, Deng Lin, and Quan
Qi. 2021. Errors of machine translation of terminol-
ogy in the patent text from english into chinese. ASP
Transactions on Computers, 1(1):12–17.
Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava
Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago On-
tanon, Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang,
Li Yang, et al. 2020. Big bird: Transformers for
longer sequences. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:17283–17297.
Gianluca Zanella, Charles Zhechao Liu, and Kim-
Kwang Raymond Choo. 2021. Understanding the
trends in blockchain domain through an unsupervised
systematic patent analysis. IEEE Transactions on En-
gineering Management.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Pe-
ter Liu. 2020. Pegasus: Pre-training with extracted
gap-sentences for abstractive summarization. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
11328–11339. PMLR.
Liwei Zhang, Tongtong Zhang, Yutao Lang, Jiaxi Li,
and Fujun Ji. 2024. Research on patent quality eval-
uation based on rough set and cloud model. Expert
Systems with Applications, 235:121057.
Liyuan Zhang, Wei Liu, Yufei Chen, and Xiaodong Yue.
2022. Reliable multi-view deep patent classification.
Mathematics, 10(23):4545.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Wein-
berger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Evaluating
text generation with bert. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations.
Jing Zhao, Xijiong Xie, Xin Xu, and Shiliang Sun. 2017.
Multi-view learning overview: Recent progress and
new challenges. Information Fusion, 38:43–54.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang,
Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen
Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. 2023. A
survey of large language models. arXiv:2303.18223.
Yuan Zhou, Fang Dong, Yufei Liu, Zhaofu Li, JunFei
Du, and Li Zhang. 2020. Forecasting emerging tech-
nologies using data augmentation and deep learning.
Scientometrics, 123:1–29.
Yuan Zhou, Fang Dong, Yufei Liu, and Liang Ran. 2021.
A deep learning framework to early identify emerg-
ing technologies in large-scale outlier patents: An
empirical study of cnc machine tool. Scientometrics,
126:969–994.
Huiming Zhu, Chunhui He, Yang Fang, Bin Ge, Meng
Xing, and Weidong Xiao. 2020. Patent automatic
classification based on symmetric hierarchical convo-
lution neural network. Symmetry, 12(2):186.
Qihao Zhu and Jianxi Luo. 2022. Generative design
ideation: a natural language generation approach. In
International Conference on-Design Computing and
Cognition, pages 39–50. Springer.
Tao Zou, Le Yu, Leilei Sun, Bowen Du, Deqing Wang,
and Fuzhen Zhuang. 2023. Event-based dynamic
graph representation learning for patent application
trend prediction. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering.
You Zuo, Kim Gerdes, Éric Clergerie, and Benoît Sagot.
2024. Patenteval: Understanding errors in patent
generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2687–
2710.
A
Patent Drawings and Metadata
Apart from patent texts, researchers also use meta-
data and images for patent analysis. Metadata typ-
ically includes citations/references, classification
codes, inventors, applicants, assignees, law firms,
and examiners. Researchers have exploited the
relationship information between patents through
citations and classification codes based on graph
neural networks (GNNs) for patent classification
and patent valuation. Solely relying on classifica-
tion codes can sometimes be misleading and be-
come a problem because patents may span multiple
technology areas. Furthermore, the publicly used
classification is rather coarse in light of the high
number of documents and notably coarser than
what offices use internally for their search or assign-
ing competent examiners. Importantly, metadata
provide high-level information but do typically not
include details of the invention, which limits the
possibility of capturing the invention and certainly
not technical nuances.
The images, called drawings or figures in patents,
could leverage the development of image process-
ing techniques, particularly convolutional neural
44
networks (CNNs). However, the figures can be very
generic, particularly in method inventions. The
fact that patent figures are not supposed to con-
tain (significant) text beyond reference numbers,
can have technological advantages. Patent figures
from computer aided design (CAD) models may
be harder to match with corresponding ones from
other documents due to the high number of lines
representing details, which tend to overwhelm con-
volutional neural networks. However, many patents
and patent applications contain simpler sketches
and schematic figures with the intention to not dis-
closing more than necessary. Such simplifications
can be beneficial for processing with artificial intel-
ligence. By now, researchers have applied convo-
lutional neural networks in patent subject classifi-
cation and patent retrieval. However, considering
the above, the performance of patent classification
based on images only appears to be much worse
than using texts. Therefore, hybrid methods that
leverage multiple sources for patent analysis, such
as texts, images, and classification codes, appear
promising.
The drawings are not helpful for automated pro-
cessing in many cases. Methods are commonly
illustrated as block diagrams, but these diagrams,
without supplementary text beyond reference num-
bers—which many patent offices do not accept for
formal reasons—become ambiguous and could be
interpreted as representing completely different and
undeniably novel inventions. Furthermore, the size
and rapid growth of patent descriptions (including
applications that are not granted) and the scientific-
technical literature worldwide pose significant chal-
lenges to the prior-art search.
A.1
Patent Classification
Images can serve for automated patent classifica-
tion (Jiang et al., 2021). There is usually no specific
feature extraction process. Deep-learning networks,
typically convolutional neural networks, can au-
tomatically extract image features from the pixel
values. Jiang et al. designed a method based on con-
volutional neural networks for patent classification
using only images and achieved 54.32% accuracy
on eight-class prediction (Jiang et al., 2021). The
results are poorer than text-based methods for two
main reasons. Firstly, predicting the subject class
based solely on images is inherently challenging,
even for human experts21. Secondly, some patent
21Important background information: in most patent offices,
the drawings are not supposed to contain text beyond reference
images suffer from low resolution. However, using
images as additional information for patent clas-
sification on top of the text may be a promising
research direction.
A.2
Patent Retrieval
Metadata-Based Methods.
Commonly used
metadata includes citations / references, classifica-
tion codes, inventors, applicants, assignees, and
examiners. Involving metadata for patent retrieval
may improve the retrieval performance because
metadata can imply relevance among documents
(Shalaby and Zadrozny, 2019). For example, ci-
tations naturally indicate the relationship between
patent documents, documents that belong to the
same category may have connections, and an inven-
tor may tend to investigate similar types of inven-
tions. A representative study would be the embed-
ding method that used both texts and metadata for
patent representation (Siddharth et al., 2022b). The
authors aggregated text embeddings obtained from
Sentence-BERT and citation embedding obtained
from knowledge graphs to formulate the patent rep-
resentation. This method improved the accuracy by
approximately 6% compared to using text only.
Image-Based Methods.
Recently, the rapid de-
velopment of image processing techniques has di-
rected the attention of retrieval tasks to patent draw-
ings. (Kucer et al., 2022) introduced a large-scale
dataset, DeepPatent, for an image-based patent re-
trieval benchmark. The dataset includes 45,000
unique design patents and 350,000 drawings from
2018 and the first half of 2018 from the United
States Patent and Trademark Office. This paper
also implemented the PatentNet model as a base-
line, a deep learning approach based on the ResNet
architecture (He et al., 2016). It achieved a 0.376
mean average precision (MAP), which was better
than traditional computer vision approaches and
other deep representations tested in their experi-
ments. After that, (Wang and Zhang, 2023) im-
proved the performance to 0.712 by leveraging the
unique characteristics of patent drawings. The au-
thors used EfficientNet-B0 (Tan and Le, 2019) as
the backbone, which is an effective and efficient
convolutional network. They also incorporated a
neck structure that comprises a fully connected
layer and a consecutive batch normalization layer
to improve the intra-class compactness and inter-
class discrimination. In addition, (Higuchi and
numbers.
45
Yanai, 2023) proposed a transformer-based deep
metric learning architecture, which reached a new
state-of-the-art mean average precision score of
0.856 on the DeepPatent dataset.
A.3
Figure Caption/Description Generation
Researchers studied generating brief descriptions
of the patent figures. Aubakirova et al. (2023) in-
troduced the first large-scale patent figure dataset,
comprising more than 30,000 figure–caption pairs.
The authors fine-tuned large vision language mod-
els to generate captions as baselines on this novel
dataset and call for future research on the improve-
ment of existing caption generation models. As
contextual information, the quality of such brief
figure descriptions can vary significantly. In quite
many cases, the figure captions read Figure n de-
picts another embodiment of the invention or Figure
m depicts perspective xy of an embodiment of the
invention to fulfill the minimum formalities (e.g.,
per European Patent Regulations Rule 42(d), PCT
Regulations Rule 5.1(a)(iv), US 37 CFR 1.74) and
let the subsequent detailed description of the fig-
ures and embodiments provide more content. Sim-
ilarly, Shukla et al. (2025) presented PatentDesc,
a novel large-scale dataset that comprises approxi-
mately 355K patent figures paired with both brief
and detailed textual descriptions. They trained a
vision encoder specifically designed for patent fig-
ures and demonstrated that it can significantly en-
hance the generation performance. Furthermore,
Shomee et al. (2024) introduced IMPACT, a mul-
timodal patent dataset that contains 3.61 million
design patent figures paired with detailed captions
and rich metadata. They used the dataset to build
benchmarks for two novel computer vision tasks—
3D image construction and visual question answer-
ing (VQA).
B
Evaluation Metrics
Evaluation metrics quantify a model’s performance,
offering a clear and objective measure of how well
the model can achieve the intended task. This is
essential for understanding the model’s capabil-
ities and limitations. In addition, metrics allow
researchers and developers to compare the effec-
tiveness of different models or algorithms on the
same task. By understanding the most relevant
metrics to a specific task, developers can select or
design models that are optimized for those metrics.
Different metrics are used based on task types. We
introduce some common evaluation metrics for dif-
ferent tasks, including classification (Section B.1),
information retrieval (Section B.2), and text gener-
ation (Section B.3).
B.1
Classification
Widely used metrics for classification tasks are ac-
curacy (A)
A =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN ,
(1)
precision (P)
P =
TP
TP + FP ,
(2)
recall (R)
R =
TP
TP + FN ,
(3)
and F1 scores (F1)
F1 = 2PR
P + R,
(4)
where true positives (TP) refer to the number of
samples that are correctly predicted as positive,
true negatives (TN) the number of samples that are
correctly predicted as negative, false positives (FP)
the number of samples that are wrongly predicted
as positive, and false negatives (FN) the number of
samples that are wrongly predicted as negative.
There are two methods of aggregating per-
formance metrics across classes, namely macro-
averaging and micro-averaging. Macro-averaging
calculates the metric independently for each class
and then takes the numerical average. This means
the weights of all classes are equal, regardless of
size or frequency. For example, macro-averaged
precision can be calculated per
MacroPrecision = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Pi,
(5)
where N is the number of classes.
In micro-averaging, the process involves sum-
ming up all TP, FP, and FN respectively across
classes, followed by the calculation of the metric.
By default, micro-averaging often serves as the pre-
ferred method unless specified otherwise, due to
its ability to more appropriately handle class im-
balances by assigning more weight to the majority
class. Micro-averaged precision can for instance
follow
MicroPrecision =
PN
i=1(TP)i
PN
i=1((TP)i + (FP)i)
.
(6)
46
B.2
Information Retrieval
In information retrieval tasks, precision (P)
P = NR
NT
,
(7)
recall (R)
R = NR
NK
,
(8)
and mean average precision (MAP)
MAP = 1
Q
Q
X
q=1
 
1
mq
nq
X
k=1
P(k) · σ(k)
!
(9)
usually serve for evaluation (Baeza-Yates et al.,
1999).
NR is the number of relevant documents re-
trieved, NT the total number of documents re-
trieved, and NK the total number of really relevant
documents. Q denotes the total number of required
queries, mq the number of relevant documents for
the q-th query, nq the number of documents re-
trieved for the q-th query, P(k) the precision at
the k-th position, and σ(k) an indicator function
that equals 1 if the k-th document is relevant, and 0
otherwise.
In addition, the patent retrieval evaluation
score (PRES)
PRES = 1 −
PN
i=1 ri
N
−N+1
2
Nmax
(10)
is a metric specifically designed to evaluate the
performance of patent retrieval systems (Magdy
and Jones, 2010). N represents the number of
relevant documents, Nmax the maximum number
of documents returned by the retrieval system, and
ri the rank of the i-th relevant document in the
retrieval results. It calculates the average deviation
of the actual ranking of relevant documents from
their ideal ranking with normalization.
B.3
Text Generation
Evaluation metrics provide feedback that is used
to adjust the model’s parameters and improve its
performance. This optimization is critical to devel-
oping highly accurate and efficient models. The
most reliable but expensive and slow evaluation
methods for text generation are human evaluations.
Human evaluation involves assessing the quality
of the generated text by human experts. Multiple
aspects are evaluated simultaneously, such as ac-
curacy, fluency, coherence, and relevance. Human
evaluation is often considered the gold standard,
but it can be time-consuming and expensive.
Researchers have developed automated evalua-
tion methods for text generation to improve effi-
ciency and reduce costs. These approaches com-
pare generated texts with referenced texts (gold
standard) to obtain the performance score. We
briefly introduce four of the most commonly used
methods, including BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
ROUGE (Lin, 2004), METEOR (Banerjee and
Lavie, 2005), and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019).
Bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU)
score (Papineni et al., 2002) quantifies how much
the generated texts match the high-quality refer-
ence texts, by comparing the n-grams to count the
number of exact matches. BLEU is simple and
easy to use, but it only focuses on literal matches,
overlooking overall sentence semantics. BLEU
was originally designed for machine translation but
could also be used for other generation tasks.
Recall-oriented understudy for gisting evalu-
ation (ROUGE) counts the number of overlapping
units, such as n-gram and word sequences, to obtain
the performance score (Lin, 2004). While BLEU
focuses more on precision, i.e., how many gener-
ated texts match reference texts, ROUGE priori-
tizes more recall performance, i.e., how many ref-
erence texts are covered by generated texts. Hence,
this method is more suitable for text summarization
tasks. Similar to BLEU, it evaluates text content,
without considering semantics or synonyms.
Metric for evaluation of translation with ex-
plicit ordering (METEOR) improves on BLEU
by accounting for both exact word matches and
similar words based on stemming and synonyms
(Banerjee and Lavie, 2005). Thus, METEOR can
better account for semantic variations compared
to BLEU. In addition, METEOR provides a more
balanced assessment by considering both precision
and recall. However, METEOR is more complex
and needs adjustments for different tasks.
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) leverages the
contextual embedding from BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018) and calculates cosine similarity between out-
put text embedding and referenced embedding. It
can effectively capture complex and subtle seman-
tic information but requires significant computa-
tional resources for evaluation.
Recently,
Lee
(2023)
proposed
a
novel
keystroke-based evaluation method for genera-
tive patent models. This method measured the
number of keystrokes that the model could save by
47
providing model predictions in an auto-complete
function. The experimental results demonstrated
that the larger models could not improve this spe-
cific evaluation metric. However, the experiments
only focused on patent claims generation and the ef-
fectiveness of this metric on other generative tasks
was unknown.
A recent work proposed PatentEval as a hu-
man evaluation framework to evaluate machine-
generated patent texts (Zuo et al., 2024). The frame-
work categorizes errors into different types, such as
grammatical errors, irrelevant content, incomplete
coverage, and clarity issues. The authors manu-
ally assessed 400 granted patents and indicated
that while LLMs demonstrate potential for patent
drafting, they still exhibit limitations.
48
