Title: Meta-learning for downstream aware and agnostic pretraining
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03270v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2106.03270v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jun 2021
Meta-learning for downstream aware and agnostic pretraining
Hongyin Luo1 Shuyan Dong2∗Yung-Sung Chuang3 Shang-Wen Li2∗
1MIT CSAIL, 2Amazon AI, 3National Taiwan University
{hyluo}@mit.edu, {shuyand,shangwel}@amazon.com,{chuangyungsung}@gmail.com
Abstract
Neural network pretraining is gaining atten-
tion due to its outstanding performance in nat-
ural language processing applications. How-
ever, pretraining usually leverages predeﬁned
task sequences to learn general linguistic clues.
The lack of mechanisms in choosing proper
tasks during pretraining makes the learning
and knowledge encoding inefﬁcient. We thus
propose using meta-learning to select tasks
that provide the most informative learning sig-
nals in each episode of pretraining.
With
the proposed method, we aim to achieve bet-
ter efﬁciency in computation and memory us-
age for the pretraining process and resulting
networks while maintaining the performance.
In this preliminary work, we discuss the al-
gorithm of the method and its two variants,
downstream-aware and downstream-agnostic
pretraining. Our experiment plan is also sum-
marized, while empirical results will be shared
in our future works.
1
Introduction and related works
Recently
neural
network
pretraining,
such
as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019),
OpenAI GPT
(Radford et al., 2018), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019),
and ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2019) has yielded
signiﬁcant performance improvement for various
downstream
applications
in natural
language
processing.
Usually, semantic and syntactic
information is implicitly learned from the co-
occurrence of words and sentences in datasets
and encoded in the networks for general purposes.
The entire networks or part of their layers are
then ﬁnetuned for the downstream usage.
To
better leverage training corpora and discover
all valuable information, ERNIE 2.0 (Sun et al.,
2020) proposes a sequential multitask pretrain-
ing framework containing a variety of word-,
∗Work in progress. * Work is not related to employment
at Amazon.
structure-, and semantic-aware pretraining tasks.
Although increasing the diversity of pretraining
tasks continually improves model performance
accuracy, the lack of mechanisms in selecting
and scheduling tasks makes the training process,
model serving, and memory footprint bulky. The
model expressivity has to grow accordingly to
encode information from all the tasks generally.
To address the challenge, we propose a frame-
work using meta-learning to schedule tasks and
make pretraining more efﬁcient in this prelimi-
nary paper. Meta-learning is commonly used in
learning model architectures, hyperparameters, or
learning algorithms that are generalizable across
tasks through episodic training (Finn et al., 2017;
Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017; Luo et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2021). Hence, we leverage meta-
learning to formulate each pretraining batch as an
episode, and select the pretraining task offering
the most helpful training signals in the episode, in-
stead of following predeﬁned or sequential order
of tasks, to update the model parameters. With the
formulation, we explore two variants, downstream-
aware and downstream-agnostic pretraining, that
utilize loss evaluating training signals with or
without labels in downstream applications.
The
episodic task selection is expected to encode lex-
ical, syntactic, and semantic information across
various tasks more efﬁciently. In this preliminary
work, we introduce the detailed algorithm, imple-
mentation challenges and corresponding solutions,
and experiment settings. We will share empirical
results later.
2
Method and experiment plan
To make multitask pretraining more efﬁcient, we
propose a framework of utilizing meta-learning to
schedule tasks used for network pretraining. We
summarize the framework step-by-step in Algo-
rithm 1. Like many previous meta-learning works,
we use two sets of tasks, source S and target T,
to build episodes for pretraining. S are different
pretraining tasks such as masked language model-
ing, sentence reordering, and dialog response se-
lection; T can be similar tasks to S or a set of
downstream applications. Each while loop in the
algorithm deﬁnes an episode and is analogous to
parameter update with N batches in ordinary pre-
training. However, before iterating through each
batch of examples from the pretraining task ˆs and
updating model parameter θ (line 11 and 12), we
modify an across-task training technique (line 3
to 9) commonly used in meta-learning (Finn et al.,
2017; Snell et al., 2017) to sample subtasks (i.e.,
a batch of examples) from S and T for selecting
the task ˆs to pretrain on. We ﬁrst obtain τ T by
sampling M subtasks for each task in T in line 3.
Then, we iterate through each task s in S, sample
N subtasks, τ s
i , for s, and evaluate the utility of
s, u(s), with τ s
i and τ T . The utility is computed
by updating θ with gradient evaluated on τ s
i and
scoring the updated parameter θ′ with τ T . By se-
lecting the source task yielding the largest utility
to pretrain on1, we expect more efﬁcient network
pretraining.
We employ the equation, scorer(θ′, τ T )
=
−P
j,t Lτ t
j (f(θ′)), to measure the utility of tasks.
As indicated in the equation, we prefer the source
task resulting in updated parameters (θ′) that yield
smaller summed losses over target subtasks. With
this formulation, it is crucial to choose appropriate
target tasks to compute the utility and thus guide
the pretraining. Ideally, the target tasks should be
as relevant to downstream applications as possible
or even provide a similar labeling schema, and we
refer to such setting as downstream-aware pretrain-
ing.
Sometimes a generalizable pretrained net-
work is preferred. In this case, we have T = S for
downstream-agnostic pretraining.
Both settings
will be explored in our experiments.
For our experiment,
we will adopt com-
mon Transformer architectures such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019) as the backbone models and examine the
performance and pretraining efﬁciency when the
proposed method is applied.
We plan to ex-
plore source pretraining tasks based on ERNIE 2.0
1Similar to approaches in reinforcement learning, the
epsilon-greedy algorithm can be used to choose between ex-
ploration and exploitation randomly.
(Sun et al., 2020) as the work provides good cov-
erage of tasks for word-, structure-, and semantic-
aware pretraining signals.
Masked passage re-
trieval (Glass et al., 2020), text generation, and un-
supervised question answering (Luo et al., 2021)
tasks will also be investigated to provide genera-
tion and passage level pretraining losses.
Algorithm 1 Meta-learning based network pre-
training
Inputs: Set of all source and target tasks S, T;
data distribution over each source and target task
ps(τ), pt(τ); Lτ, the loss function evaluated on a
subtask τ sampled from ps(τ) or pt(τ); learning
rates α, λ, number of batches M, N.
Output: Optimized network parameters θ.
1 Initialize θ;
2 while not done do
3
Sample M ∗|T| target subtasks (i.e., batches)
τ T =
S
t=T
τ t
j, where τ t
j ∼pt(τ) and j =
1...M;
4
for s ∈S do
5
Sample M subtasks τ s
i
∼ps(τ), i
=
1...M;
6
u(s) = 0;
7
for all τ s
i do
8
Compute gradient for fast adaptation:
θ′ = θ −α∇θLτ s
i (f(θ));
9
Evaluate updated parameters on target
subtasks: u(s) += scorer(θ′, τ T )
10
ˆs = argmax
s
u(s)
11
Sample N subtasks τ ˆs
i ∼pˆs(τ), i = 1...N;
12
for all τ ˆs
i do
Compute gradient and update parameters:
θ = θ −λ∇θLτ ˆs
i (f(θ));
We will focus on four applications for the
downstream tasks and the target pretraining
tasks in the downstream-aware setting: relation
extraction, semantic role labeling, general lan-
guage and sentence understanding, and machine
reading comprehension. In this setting, additional
prediction heads will be added to the backbone
network separately for different tasks.
These
heads are pretrained (in the downstream-aware
setting) and ﬁnetuned (in both downstream-aware
and downstream-agnostic settings) for evalua-
tion.
We will employ CoNLL04 (Roth and Yih,
2004),
CoNLL-2005
(Carreras and M`arquez,
2005), GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), and SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016), respectively, to obtain
learning signals for the target pretraining tasks
of relation extraction,
semantic role labeling,
general language and sentence understanding,
and machine reading comprehension.
Corre-
spondingly,
ACE2005
(Walker et al.,
2006),
CoNLL 2012 (Pradhan et al., 2012), SuperGLUE
(Wang et al., 2019) (excluding those tasks al-
ready seen in GLUE), and Natural Questions
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) will be used as the
downstream applications to evaluate pretrained
networks in each of the four tasks.
3
Conclusion
In this work, we propose a meta-learning-based
downstream-aware and downstream-agnostic pre-
training method, where pretraining tasks are se-
lected episodically from a list of candidate tasks
to improve pretraining efﬁciency while maintain-
ing the performance. We summarize the algorithm
and our experiment plan. Empirical results will be
shared in our future works.
References
Xavier Carreras and Llu´ıs M`arquez. 2005. Introduc-
tion to the conll-2005 shared task: Semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the ninth conference on
computational natural language learning (CoNLL-
2005), pages 152–164.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, and
Christopher D Manning. 2019. Electra: Pre-training
text encoders as discriminators rather than genera-
tors. In ICLR.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In NAACL.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017.
Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
deep networks. In ICML.
Michael Glass, Alﬁo Gliozzo, Rishav Chakravarti, An-
thony Ferritto, Lin Pan, GP Shrivatsa Bhargav, Di-
nesh Garg, and Avirup Sil. 2020. Span selection pre-
training for question answering. In ACL.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
ﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti,
Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin,
Kenton Lee, et al. 2019. Natural questions: A bench-
mark for question answering research. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
7:453–466.
Shang-Wen Li, Jason Krone, Shuyan Dong, Yi Zhang,
and Yaser Al-onaizan. 2021. Meta learning to clas-
sify intent and slot labels with noisy few shot exam-
ples. In 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology
Workshop (SLT), pages 1004–1011.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Hongyin Luo, Shang-Wen Li, and James Glass. 2020.
Prototypical q networks for automatic conversa-
tional diagnosis and few-shot new disease adaption.
In Interspeech.
Hongyin Luo, Shang-Wen Li, Seunghak Yu, and James
Glass. 2021.
Cooperative learning of zero-shot
machine reading comprehension.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.07449.
Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue,
Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012.
Conll-
2012 shared task:
Modeling multilingual unre-
stricted coreference in ontonotes. In Joint Confer-
ence on EMNLP and CoNLL-Shared Task, pages 1–
40.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018.
Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP.
Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. 2004. A linear program-
ming formulation for global inference in natural
language tasks.
Technical report, Department of
Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. 2017.
Prototypical networks for few-shot learning.
In
NeurIPS.
Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Yukun Li, Shikun Feng, Hao
Tian, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. 2020. Ernie 2.0:
A continual pre-training framework for language un-
derstanding. In AAAI.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. 2016. Match-
ing networks for one shot learning. In NeurIPS.
Christopher Walker, Stephanie Strassel, Julie Medero,
and Kazuaki Maeda. 2006.
Ace 2005 multilin-
gual training corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium,
Philadelphia, 57:45.
Alex Wang,
Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
derstanding systems. In NeurIPS.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. Glue:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for
natural language understanding.
In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: An-
alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
pages 353–355.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. 2019.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for
language understanding. In NeurIPS.
