Title: Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017)
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02509v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1706.02509v1  [cs.DL]  8 Jun 2017
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing
for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017)
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran
School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
muthu.chandra@comp.nus.edu.sg
Kokil Jaidka
School of Arts & Sciences,
University of Pennsylvania, USA
jaidka@sas.upenn.edu
Philipp Mayr
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social
Sciences, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org
ABSTRACT
The large scale of scholarly publications poses a challenge for schol-
ars in information seeking and sensemaking. Bibliometrics, infor-
mation retrieval (IR), text mining and NLP techniques could help
in these search and look-up activities, but are not yet widely used.
This workshop is intended to stimulate IR researchers and digital
library professionals to elaborate on new approaches in natural lan-
guage processing, information retrieval, scientometrics, text min-
ing and recommendation techniques that can advance the state-
of-the-art in scholarly document understanding, analysis, and re-
trieval at scale. The BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 2017 will incor-
porate an invited talk, paper sessions and the third edition of the
Computational Linguistics (CL) Scientiﬁc Summarization Shared
Task.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems →Information retrieval; Link and co-
citation analysis; • Applied computing →Digital libraries and
archives;
KEYWORDS
Scientometrics; Information Retrieval; Digital Libraries; NLP; Sum-
marization; Information Extraction; Citation analysis
ACM Reference format:
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Kokil Jaidka, and Philipp Mayr. 2017. Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrievaland Natural Lan-
guage Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017). In Proceedings of SI-
GIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan., , 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084370
1
INTRODUCTION
Over the past several years, the BIRNDL workshop and its parent
workshops are establishing themselves as the primary interdisci-
plinary venue for the cross- pollination of bibliometrics and infor-
mation retrieval (IR) [5]. Our motivation as organizers of the work-
shop started from the observation that both communities share
only a partial overlap; yet, the main discourse in both ﬁelds con-
sists of diﬀerent approaches to solve similar problems. We believe
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercialadvantage and that copies bearthis notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrstpage. Copyrights for third-party components of this work mustbe honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, , August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084370
that a knowledge transfer would be proﬁtable for both sides. A
good overview of the symbiotic relationship that exists among bib-
liometrics, IR and natural language processing (NLP) has been pre-
sented by Wolfram [6]. A report of the past BIRNDL workshop has
been published recently in The SIGIR Forum [1].
The goal of the BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR is to engage the
IR community about the open problems in academic search. Aca-
demic search refers to the large, cross-domain digital repositories
which index research papers, such as the ACL Anthology, ArXiv,
ACM Digital Library, IEEE database, Web of Science and Google
Scholar. Currently, digital libraries collect and allow access to pa-
pers and their metadata — including citations — but mostly do not
analyze the items they index. The scale of scholarly publications
poses a challenge for scholars in their search for relevant literature.
Finding relevant scholarly literature is the key theme of BIRNDL
and sets the agenda for tools and approaches to be discussed and
evaluated at the workshop.
Papers at the 2nd BIRNDL workshop will incorporate insights
from IR, bibliometrics and NLP to develop new techniques to ad-
dress the open problems such as evidence-based searching, mea-
surement of research quality, relevance and impact, the emergence
and decline of research problems, identiﬁcation of scholarly rela-
tionships and inﬂuences and applied problems such as language
translation, question-answering and summarization. We will also
address the need for established, standardized baselines, evalua-
tion metrics and test collections. Towards the purpose of evaluat-
ing tools and technologies developed for digital libraries, we are or-
ganizing the 3rd CL-SciSumm Shared Task based on the CL-SciSumm
corpus, which comprises over 500 computational linguistics (CL)
research papers, interlinked through a citation network.
The organizers of the 2nd BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 20171
have previously organized other workshop series at premier IR
and CS venues - notably, the Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval (BIR) workshops in 2014, 2015 and 2016 at ECIR [4] and
the NLPIR4DL workshop at ACL-IJCNLP (2009). Most recently, the
BIRNDL workshop and the 2nd CL-SciSumm Shared Task were
co-located with JCDL 20162 [1], where 10 research papers and 10
system papers were presented3 (acceptance rate: 30%). In 2017, the
BIRNDL workshop takes this legacy forward with a focus on schol-
arly publications and data, and an updated scientiﬁc summariza-
tion Shared Task for its participants.
This workshop will be relevant to scholars in computer and in-
formation science, specializing in IR and NLP. It will also be of
1http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2017/
2http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-jcdl2016/
3http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/
importance to all stakeholders in the publication pipeline: practi-
tioners, publishers and policymakers. Today’s publishers continue
to provide new ways to support their consumers in disseminating
and retrieving the right published works to their audience. For-
mal citation metrics are increasingly a factor in decision-making
by universities and funding bodies worldwide, making the need for
research in applying these metrics more pressing.
2
WORKSHOP TOPICS AND FORMAT
Our goal is to encourage insights from IR, NLP and CL for schol-
arly document understanding, document analysis and retrieval in
digital libraries. The papers presented at the workshop will touch
upon several topics, including (but not limited to) full-text analy-
sis, multimedia and multilingual analysis and alignment as well as
the application of citation-based NLP, information retrieval and in-
formation seeking techniques in digital libraries. More speciﬁcally,
our ﬁelds of interests include:
• Infrastructures for scientiﬁc text mining and IR
• Semantic and Network-based indexing, navigation, search-
ing and browsing in structured data
• Discourse structureidentiﬁcation and argument mining from
scientiﬁc papers
• Summarization and question-answering for scholarly DLs
• Recommendation for scholarly papers, reviewers, citations
and publication venues
• Measurement and evaluation of quality and impact
• Metadata and controlled vocabularies for resource descrip-
tion and discovery; automatic metadata discovery, such as
language identiﬁcation
• Disambiguation issues in scholarly DLs using NLP or IR
techniques; data cleaning and data quality.
2.1
Tentative Schedule of Events
The workshop will start with a keynote titled “Do “Future Work"
sections have a real purpose? Citation links and entailment for global
scientometric questions” by Dr. Simone Teufel (University of Cam-
bridge). This session will be followed by regular research paper
presentations, overview papers and posters on the Shared Task.
2.2
The CL-SciSumm Shared Task
The 3rd Computational Linguistics (CL) Scientiﬁc Summarization
Shared Task, sponsored by Microsoft Research Asia, will be con-
ducted as a part of this workshop. This is the ﬁrst medium-scale
shared task on scientiﬁc document summarization in the CL do-
main. It follows up on and extends the successful CL Shared Tasks
conducted as a part of BIRNDL 2016 [1], and within the Biomed-
Summ Track at the Text Analysis Conference 2014 (TAC 2014) [2].
In the CL-SciSumm 2016 [3] Shared Task, ﬁfteen teams from six
countries signed up, and ten teams ultimately submitted and pre-
sented their results.
The Shared Task comprises three sub-tasks in automatic research
paper summarization on a new corpus of research papers, as de-
scribed below.
Given: A topic consisting of a Reference Paper (RP) and up to ten
Citing Papers (CPs) that all contain citations to the RP. Citations in
the CP are pre-identiﬁed as the text spans (i.e., citances), that cite
the RP.
Task 1a: For each citance, identify the spans of text (cited text
spans) in the RP that most accurately reﬂect the citance.
Task 1b: For each cited text span, identify what facet of the paper
it belongs to, from a predeﬁned set of facets.
Task 2 (optional bonus task): Finally, generate a structured sum-
mary of the RP from the cited text spans of the RP. The length of
the summary should not exceed 250 words.
Evaluation: Task 1 will be scored by overlap of text spans mea-
sured by number of sentences in the system output vs gold stan-
dard. Task 2 will be scored using the ROUGE family of metrics be-
tween the system output, and i) human summaries, ii) community
summaries comprising the cited text spans, and ii) the Abstract
section of the reference paper.
This task is continues to be of interest to a broad community in-
cluding those working in CL and NLP, especially in the sub-disciplines
of text summarization, discourse structure in scholarly discourse,
paraphrase, textual entailment and text simpliﬁcation.
3
OUTLOOK
This workshop is the ﬁrst step to foster a reﬂection on interdisci-
plinarity, and the beneﬁts that the disciplines Bibliometrics, IR and
NLP can derive from it in the Digital Libraries context. The authors
of accepted papers will be invited to submit extended versions of
their work to the International Journal on Digital Libraries (IJDL).
As an output of BIRNDL 2016, a special issue of IJDL on “Biblio-
metrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing
in Digital Libraries” is currently in preparation. In the future, we
plan to continue to host this series of workshops and Shared Tasks
at prominent IR, NLP and Digital Library venues.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Microsoft Research Asia for their generous support in funding
the development, dissemination and organization of the CL-SciSumm dataset
and the Shared Task. We are also grateful to the co-organizers of the 1st
BIRNDL workshop - Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo Frommholz, Min-Yen Kan
and Dietmar Wolfram, for their continued support and involvement.
REFERENCES
[1] Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Ingo Frommholz, Kokil
Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, Philipp Mayr, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Report on the
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2016). SIGIR Forum 50, 2
(2016), 36–43. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/p036.pdf
[2] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Beatriz Fisas Elizalde, Rahul Jha,
Christopher Jones, Min-Yen Kan, Ankur Khanna, DiegoMolla-Aliod, Dragomir R
Radev, Francesco Ronzano, et al. 2014. The computational linguistics summariza-
tion pilot task. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference. Gaithersburg, USA.
[3] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Sajal Rustagi, and Min-Yen Kan.
2016. Overview of the CL-SciSumm 2016 Shared Task. In In Proceedings of Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital Li-
braries (BIRNDL 2016).
[4] Philipp Mayr, Ingo Frommholz, and Guillaume Cabanac. 2016.
Re-
port
on
the
3rd
International
Workshop
on
Bibliometric-enhanced
Information Retrieval (BIR 2016).
SIGIR Forum 50, 1 (2016), 28–34.
http://sigir.org/ﬁles/forum/2016J/p028.pdf
[5] Philipp Mayr and Andrea Scharnhorst. 2015.
Scientometrics and Informa-
tion Retrieval - weak-links revitalized. Scientometrics 102, 3 (2015), 2193–2199.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-014-1484-3
[6] Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Lan-
guage Processing: NaturalSynergies to Support DigitalLibraryResearch.In Proc.
of the BIRNDL Workshop 2016. 6–13. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/paper1.pdf
