Title: Explaining Natural Language Processing Classifiers with Occlusion and Language Modeling
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.11889v1
--------------------------------------------------

UNIVERSITY OF POTSDAM
MASTER’S THESIS
Explaining Natural Language
Processing Classiﬁers with Occlusion
and Language Modeling
Author:
David HARBECKE
Supervisors:
Prof. Dr. David SCHLANGEN
Prof. Dr. Manfred STEDE
A thesis submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science in
Cognitive Systems: Language, Learning and Reasoning
at the
Faculty of Human Sciences
September 27, 2020
arXiv:2101.11889v1  [cs.CL]  28 Jan 2021
Declaration of Authorship
I, David HARBECKE, declare that this thesis, titled “EXPLAINING NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING CLASSIFIERS WITH OCCLUSION AND LANGUAGE
MODELING”, and the work presented in it are my own. I conﬁrm that I
worked independently and only with the sources and aids indicated.1 All
passages of the work which I have taken from these sources and aids, either
in wording or in meaning, are marked and listed in the bibliography. Parts
of the presented research have been published with a co-author (Harbecke
and Alt, 2020).2 Content contributions of the co-author that are mentioned
are marked as such. I am familiar with “Richtlinie zur Sicherung guter
wissenschaftlicher Praxis für Studierende an der Universität Potsdam (Pla-
giatsrichtlinie)”3.
Date:
Signed:
1Nevertheless, this thesis is written in ﬁrst-person plural.
2I hereby acknowledge the Association for Computational Linguistics for letting me
describe ﬁndings of publications co-authored by me.
3https://www.uni-potsdam.de/am-up/2011/ambek-2011-01-037-039.pdf
iii
English Abstract
David HARBECKE
EXPLAINING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING CLASSIFIERS WITH
OCCLUSION AND LANGUAGE MODELING
Deep neural networks are powerful statistical learners. However, their
predictions do not come with an explanation of their process. To analyze
these models, explanation methods are being developed. We present a
novel explanation method, called OLM, for natural language processing
classiﬁers. This method combines occlusion and language modeling, which
are techniques central to explainability and NLP, respectively. OLM gives
explanations that are theoretically sound and easy to understand.
We make several contributions to the theory of explanation methods. Axioms
for explanation methods are an interesting theoretical concept to explore their
basics and deduce methods. We introduce a new axiom, give its intuition
and show it contradicts another existing axiom. Additionally, we point
out theoretical difﬁculties of existing gradient-based and some occlusion-
based explanation methods in natural language processing. We provide an
extensive argument why evaluation of explanation methods is difﬁcult. We
compare OLM to other explanation methods and underline its uniqueness
experimentally. Finally, we investigate corner cases of OLM and discuss its
validity and possible improvements.
iv
Deutsche Zusammenfassung
David HARBECKE
EXPLAINING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING CLASSIFIERS WITH
OCCLUSION AND LANGUAGE MODELING
Tiefe neuronale Modelle sind gut im statistischen Lernen. Jedoch liefern
deren Vorhersagen keine Erklärungen des Vorgangs. Um diese Modelle zu
analysieren, hat man Erklärungstechniken entwickelt. Wir präsentieren eine
neue Erklärungstechnik, gennant OLM, für klassiﬁzerende Modelle linguis-
tischer Datenverarbeitung. Diese Methode kombiniert das Maskieren von
Merkmalen mit Sprachmodellierung, was jeweils grundlegende Methoden
der Erklärungstechnik und linguistischer Datenverarbeitung sind. OLM
liefert Erklärungen die theoretisch fundiert und einfach zu verstehen sind.
Wir machen mehrere theoretische Beiträge zu Erklärungstechniken. Axiome
für Erklärungstechniken sind ein interessantes theoretisches Konzept um
deren Grundlagen auszuloten und Techniken abzuleiten. Wir führen ein
neues Axiom ein, legen die Intuition dar und zeigen dass es einem existieren-
den Axiom widerspricht. Zusätzlich zeigen wir theoretische Problematik
in der Anwendung von gradienten- und manchen maskierungsbasierten
Erklärungstechniken bei linguistischer Datenverarbeitung auf. Wir argu-
mentieren umfangreich, warum die Evaluation von Erklärungstechniken
schwierig ist. Wir vergleichen OLM mit anderen Erklärungstechniken und
heben dessen Alleinstellungsmerkmal hervor. Abschließend betrachten wir
Grenzfälle der Anwendung von OLM und diskutieren dessen Validität und
mögliche Verbesserungen.
v
Contents
Declaration of Authorship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
English Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Deutsche Zusammenfassung
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
List of Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.4
Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Language Representations for Deep Learning
. . . . .
6
2
Explainability of DNNs
8
2.1
Axioms for Explanation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Gradient-based Explanation Methods in NLP . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
On the Incompleteness of Evaluating Explanations . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods
17
3.1
Occlusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Language Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
OLM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Formula Derivation OLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Axiomatic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.4
OLM-S(ensitivity) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
vi
4
Experiments
26
4.1
Correlation of Explanation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Baseline Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
CoLA Corner Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Statistical Analysis of Explanations . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
FAVA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion
41
5.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Bibliography
46
vii
List of Figures
1.1
Schematic view of a neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Artiﬁcial explanations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Schematic display of data likelihood in NLP
. . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Correlation of verb relevance for FAVA sentence pairs . . . . .
40
List of Tables
4.1
Example explanations for SST-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Resampling examples for SST-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Correlation of explanation methods on MNLI . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Correlation of explanation methods on SST-2 . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Correlation of explanation methods on CoLA . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Signiﬁcance test for explanations on CoLA
. . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Example explanations for CoLA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
Resampling examples for CoLA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.9
Example explanations for FAVA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.10 Signiﬁcance test for explanations on FAVA . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
viii
List of Deﬁnitions
pdata
probability distribution of data
pLM
probability distribution of a language model
fθ
neural network with parameters θ
f
neural network, or, in general, black-box function
fc := projc ◦f
projection of function f to class c, i.e. output neuron c
(X, Y)
labeled dataset
X
a dataset or, more general, the whole input space
Y
label set
x ∈X
an input element of the dataset; an input vector
xi
an indexed feature of the input x
x\i
an input without the feature at i-th position
(x\i, ˆxi)
an input with a replacement feature
r f,c(xi)
relevance of an input feature xi regarding function f
and class c
1
1 Introduction
The advent of deep learning has created an explanation gap as the models
are considered hard to interpret (Guidotti et al., 2018; Adadi and Berrada,
2018). Models without hand-engineered features are hard to understand in
their decision making. This makes explanation methods highly relevant. In
natural language processing most state-of-the-art architectures are neural
networks. To understand their decisions we point out gaps in existing
explanation methods and develop a novel method.
1.1
Deep Learning
Deep learning describes the architectures of multi-layered neural networks
and methods to train them. Deep neural networks (DNNs) learn features
from data. The layers of a deep neural network learn increasingly higher
level features (Deng and Yu, 2014).
To introduce deep neural networks we ﬁrst motivate interest in them. Then,
we introduce some of their theory by explaining a possible deep neural
network architecture and how DNNs can be trained. Lastly, we discuss
speciﬁc properties that show DNNs’ relevance to the presented work.
1.1.1
Motivation
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a wide
variety of tasks, such as
• image recognition (Ciregan et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
• text classiﬁcation (Kim, 2014),
• perfect information games (Silver et al., 2016, 2018),
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
x1
x2
x3
Input
layer
h1
1
h1
2
h1
3
h1
4
Hidden
layer 1
h2
1
h2
2
h2
3
h2
4
Hidden
layer 2
ˆy1
ˆy2
Output
layer
FIGURE 1.1: Schematic view of a feed-forward neural network
with two hidden layers. Each node displays a neuron, the
arrows between nodes represent the weights. The biases and
activation functions are not depicted.
• or estimating the underlying probability distribution of a sample space
(Bengio et al., 2003; Goodfellow et al., 2014).
In addition to the wide variety of tasks they can perform well, the prediction
process of a neural network can be seen as opaque. A neural network learns
its parameters from data and does not need to have feature extractions
engineered by humans. Thus, external techniques are required to explain the
training and decisions of a neural network.
1.1.2
Architecture
A neural network consists of neurons in layers. Figure 1.1 gives a schematic
view of a neural network. The input layer displays an input vector x =
(x1, x2, x3)T with three input dimensions. For the ﬁrst hidden layer this input
vector is multiplied by a weight matrix W1 with 3 × 4 dimensions, a bias
vector b1 = (b1
1, b1
2, b1
3, b1
4)T is added and a non-linear activation function σ1 is
applied component-wise. This is repeated for the next hidden layer and the
output layer with different weights and biases. Therefore, a step from a layer
to the next is an afﬁne transformation followed by an activation function.
The activation function of the output layer is usually chosen such that the
output neurons represent a probability distribution or individual probability
functions, depending on the formulation of the problem and the data. A
mathematical formulation of the network would be
ˆy = σ3(W3σ2(W2σ1(W1x + b1) + b2) + b3).
(1.1)
1.1. Deep Learning
3
A neural network with several hidden layers is called deep neural network
(DNN). The weights and biases are the trainable parameters θ of a neural
network. The prediction ˆy depends on these parameters, also referred to as
weights. A simpler formulation if we are not interested in speciﬁc weights is
ˆy = fθ(x).
(1.2)
1.1.3
Training
To train a DNN we need an objective and a loss function. The objective is
usually a labeled dataset (X, Y) and tells us what the network should predict
for each input. An element of the dataset x ∈X is usually a coordinate vector
over R. The loss function is a function L( ˆy, y) of the prediction ˆy and true
label y ∈Y. Sometimes a regularizer, which is a loss function on the network
parameters θ, also usually coordinate vectors over R, is added to this loss
function.
With all these ingredients, a neural network is usually trained with back-
propagation (Linnainmaa, 1970; Rumelhart et al., 1986a,b) and a variation
of gradient descent (Cauchy, 1847). Backpropagation is a method that prop-
agates the error E calculated by the loss function to the parameters θ of
the DNN via the chain rule of differentiation. The need for differentiability
explains why often both the inputs and parameters are coordinate vectors
over R. It ensures that the gradients are also real valued. This is important
for section Language Representations for Deep Learning (1.2.1).
Differentiation can be done in parallel for all parameters of a layer. Gradient
descent is an optimization technique of these parameters. Let us view the
neural network as a high-dimensional function over all parameters θ. It
changes the parameter values by stepping proportionally to the size of the
partial derivative of the loss over the whole dataset regarding the parameter
in each direction. Gradient descent can be seen an optimization alternative
to using Newton’s Method (Newton, 1736; Raphson, 1690; Simpson, 1740),
which looks for zeros of a function, for the ﬁrst derivative of a function.
Gradient descent only updates the parameters once per iteration over the
dataset. This is inefﬁcient as subsets of the dataset (mini-batch) can provide
a good estimation of the gradient (Wilson and Martinez, 2003; Bottou and
Bousquet, 2008). Stochastic gradient descent (Robbins and Monro, 1951)
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
averages the gradients over a mini-batch and does one optimization step for
this mini-batch. This is a better trade-off between update time and update
quality. There are many popular and recent variants and alternatives to
stochastic gradient descent such as Momentum (Qian, 1999) and ADAM
(Kingma and Ba, 2014).
1.1.4
Capabilities
The universal approximation theorem states that with speciﬁc restrictions for
the width (Lu et al., 2017) or depth (Hanin, 2017) DNNs can approximate any
continuous convex function. This gives an intuition on why they are state-of-
the-art for many prediction tasks. Furthermore, Choromanska et al. (2015)
show that deep networks have better loss surfaces than shallow networks for
training. This means that the local optima that optimizers ﬁnd are closer to
the global optimum for deep networks. This is underlined by the information
bottleneck principle (Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015; Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby,
2017) which states that training of a DNN is faster than that of similarly
capable shallow networks. The success of deep learning is also partly due to
hardware with parallel computing capabilities (Strigl et al., 2010).
For this work the relevance of DNNs is two-fold. First, we try to explain their
behaviour when performing state-of-the-art prediction on natural language
processing tasks. Second, we use neural language models to create these
explanations.
1.2
Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing (NLP) encompasses the intersection between
human language and the processing of it by computing machinery. The ﬁeld
of NLP is nowadays mostly concerned with a statistical and quantitative
processing and modeling of mass amounts of language data. Manning and
Schütze (1999) state:
“Increasingly, businesses, government agencies and individuals
are confronted with large amounts of text that are critical for
working and living, but not well enough understood to get the
enormous value out of them that they potentially hide.”
1.2. Natural Language Processing
5
This development has been ampliﬁed by the success of DNNs which are
currently state of the art for many of the popular datasets of these tasks. This
includes
• automatic speech recognition on the LibriSpeech corpus (Panayotov
et al., 2015) by Synnaeve et al. (2019) and the Wall Street Journal corpus
(Paul and Baker, 1992) by Povey et al. (2016),
• part-of-speech tagging on the Wall Street Journal part of the Penn
Treebank (Marcus et al., 1999) by Bohnet et al. (2018),
• sentiment analysis on the IMDB dataset (Maas et al., 2011), the Stanford
Sentiment Treebank (Socher et al., 2013) and the Yelp Review dataset
(Zhang et al., 2015) by XLNET (Yang et al., 2019),
• text classiﬁcation on the AG News corpus, the DBpedia onthology
(Zhang et al., 2015) and the TREC dataset (Voorhees and Tice, 2000) by
XLNET (Yang et al., 2019).
• There are also multi-task benchmarks, such as GLUE (Wang et al.,
2017) and SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019a), that combine several NLP
classiﬁcation tasks. Leading both benchmarks is T5 (Raffel et al., 2019).
At least three things are notable regarding the previous list. First, the variety
of tasks is wide, ranging from speech recognition on audio data and generat-
ing text data in language modeling to classifying words, sentences or texts
in part-of-speech tagging, relationship extraction, sentiment analysis and
text classiﬁcation. This makes the dominance of neural architectures in these
tasks even more impressive.
Second, XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) appear frequently
on top of the leaderboard on many of these tasks. Both use a pre-trained
language model, i.e. they learn a representation of language by going over
large text datasets with billions of words, such as the BooksCorpus (Zhu
et al., 2015) or English Wikipedia1. The training of language models will be
described in more detail in section Language Modeling (3.2). Raffel et al.
(2019) even encode the problem formulation into the representation.
Third, most of the datasets are classiﬁcation tasks in some sense where the
neural model has a preselected set of outputs. These are the problems and
1https://en.wikipedia.org
6
Chapter 1. Introduction
models we are interested in. The method presented in this thesis yields
explanations for NLP classiﬁcation tasks.
1.2.1
Language Representations for Deep Learning
Time ﬂies like an arrow;
fruit ﬂies like bananas
Anthony Oettinger
An important component to utilize neural networks in NLP is the represen-
tation of the input. This is nontrivial, as we saw in section Training (1.1.3).
We have to assign real valued coordinate vectors to our input. Furthermore,
the unit of language, called token or atomic parse element, from which to
map into our vector space is nonobvious. It is imperative to choose a token
that allows for an unambiguous mapping. For written language characters,
words, sentences and documents are among the candidates for this atomic
parse element.
A simple realization of this mapping is to count the words of an input and
create a vector representation with vector indices corresponding to words.
This method is called bag-of-words (Harris, 1954). It can be used both on a
sentence and a document level. A practical improvement on this is what
is now called tf-idf (Salton et al., 1975). There, the word counts are scaled
with the logarithm of the inverse of the ratio of documents containing the
word. Both methods do not preserve the order or contextual meaning of
words. Locally, the order and contextuality can be incorporated by choosing
to use n-grams instead of or in addition to single words. However, this does
not retain information about longer contexts. It also yields exponentially
more possible n-grams and fewer counts of a speciﬁc n-gram for increasing
n, which makes the representations less precise and efﬁcient.
A variation to bag-of-words is one-hot-encoding where the words are not
counted but words get assigned pairwise distinct standard basis vectors.
If we ignore out-of-vocabulary words, this is an one-to-one function between
inputs and the representation. This method can be used as underlying trans-
formation for representing words with other methods. Compared to the
previous methods, it allows the order of words in the whole input to be kept.
1.2. Natural Language Processing
7
However, none of these methods provide information about the similarity of
words.
Mikolov et al. (2013) introduce word2vec, a learned vector space represen-
tation of words. It can be called an embedding because the dimensionality
of this vector space is lower than the number of words that are represented.
This means that the vectors corresponding to words are not pairwise orthog-
onal, generally. Words with similar meaning are supposed to have a small
angle between their vector representations. Words are predicted from their
context with the intuition that words that appear in similar contexts have
similar meaning. At the time they achieved state of the art on semantic word
similarity. GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) explicitly learns vector representa-
tions that are based on co-occurrence. These representations allow the DNNs
that employ them to use the order of words if they desire. Thus, context is
preserved but does not inﬂuence representation itself.
Many approaches use characters (Wieting et al., 2016; Bojanowski et al., 2017)
or sub-words (Wu et al., 2016; Kudo and Richardson, 2018) as tokens to
improve on word representations. By choosing a smaller unit, similarities
between words with similar spelling or the same root can be incorporated
into the representation. Still, it does not enable different representations of
the same word in different contexts.
Howard and Ruder (2018) use the language modeling described in section
Language Modeling (3.2) to create a vector embedding where the infor-
mation of context is fed through several layers. This enables a different
representation for “ﬂies like” in the epigraph of this section, depending on
the context.
8
2 Explainability of DNNs
In section Capabilities (1.1.4) we indicated the performance abilities of
DNNs. However, their state-of-the-art prediction performance is not the mea-
sure of all things. Recital 71 of the European Union’s General Data Protection
Regulation1 states:
“[decision-making based solely on automated processing] should
be subject to suitable safeguards, which should include speciﬁc
information to the data subject and the right [...] to obtain an
explanation of the decision reached after such assessment and to
challenge the decision.”
Its potential legal ramiﬁcations are discussed in Goodman and Flaxman
(2017). This regulation clearly states that for real-world applications of
DNNs explanations are necessary. Explanations as support for a decision
by a black box is detailed in Lombrozo (2006): “explanations are [...] the
currency in which we exchanged beliefs”. We will be using the term ex-
plainability (of DNNs) to refer to this ﬁeld, not the more frequently used
“Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)” or “Interpretable Machine Learn-
ing”. Both these terms indicate that there is something inherently explainable
or interpretable about the models in deep learning. This may be the case in
machine learning but cannot be assumed in general. Furthermore, it is very
controversial whether the “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” moniker is a precise or
helpful representation of the characteristics of deep learning (Jordan, 2019).
Several popular surveys of explainability exist. We summarize some of
them to pigeonhole our work more precisely. Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017)
point out that explanations ﬁll an incompleteness in the problem that deep
learning models work on. E.g., the objective given to the model during
training may not have measured generalization performance adequately.
This can be uncovered with explanations. Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017) divide
1https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679
Chapter 2. Explainability of DNNs
9
explanations into local and global explanations. Local explanations try to
explain the model at a speciﬁc input, whereas global explanations try to
explain the model as a whole or its general behaviour.
Adadi and Berrada (2018) highlight key concepts in explainability. They
give four reasons for explanations: “explain to justify”, “explain to con-
trol”, “explain to improve” and “explain to discover”. Furthermore, they
add two categories to sort explanation methods into. They differentiate
between model-speciﬁc interpretability and model-agnostic interpretability
with the latter denoting methods that can work on any black-box model. As
a subcategory to model-speciﬁc methods they discern intrinsic and post-hoc
methods.
Guidotti et al. (2018) present a detailed taxonomy of problems that explana-
tion methods can try to solve. They give formal deﬁnitions of these problems,
including intrinsically explainable models and post-hoc black-box methods.
In addition to the previous methods, they describe black-box model expla-
nation, which tries to build intrinsically explained models that approximate
the model to be explained.
There is an extended discussion of explanation and psychology in Miller
(2019). They argue that many of the insights gained in psychological under-
standing of explanations can be used for explainability of DNNs. We will
try to psychologically motivate our method in section Motivation (3.3.1).
However, we disagree that many insights from psychology can be easily
transferred. Two main questions for explanations of black boxes are how to
generate explanations from them and how to evaluate the faithfulness of their
explanations. This removes assumptions generally held in psychological
contexts.
There exist a variety of NLP speciﬁc explanations. Li et al. (2016) present
methods to view and test heatmaps for different recurrent networks. They in-
vestigate sentiment analysis by putting forward different investigative input.
Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola (2017) create an explanation graph between struc-
tured input and output. This is especially useful for sequence to sequence
tasks like machine translation. Many state-of-the-art models use attention
(Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017). Some papers argue whether
attention weights as explanations are permissible. Jain and Wallace (2019)
show that attention weights do not necessarily agree with other explanations
10
Chapter 2. Explainability of DNNs
and can also be distorted while not changing the prediction. Wiegreffe and
Pinter (2019) disagree and show that under some circumstances these distor-
tion lead to a signiﬁcant decrease in performance. Synthesized, these papers
argue that attention weights can be used as explanation if and only if the
attention is vital for the model. There is also a variety of approaches that
determine the quality of models by linguistic analysis (Linzen et al., 2016;
McCoy et al., 2019).
We provide some examples of methods that that do not belong to our cat-
egory of explanations and will not be discussed further. Kim et al. (2018)
analyze neural models by determining which concepts were important to a
classiﬁcation decision. Intrinsic model-speciﬁc explanations can be found
in older machine learning approaches, such as decision trees, or in model
architectures that provide explanations and predictions in parallel (Zhang
et al., 2018). Ribeiro et al. (2016) explain by learning a local explainable model
around the prediction of a neural model.
We will now focus on local post-hoc input space explanations. They describe
how much a feature of one speciﬁc input contributed to a speciﬁc output
(class). They give a real value called relevance for every input feature which
can be used to create a saliency map (Simonyan et al., 2013). An example can
be found in Table 4.1. The output can be the true label neuron, the predicted
neuron or another output of choice. A positive relevance value indicates that
the feature contributed positively to the given output, whereas a negative
relevance value indicates that the feature distracted from the output. Input
features can be the input values for the ﬁrst layer, or a cluster of these. For
NLP, e.g., all input values of a word (and punctuation mark) can be clustered.
If the explanation method gives relevances for every input dimension the
relevances are aggregated such that every word receives one relevance value.
This is often achieved by summing the relevances (Arras et al., 2017).
An important part of explainability is occlusion. It is either presented as an
explanation method (Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko, 2008; Zintgraf et al.,
2017) where the difference in prediction when removing an input feature is
seen as indicator for the importance of this feature . Alternatively, it is used
as evaluation of explanation methods (Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Montavon
et al., 2018), where it is argued that (other) explanation methods should ﬁnd
features whose occlusion change the prediction signiﬁcantly.
2.1. Axioms for Explanation Methods
11
The use of a method both for generating and evaluating explanations points
to a false dichotomy between explanation methods and their evaluation,
which we discuss extensively in section On the Incompleteness of Evaluat-
ing Explanations (2.3). In general, most objective evaluation methods allow
for a derivation of an explanation method which satisﬁes this evaluation
perfectly. This has already been done in Kindermans et al. (2018) and when
developing the theory for this thesis, it was originally intended as an evalu-
ation method. However, we argue the standard for an evaluation method
should be higher. It should not be considered as just an accessory to an
explanation method to justify the explanations.
Explanations are a simpliﬁcation of the model’s decision process. They try to
present the process in a human-understandable way. For complex models
this is always an approximation. To strictly deﬁne some ground rules for this
approximation, axioms for explanation methods are developed.
2.1
Axioms for Explanation Methods
Axioms are a proposed method to develop and test explanation methods
by Sundararajan et al. (2017) and extensively discussed in Lipton (2018).
Additional axioms are proposed in Bach et al. (2015), Ancona et al. (2018),
Kindermans et al. (2019) and Srinivas and Fleuret (2019). The advantage of
axiomatic analysis is that objectives for explanation methods can be stated
and discussed and each explanation method can be evaluated against these
objectives. This can also give context to tasks, models or settings where
some explanation methods might be suitable or unsuitable. We will discuss
later why axioms might be the most objective evaluation of explanation
methods. In the following, we brieﬂy discuss some important axioms and
their intuition.2
Completeness The sum of the relevances of features of an input is equal to the
prediction (Bach et al., 2015). This axiom stems from the intuition that a
prediction of an input is a prediction of a composition of features.
Implementation Invariance Two neural networks that are functionally equiv-
alent, i.e. give the same output for all possible inputs, should receive the same
2An extensive discussion of axioms and explanation methods was done in the Individual
Module and will thus not be repeated.
12
Chapter 2. Explainability of DNNs
Explanation 1:
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
(positive sentiment)
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
(negative sentiment)
Explanation 2:
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
(positive sentiment)
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
(negative sentiment)
FIGURE 2.1: Artiﬁcial explanations from two methods. We
are investigating the explanation of a sentiment classiﬁer for
both positive and negative sentiment. Red indicates a feature
supporting the prediction, blue indicates a detraction. The ﬁrst
explanations do not satisfy Class Zero-Sum as the explanations
are equal for both classes. It is unclear which token actually
contributed to which classes. The second explanations do sat-
isfy Class Zero-Sum. It is identiﬁable which token contributed
to which class and by how much.
relevances for every input (Sundararajan et al., 2017). This seems trivial but
is important to state as methods that work with internal weights of neural
models do not necessarily comply.
Linearity A network, which is a linear combination of other networks, should
have explanations which are the same linear combination of the original networks
explanations (Sundararajan et al., 2017). This axiom states that an explanation
method should be a linear function of neural networks given the input.
Sensitivity An input feature should receive a non-zero relevance, if and only if the
prediction of the network depends on the feature (Sundararajan et al., 2017). This is
a simple double check that features that are ignored by the network should
not receive relevance and features that are important to the model should
receive relevance.
Sensitivity-1 The relevance of an input variable should be the difference of predic-
tion when the input variable is removed (Ancona et al., 2018). This could also be
named the occlusion axiom. It basically restates the prediction difference
formula (Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko, 2008) which we will see later in
Eq. (3.1).
We introduce a new axiom:
Class Zero-Sum The sum of relevances of a feature over all classes is zero (Harbecke
and Alt, 2020). The intuition behind this axiom is guided by the normalization
of most classiﬁers. If the sum of the predictions is ﬁxed, then every feature
2.2. Gradient-based Explanation Methods in NLP
13
adds as much to the prediction of a set of classes as it takes away from all
other classes. Thus, if we want to explain the feature for all classes we should
ﬁx the sum over all classes to zero. E.g., we do not want a token to contribute
positively to positive and negative sentiment (see Figure 2.1).
If a relevance method fulﬁlls this axiom, it allows for an intuitive interpreta-
tion of the relevances, that may be taken for granted. Since the relevances of
a feature are normalized to have a sum of zero over all classes, a feature with
positive relevance to a class can be interpreted as contributing to that class,
whereas a feature with a negative relevance detracts from that class.
The Class Zero-Sum axiom is a contradiction to the Completeness axiom if the
normalization of the classiﬁer is not set to have a sum of zero. We argue that
Completeness forces a method to assign undue relevance, e.g. in cases where
there is no information detected in the input for any class, it does not make
sense to distribute positive relevance over features.
2.2
Gradient-based Explanation Methods in NLP
Gradient-based explanation methods were introduced with Sensitivity Analy-
sis (Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013). The intuition is that the
gradient of the prediction at the input tells us which input dimensions can
change the prediction the most and are thus most important for the predic-
tion. As Sundararajan et al. (2017) showed, this can be misleading, as this
only gives information about the function in the local neighborhood of the
input.
In the following we call the distribution of data pdata, meaning pdata(x) is
the probability of x appearing as a data point for a speciﬁc task. This is not
constrained to a dataset but the evasive more general distribution, i.e. “data
that users would expect the systems to work well on” (Gorman and Bedrick,
2019). As discussed in section Training (1.1.3), in general, an input x in this
case can be regarded as coordinate vector over R. In practice this is almost
always the case in NLP. Let us assume we have a practical limitation on the
length of input text and, therefore, a maximum embedding dimension of n.
We can make all other inputs have this dimensionality by padding them with
zeros. Thus, we have a function f that maps text to a subset S of a coordinate
14
Chapter 2. Explainability of DNNs
space Rn. We will now discuss which properties this subset S has and why
this is important.
FIGURE 2.2: Schematic display of data likelihood in NLP. There
are discrete inputs, i.e., combination of tokens, with a data
likelihood greater than zero. All other inputs in the embed-
ding space have likelihood zero because they have no corre-
sponding tokens. Every input with a positive likelihood has a
neighborhood that does not contain another input with positive
likelihood. Gradient-based explanation methods (red arrow)
consider inﬁnitesimal changes to the input and thus data with
no likelihood.
1. S is a discrete set in Rn.
A discrete set is a set where every element s ∈S has a neighbourhood that
does not contain any other point of S. There are a ﬁnite number of tokens
with pairwise distinct embeddings and a ﬁnite length. Thus, S is ﬁnite and
the global minimum of distances between two elements of S is positive.
Therefore, S is discrete.
2. pdata(x) for x ∈Rn is a discrete probability distribution.
For every point x ∈Rn/S we have pdata(x) = 0. We just saw that S ⊂Rn is
a discrete subset. Therefore, pdata is a discrete probability distribution, as can
be seen schematically in Figure 2.2. Note that this is particularly different
2.3. On the Incompleteness of Evaluating Explanations
15
to vision. Every canonical image representation x in a coordinate space Rn
entails a neighbourhood of small perturbations where the images still make
sense. Consequently, the probability distribution of images embedded in Rn
is continuous.
3. This property of the probability distribution is fundamental to gradient-
based explanation methods.
Gradient-based explanation methods analyze the change of prediction with
respect to the the input dimensions. Analyzing inﬁnitesimal change in a
function presumes that this change is meaningful. However, if the data
probability is zero everywhere in a small neighbourhood of an input vector,
these changes become meaningless, as the prediction function can never be
confronted with other vectors from this neighbourhood. These vectors are
automatically out of distribution, i.e. the prediction function is analyzed by
evaluating a priori meaningless behaviour.
We thus argue that gradient-based explanation methods are not theoretically
justiﬁed in NLP. Although, in some cases, especially if the function is well-
regularized, local behaviour indicates global behaviour. This, however, can
not be assumed and needs to be investigated before using gradient methods.
2.3
On the Incompleteness of Evaluating Explana-
tions
The sole focus of an explanation method should be to relay information
about a model to a user. Explanations exist to help understand the decision
process of the model (Doshi-Velez et al., 2017). Thus, the correct explanation
cannot be independent of the model.
Every experimental evaluation of explanation methods relies on a ground
truth (property) that the explanation should have. For example, let us take the
evaluation method where the explanation of a model is compared with some
features that are identiﬁed with the help of experts (Mohseni and Ragan,
2018). These ground truths are independent of the model. First, neural
models have achieved superhuman performance on several tasks, e.g. go
(Silver et al., 2016) and chess (Silver et al., 2018), and grounding explanations
by humans on these tasks cannot be considered helpful in understanding
superhuman performance.
16
Chapter 2. Explainability of DNNs
Second, it does not take into consideration that a model can be wrong and
the explanations correct. The explanations of a model that made a false
classiﬁcation can point to completely different features than an expert would
select.
Third, a rigid scheme by humans does not take into account that predictive
features can be missed even by experts, as neural models are powerful statis-
tical learners (Sarle, 1994; Geirhos et al., 2018). On the contrary, explanation
methods are especially useful in cases where the model uses artefacts, not
human-intuitive features, for its decision.
It is unclear whether it is possible to distinguish between the theoretical foun-
dations of explanation methods and their evaluations. The most prominent
example of a method that is used for both is occlusion, which is discussed
in the following section Occlusion (3.1). Since the model is the only ground
truth and explanations are a simpliﬁcation, it is highly probable that there is
more than one sensible explanation for an input classiﬁed by a model. Thus,
for both explanations and evaluation, constraints are established that reduce
the number of explanations. If these constrains are explicitly stated they can
be regarded as axioms. Note that axioms can be used both to develop and to
test explanation methods. All in all, the need for somewhat subjective con-
straints makes the existence of a general evaluation of explanation methods
unlikely.
We do not argue that it is impossible to evaluate an explanation method.
The performance in sensibly selected evaluations does probably correlate to
the quality of an explanation method. Measuring the correlation to sensible
explanation methods can also be seen as quality assessment. We will use
and discuss this approach in section Tasks (4.1.2). Asserting which axioms
an explanation method fulﬁlls is an important step towards evaluating its
validity. We argue that the explanation method for one’s use case should
be motivated by the paradigms that the method fulﬁlls. Furthermore, there
are sanity checks (Adebayo et al., 2018) that can determine whether an
explanation method has undesired properties. Experimental evaluation of
a method can provide guidance for selecting an explanation method. They
become more valuable the closer the setting of the evaluation is to the setting
where the explanation is needed.
17
3 Methods
To build a theoretically solid explanation method we combine a technique
related to the Sensitivity-1 axiom with a method that considers likelihood in
NLP. We introduce these techniques, occlusion and language modeling, before
synthesizing them to a new method.
3.1
Occlusion
We lay out the theory of occlusion and discuss its advantages and disadvan-
tages. Occlusion was introduced under the name Occlusion Sensitivity (Zeiler
and Fergus, 2014) as a method to detect whether an explanation method
detects important features of an input for a neural network, by evaluating
inputs with occluded features detected by the explanation method.
Conversely, Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko (2008) introduce the same tech-
nique as a local post-hoc input space explanation method. It measures the
importance of features of an input for a classiﬁer. This is done by comparing
the predictions of the classiﬁer with and without the feature. We refer to this
method as occlusion, too. A feature can be a word or sentence in NLP classi-
fying or a pixel or larger patch of an image in image classifying. Occlusion is
a true black-box method. It only uses the predictions of a model, no internal
representations or even structural information about the model.
For an input x we take a feature xi. To determine the relevance of xi we
consider the input x\i without this feature. This is an incomplete input as we
do not know which values to set as replacement for xi. A simple approach
is to set all the values of xi to zero. In NLP, it is possible to delete words or
replace them with the <UNK> token. This will be done as baseline methods
in the experiments. Zintgraf et al. (2017) propose sampling the values from
the overall distribution of the dataset. With this replacement we employ the
18
Chapter 3. Methods
difference of probabilities formula (Robnik-Šikonja and Kononenko, 2008;
Zintgraf et al., 2017).
The relevance r given the prediction function f and class c is
r f,c(xi) = fc(x) −fc(x\i).
(3.1)
There are various practical difﬁculties with occlusion. It is unclear which fea-
tures to select, especially if the human understanding of features differs from
the feature space that was used to input the data. Furthermore, occlusion
does not guarantee that the data still makes sense (to the model) after a part
of the input is taken out. This is especially difﬁcult in NLP, where models
have increasing syntactic, hierarchical and other linguistic understanding
(Liu et al., 2019a; Hewitt and Manning, 2019). Thus, models could misinter-
pret data with missing features in various ways, e.g. taking ungrammaticality
as an indicator for the prediction.
3.2
Language Modeling
We offer a short introduction to language modeling. This is both valuable
for our approach and for understanding the foundation of current state-of-
the-art NLP classiﬁcation models. Language modeling can be seen as using
large corpora of unannotated language data and creating a supervised task
by reusing words as their own labels.
A DNN takes a static word embedding like word2vec or GloVe, or a sub-word
embedding like SentencePiece (Kudo and Richardson, 2018) as input and
predicts one or several tokens that are missing. These missing tokens can
be following the original input or masked among the input. The labels of
these tokens are one-hot vectors. In a way, these models assign likelihood
to a given text (Brown et al., 1992). Let us have a text T that is split into
tokens (t1, . . . , tn) = T. If we have a language model pLM that is able to
make predictions of the form pLM(t1) and pLM(ti+1|(t1, . . . , ti)) then we get
3.3. OLM
19
a probability and score of the whole text.
pLM(T) = pLM((t1, . . . , tn)) = pLM(t1)
n−1
∏
i=1
pLM(ti+1|(t1, . . . , ti))
PPpLM(T) := pLM(T)−1
n
(3.2)
PPpLM(T) is called perplexity of the corpus. The lower this score, the higher
the probability that the language model assigned to the corpus and thus,
through a Bayesian argument, the better the language model.
Not all language models are trained to predict text from scratch. E.g., Devlin
et al. (2019) mask 15% of words in a sentence and predict those. This does not
lead to a model that can be measured by giving the perplexity of a corpus.
Nevertheless, all these models create an embedding of the input in every
hidden layer that can be used for other tasks. It is a priori unclear whether
these representations are an improvement on the static embedding because
the primary goal of the DNN is not to create a better representation of the
input for other classiﬁcation tasks. However, experimental results from
Howard and Ruder (2018), Peters et al. (2018) and Devlin et al. (2019) suggest
that using embeddings from a language model is an improvement on static
embeddings. The success of these models in various tasks mentioned in sec-
tion Natural Language Processing (1.2) has been coined “NLP’s ImageNet
moment” (Ruder, 2018). Devlin et al. (2019) argue “Recent empirical improve-
ments due to transfer learning with language models have demonstrated
that rich, unsupervised pre-training is an integral part of many language
understanding systems.”
In our experiments, we only use language models for the simple task of
predicting one missing word or punctuation mark. This is an area where
masked language models should excel.
3.3
OLM
The main idea of this thesis is combining Occlusion with Language Modeling
(OLM). Instead of leaving out tokens, we want to replace them with sensible
options that only remove information but not structure. This disallows the
prediction network to consider a changed structure of the input. It is now
20
Chapter 3. Methods
forced to consider the change in information. To get a good overview of this
change we sample plenty of possible replacements and compute a weighted
average of the prediction results. Due to the law of large numbers (Bernoulli,
1713) we consider this average an accurate approximation of all possibilities.
3.3.1
Motivation
Counterfactual thinking is a psychological concept which states that humans
think of past and future events by looking at alternatives “What if [...] ?”
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1981; Roese, 1997). This enables us to evaluate
past actions in another way than just looking at the outcome. For statistical
models we are able to actually evaluate counterfactuals without needing to
guess about the outcome. Occlusion can be seen as an objective measure to
do this by changing small parts of the input and considering “What if” this
part of the input is different.
These approaches are closely linked to perturbation-based explanation meth-
ods. In contrast, these methods do not presume a set of features of which
at least one is occluded, but ﬁgure out which features create the largest
change in prediction if they are missing or different (Fong and Vedaldi, 2017;
Wachter et al., 2017). They highlight the synergy of local adversarials and
explanations. Ribeiro et al. (2016) propose a variant of this by using small
perturbations to learn a local linear model that resembles the original model
and is interpretable. We argue that all these methods fail to consider data
likelihood. Furthermore, Ilyas et al. (2019) show that uninterpretable adver-
sarials are an inherent feature of almost all neural models, which questions
their usefulness as explanations.
Norm theory (Kahneman and Miller, 1986) states that we choose counter-
factuals depending on how easy they are to imagine. This is at least related
to how likely these alternatives are. Rational imagination theory (Byrne,
2007) argues explicitly that we choose probable alternatives to reality when
evaluating outcomes. These alternatives can either lead to more positive
or negative results (Roese and Olson, 2014). We consider these psycholog-
ical intuitions because they are important to our own understanding of
explanations. Although, as we argued in section On the Incompleteness
of Evaluating Explanations (2.3), explanations should not be evaluated by
human intuition, it should be clear how the results of the methods are to be
3.3. OLM
21
understood. Furthermore, intuitions are closely related to axioms. The men-
tioned psychological statements describe intuitive principles. The evaluation
of likely alternatives is easily understood and communicable to laymen of
DNNs who may examine explanations to judge a model’s decision process.
3.3.2
Formula Derivation OLM
We start from the difference of probabilities formula in Eq. (3.1). We reinter-
pret x\i in the following way. Instead of considering removing the feature
xi we rather remove the information provided by this feature to the model.
This gives a very intuitive information-theoretic question that our method
answers: What additional information does this feature give to the model for
classiﬁcation? For this we have to consider what inputs are how likely given
the rest of the input is preserved. In the abstract this gives
fc(x\i) = ∑
ˆxi
pdata( ˆxi|x\i) fc(x\i, ˆxi)
(3.3)
with pdata being the data probability over a deﬁned space containing the
inputs, as deﬁned in section Gradient-based Explanation Methods in NLP
(2.2).
To use this formula in NLP we approximate the data distribution (pdata) with
a language model
pdata( ˆxi|x\i) ≈pLM( ˆxi|x\i).
(3.4)
In practice this means we mask a word, which may consist of several tokens,
or a punctuation mark and resample it with a given language model. Other
inputs and features are possible but could increase the approximation error,
e.g. by accumulating it over several words. The language model does not
have the information of the original word but all information of the context.
This can lead to cases where the original word is predicted with a very high
probability. We argue that in these cases the additional information provided
by this word was negligent.
The big advantage of this approach is that the structure of the original input
is preserved by only picking replacements that seem likely to a language
22
Chapter 3. Methods
model. It gives the formula
fc(x\i) :≈∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fc(x\i, ˆxi)
(3.5)
for x\i. There are several practical difﬁculties that this approximation brings.
First, it is only valid if all data is supposed to be grammatical. A language
model assigns higher probability to replacement tokens that produce a gram-
matical sentence. We will investigate this effect with the Corpus of Linguistic
Acceptability dataset, in section CoLA Corner Case (4.2).
Second, replacements sometimes make much more sense if another part
of the input is changed. For example, a prepositional verb determines the
preposition it appears alongside with and the preposition can be seen as
information of the verb. This preposition, however, selects which verbs can
be sampled as replacement.
Third, the length of the replacement is a limiting factor. There are cases when
the replacement should be allowed to contain more or fewer tokens than
the original. Additionally, some masked language models, which predict
sub-word tokens frequently, may not sample a whole word. This distorts
the resampled input. The last two problems can be interpreted as not giv-
ing the language model enough freedom by forcing it to make exactly one
token replacement. We elaborate possible alleviations of these difﬁculties in
section Future Work (5.2). In the following, we refer to the unit we want to
resample as token because, disregarding practical concerns, it is arbitrary in
our method.
Combined with Eq. (3.1) we set
r f,c(xi) := fc(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fc(x\i, ˆxi).
(3.6)
This establishes a new method that can determine what effect tokens have
on a prediction. They can either have a positive or negative relevance,
depending on whether the original prediction is greater than the averaged
prediction after resampling.
3.3. OLM
23
3.3.3
Axiomatic Analysis
We will show that OLM satisﬁes Class Zero-Sum, Implementation Invariance,
Sensitivity-1 and Linearity. Let f be a neural network that takes an element of
the input space X and predicts a probability distribution over classes C, i.e,
f : X →R|C|
fc(x) ≥0
∀c ∈C, x ∈X
∑
c∈C
fc(x) = 1
∀x ∈X.
(3.7)
Let xi be an indexed feature of an input x. We denote the relevance given to
this feature regarding model f and class c by our method OLM with r f,c(xi).
OLM satisﬁes Class Zero-Sum. Intuitively, if the input with the resampled
token increases the prediction for one class, it has to decrease the predictions
of other classes, and vice-versa. We have
∑
c∈C
r f,c(xi)
(3.6)
= ∑
c∈C
 
fc(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fc(x\i, ˆxi)
!
= ∑
c∈C
fc(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) ∑
c∈C
fc(x\i, ˆxi)
(3.7)
= 1 −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) = 0.
(3.8)
Thus, OLM satisﬁes Class Zero-Sum. From this follows that it does not satisfy
Completeness.
OLM satisﬁes Implementation Invariance. OLM is a black-box method and
only evaluates the function of the neural network. It does not regard the
parameters θ. Assume we have
θ ̸= θ′
and
fθ(x) = fθ′(x)
∀x ∈X.
(3.9)
24
Chapter 3. Methods
Then we get
r fθ,c(xi) = fθc(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fθc(x\i, ˆxi)
= fθ′c(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fθ′c(x\i, ˆxi)
= r fθ′,c(xi).
(3.10)
Thus, OLM satisﬁes Implementation Invariance.
OLM satisﬁes Sensitivity-1. OLM is deﬁned as an occlusion method, so it
necessarily provides the difference of prediction when an input variable is
occluded. Equation (3.6) is based on Eq. (3.1).
OLM satisﬁes Linearity. Let f = ∑n
j=1 αjgj be a linear combination of models.
Then we have
r f,c(xi) = fc(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i) fc(x\i, ˆxi)
=
n
∑
j=1
αjgj
c(x) −∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i)
n
∑
j=1
αjgj
c(x\i, ˆxi)
=
n
∑
j=1
αjrgj,c(xi).
(3.11)
3.3.4
OLM-S(ensitivity)
It can be of additional interest to determine to which input features the model
is most sensitive. Previously, we measured the mean difference between the
model prediction and the resampled predictions. As a measure for sensitivity
we suggest taking the standard deviation of the resampled predictions. This
measures how varied the predictions are for one token position, given the
rest of the input but regardless of the original token. With previous notation,
we suggest for sensitivity s:
s f,c(xi) :=
s
∑
ˆxi
pLM( ˆxi|x\i)

fc(x\i, ˆxi) −µ
2
.
(3.12)
We do not suggest this as a relevance measure because, as previously men-
tioned, it is independent of the input feature xi. Rather, this measure suggests
3.3. OLM
25
additional information to the relevance method. For a neutral feature it may
be reassuring to know whether the model would have picked up on more
class-indicating possibilities. In combination OLM and OLM-S measure the
mean and standard deviation of predictions with resampled tokens.
26
4 Experiments
We perform several experiments to investigate the explanations generated
by OLM. Example explanations can be found in Table 4.1. These experiments
highlight some practical peculiarities of our explanation method. For com-
parison with other methods we also display the results of OLM-S. These
experiments cannot be comprehensive (see section On the Incompleteness
of Evaluating Explanations (2.3)) and there is no standard benchmark. Thus,
we compare to other explanation methods and conduct experiments in areas
that may present corner cases to OLM.
Method
Relevances
Max. value
OLM
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.57
OLM-S
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.48
Delete
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.98
UNK
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.98
Sensitivity Analysis
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
35
Gradient*Input
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.041
Integrated Gradients
good ﬁlm , but very glum .
0.96
TABLE 4.1: Example explanations for SST-2. Explanations
are shown for positive sentiment which the input is correctly
predicted as. Positive relevances are displayed in red, negative
relevances are displayed in blue. Color intensity is normalized
for every explanation method and is proportional to absolute
value of relevance. The last column gives the maximum of
the absolute relevances. OLM and OLM-S give relevance or
sensitivity to both clauses. The other occlusion-based methods
give almost all relevance to “good”. Gradient-based methods
give most relevance to the second clause. Resamples that OLM
used multiple times can be found in Table 4.2. OLM gives
positive relevance to “glum” because some alternatives are
predicted with a much lower probability for positive sentiment.
Chapter 4. Experiments
27
Underlying these experiments is mostly the same combination of explanation
and prediction model. This is done for two reasons. We investigate the
algorithmic efﬁciency of OLM. For every token we resample k times. Let us
assume the distribution of these tokens follows a variation of Zipf’s Law
(Estoup, 1916; Zipf, 1949) with α > 1 (Piantadosi, 2014). Then, we have
O(
α√
k) different samples per token. Furthermore, we resample each of n
tokens in an input. Thus, for a single input we have O(n
α√
k) predictions. An
investigation of the effect of different language models on the explanations
of different classiﬁcation models should be done but requires vast resources.
Additionally, we ﬁx the models to compare results across different tasks
and datasets. To this end, we also only investigate explanations of the true
label neuron. Some explanation methods do not necessarily treat different
classes differently, as alluded to in Figure 2.1. We try to remove this effect by
focusing only on the most important class.
For OLM and OLM-S we use BERTBASE (Devlin et al., 2019) as a language
model and choose words (and punctuation marks) as units for resampling.
Resampling is computationally expensive but the quality of the samples is
very important. We also want a language model that does not frequently
produce sub-word tokens. BERT uses WordPiece (Wu et al., 2016) which
does have sub-word tokens but mostly predicts whole words. This is viable
for single word resampling, especially compared to many other masked
language models. Thus, we choose BERTBASE as a low-resource compromise
of a well-ﬁtting state-of-the-art language model to analyze the method over
datasets. An example of the samples is shown in Table 4.2. We point out that
in general our approach is language model agnostic. For generating single
input explanations, not analyzing a dataset, we suggest using a collection
of the best well-ﬁtting language models available. For classiﬁcation we use
different variations of ROBERTA (Liu et al., 2019b)1 that we describe in
section Tasks (4.1.2).2
1All models were originally published at https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/tree/
master/examples/roberta. We use the implementation and pre-trained models from
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.
2Experiments are available at https://github.com/harbecke/xbert.
28
Chapter 4. Experiments
good
ﬁlm
,
but
very
glum
.
good
looking
,
but
not
bad
.
(34, 0.98)
(11, 0.96)
(84, 0.98)
(87, 0.98)
(22, 1)
(26, 0.003)
(100, 0.98)
nice
news
art
and
still
short
(10, 0.46)
(5, 0.018)
(2, 0.79)
(3, 1)
(10, 0.87)
(11, 1)
great
idea
quality
not
very
old
(3, 0.41)
(4, 0.0011)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
(10, 0.98)
(5, 1)
ﬁne
taste
though
also
thin
(3, 0.27)
(4, 0.94)
(2, 1)
(6, 1)
(5, 1)
classic
morning
too
dull
(3, 0.93)
(3, 0.0064)
(5, 1)
(5, 0.058)
interesting
try
always
slow
(3, 0.085)
(3, 0.0026)
(4, 0.89)
(3, 1)
lovely
job
never
boring
(3, 0.99)
(3, 0.99)
(3, 1)
(3, 0.0059)
strong
work
sometimes
small
(2, 1)
(2, 0.99)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
bad
thing
quite
dark
(2, 8e-05)
(2, 0.0041)
(2, 0.98)
(2, 1)
fun
plan
slightly
expensive
(2, 0.87)
(2, 0.0017)
(2, 1)
(2, 1)
funny
lord
damn
(2, 0.55)
(2, 0.007)
(2, 0.018)
excellent
question
(2, 0.88)
(2, 0.0012)
wonderful
walk
(2, 0.93)
(2, 0.22)
decent
answer
(2, 0.48)
(2, 0.011)
scary
thoughts
(2, 0.001)
(2, 0.07)
advice
(2, 0.0052)
mood
(2, 0.99)
timing
(2, 0.2)
TABLE 4.2: Resampled words for the example explanations in
Table 4.1. The header of a column indicates which word was
replaced. The word entry in the row shows the replacement.
The numbers in brackets are how often this word was the
replacement out of 100 samples (weight) and the prediction of
the positive sentiment neuron, which is the true label. Only
words which were sampled at least twice are presented, the
columns are ordered by sampling count.
4.1. Correlation of Explanation Methods
29
4.1
Correlation of Explanation Methods
First, we compare the relevances produced by OLM to those of other ex-
planation methods. The main focus of this experiment is to evaluate how
large the differences to other explanations are. It could be assumed that the
explanations of basic occlusion is very similar to OLM explanations. If this
were shown by experiments, it would make the theoretical beneﬁts of OLM
superﬂuous. E.g., in theory, the language model of a state-of-the-art classiﬁer
could understand an obviously missing word. It could treat this similar to
our method by internally representing it as missing and deriving a predic-
tion from that. In the same vein, we investigate how much the explanation
methods that use gradients differ from occlusion-based methods to see if
theoretical difﬁculties manifest. 3
We calculate the correlation of explanation methods on tasks in the following
way. Let r1
x and r2
x be the ordered relevances of an element x ∈X of dataset
X for methods 1 and 2. With corr being the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient for
samples (Pearson, 1895), we set the correlation of two methods over dataset
X to
∑n
i=1 corr(r1
i , r2
i )
n
.
(4.1)
This means, two methods are perfectly positively correlated if and only if
they produce scaled relevances with possibly different positive scaling for
each input.
4.1.1
Baseline Methods
We compare our explanations with two baselines based on occlusion (see
Eq. (3.1)). The simplest variation is removing the word of interest and not
replacing it. We call this method Delete, it was ﬁrst used in NLP by Li
et al. (2016). Similarly, we replace the word of interest with the unknown
token <UNK>. This approach is more tailored to state-of-the-art classiﬁers
pre-trained with masked language modeling.
Furthermore, we compare explanations to three gradient-based methods.
All these methods provide relevances for every dimension of the input. To
3This experiment already appears in Harbecke and Alt (2020). The baseline methods
were selected by me. Christoph Alt selected and conducted the experiments. Phrasing and
analysis exceeding the publication is mine.
30
Chapter 4. Experiments
receive relevances on word level we sum over the dimensions for each word
(Arras et al., 2017). The simplest one is the absolute value of the gradients and
is called Sensitivity Analysis (Simonyan et al., 2013). Note that this method
only provides non-negative relevances. It is especially comparable to OLM-S
which also provides a non-negative sensitivity of the model. Input*Gradient
(Shrikumar et al., 2017) is self-explaining. Every input gets multiplied with
its gradient. Finally, we compare our explanations to Integrated Gradients
(Sundararajan et al., 2017). This is the integration of the gradient of the
prediction function along a straight path from a baseline, usually the zero
vector, to the input vector multiplied by the path length.
4.1.2
Tasks
We select three NLP classiﬁcation tasks. An input contains one or two
sentences or phrases for all tasks. Each task focuses on one speciﬁc aspect of
language understanding. All tasks are part of the GLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2017) which does not publish test sets. Therefore, we report results on
the development set which we do not use for model optimization.
Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference Corpus (MNLI) by Williams et al.
(2018) is a natural language inference corpus. A data point consists of two
sentences that may have a relation to each other.
• If the second sentence is a sensible successor to the ﬁrst in content, this
pair gets the entailment label.
• If the content of the sentences does not relate to each other, the label is
neutral.
• If the sentences have are in disagreement they get a contradiction label.
The corpus contains more than 400,000 samples.
We use a ROBERTALARGE model which is already ﬁne-tuned on MNLI. It
achieves an accuracy of 90.2% on the development set which is two per-
centage points behind state-of-the-art T5 (Raffel et al., 2019). McCoy et al.
(2019) show that even though these models perform around the human base-
line for this task, they fail to generalize for a variety of rare constructions.
Correlations of the explanation methods for MNLI can be found in Table 4.3.
4.1. Correlation of Explanation Methods
31
Occlusion
Gradient
Method
OLM
OLM-S
Del
UNK
Sen
G*I
IG
OLM
1.00
0.61
0.60
0.58
0.27
-0.03
0.28
OLM-S
0.61
1.00
0.32
0.32
0.35
-0.01
0.20
Delete
0.60
0.32
1.00
0.73
0.23
-0.05
0.34
UNK
0.58
0.32
0.73
1.00
0.22
-0.03
0.32
Sensitivity Analysis
0.27
0.35
0.23
0.22
1.00
0.03
0.17
Gradient*Input
-0.03
-0.01
-0.05
-0.03
0.03
1.00
0.00
Integrated Gradients
0.28
0.20
0.34
0.32
0.17
0.00
1.00
TABLE 4.3: Correlation between explanation methods on MNLI
development set. The table is symmetrical. The ﬁrst two rows
are our own methods. The next two rows are other occlu-
sion methods. The last three rows are gradient-based explana-
tion methods. The correlation of different methods is highest
between the occlusion methods but never close to 1. Gradi-
ent*Input does not correlate with any method.
Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST) by Socher et al. (2013) is a sentiment
classiﬁcation dataset. It contains 70,000 sentences from movies with either a
negative or positive connotation. The SST-2 version only consists of binary
classiﬁcation with positive and negative sentiment. Sentiment Analysis is an
easy task to interpret explanations on if the explanation method assumes that
features cannot contribute to both classes (see Figure 2.1 and Eq. (3.8)). An
input feature contributes as much to the positive sentiment as it detracts from
the negative sentiment and vice versa. Therefore, the explanation method
assigns each feature positive or negative sentiment.
We ﬁne-tune a pre-trained ROBERTABASE. This model achieves an accuracy
of 94.5% on the development set which is 3 percentage points lower than mul-
tiple state-of-the-art models, including T5 (Raffel et al., 2019). Correlations
of the explanation methods for SST-2 can be found in Table 4.4.
Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability (CoLA) by Warstadt et al. (2019) is a
dataset with sentences labeled by their grammatical acceptability. It contains
more than 10,000 sentences which are annotated as either acceptable or
unacceptable. We will elaborate on the speciﬁcs of this task for explanation
methods in section CoLA Corner Case (4.2).
32
Chapter 4. Experiments
Occlusion
Gradient
Method
OLM
OLM-S
Del
UNK
Sen
G*I
IG
OLM
1.00
0.78
0.52
0.47
0.30
0.02
0.35
OLM-S
0.78
1.00
0.39
0.38
0.37
0.01
0.30
Delete
0.52
0.39
1.00
0.64
0.21
0.01
0.37
UNK
0.47
0.38
0.64
1.00
0.18
0.03
0.36
Sensitivity Analysis
0.30
0.37
0.21
0.18
1.00
0.03
0.13
Gradient*Input
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
1.00
0.04
Integrated Gradients
0.35
0.30
0.37
0.36
0.13
0.04
1.00
TABLE 4.4: Correlation between explanation methods on SST-2
development set. The results resemble the results from Table
4.3. The correlation between OLM and other occlusion methods
is a little lower. In contrast, the correlation between OLM-S and
other occlusion methods is a little higher.
Analogous to SST-2 we ﬁne-tune ROBERTABASE and achieve a phi coefﬁ-
cient4 (Yule, 1912) of 0.613 on the development set. STRUCTBERT (Wang
et al., 2019b) achieves a phi coefﬁcient of 0.753. Correlations of the explana-
tion methods for CoLA can be found in Table 4.5.
4also misnomered Matthews correlation coefﬁcient
Occlusion
Gradient
Method
OLM
OLM-S
Del
UNK
Sen
G*I
IG
OLM
1.00
0.56
0.25
0.21
0.20
0.02
0.15
OLM-S
0.56
1.00
0.15
0.12
0.29
0.03
0.09
Delete
0.25
0.15
1.00
0.35
0.02
0.04
0.18
Unk
0.21
0.12
0.35
1.00
0.03
0.03
0.14
Sensitivity Analysis
0.20
0.29
0.02
0.03
1.00
-0.00
0.07
Gradient*Input
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.03
-0.00
1.00
0.12
Integrated Gradients
0.15
0.09
0.18
0.14
0.07
0.12
1.00
TABLE 4.5: Correlation between explanation methods on CoLA
development set. The correlation between OLM and OLM-
S and other occlusion methods (in bold) is much lower than
on the other two tasks. This indicates that this dataset could
be a corner case for our method. Correlation between other
methods is also lower but to a smaller extend.
4.1. Correlation of Explanation Methods
33
4.1.3
Results
Tables 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 show correlation of all tested explanation methods.
Overall, there is positive correlation between almost all methods. No meth-
ods produce equivalent relevances, even the correlation between OLM and
OLM-S is never close to 1. The three occlusion-based relevance methods
OLM, Delete and UNK have consistently high correlation on MNLI and SST-2
but much lower correlation on CoLA.
We draw the following conclusions. OLM produces signiﬁcantly different
explanations than other occlusion methods. Delete and UNK have a higher
correlation with each other for all three tasks than with OLM which is ev-
idence that it stands out from other occlusion methods. The theoretical
differences between these methods seem to manifest experimentally.
OLM-S has the about as much correlation to other occlusion methods than
to Sensitivity Analysis. This can be seen as experimental validation as a
sensitivity method with a somewhat different intent than a relevance method.
The correlation between gradient-based methods and other methods is low
across all tasks. This could indicate that gradient methods do not capture the
discrete nature of NLP (see section Gradient-based Explanation Methods in
NLP (2.2)). Note that we use correlation in our argument in two seemingly
conﬂicting ways. If the correlation of explanations is close to 0, they are
independent of each other. It is unlikely that methods with independent
results can both give very good explanations. Furthermore, if the correlation
of explanations is close to 1, the methods are redundant. They might have
theoretical differences but these at least did not manifest in the experiments.
On the whole, we think different sensible explanation methods should have
positive correlation 0 ≪c ≪1. This appears to be the case for OLM and
most compared explanation methods.
Table 4.1 shows example explanations for the input “good ﬁlm , but very
glum .” from the SST-2 dataset. Table 4.2 shows the sampling examples that
OLM used to give relevance to the words. The maximum value is easy to
interpret for occlusion-based methods, as it indicates the change in prediction
if the feature with the maximum value is occluded. OLM and OLM-S give
lower relevances to “good” because alternatives sometimes lead to a positive
classiﬁcation as well. Interestingly, alternatives to “ﬁlm” more often lead to a
34
Chapter 4. Experiments
negative classiﬁcation. This indicates that the meaning or strength of “good”
depends on the following noun. Surprisingly, “glum” also receives a positive
relevance from OLM. There are alternatives, especially “bad”, that change
the prediction to negative. Furthermore, the classiﬁcation gives positive
sentiment a probability of 98%, so no negative word had a big effect in the
original sentence.
For two out of ﬁve words the original word was the most frequent sample
from the language model. Additionally, the comma was resampled 84% of
the time and the period every time. This indicates that the information of
these was not completely lost as they are made very likely by the context.
Many resampled words (prediction < 0.5) lead to a negative sentiment
classiﬁcation. Also, many resampled words lead to a classiﬁcation where the
model assigns a high probability to one class, i.e. is very sure. Only the ﬁrst
word has several replacements where the model is unsure.
This example also highlights a disadvantage of OLM. The structure “good
[...] but [...] glum” can not be adequately evaluated by resampling only one
word. It is possible to argue that two of these words already determine the
sentiment of the third.
4.2
CoLA Corner Case
CoLA is an interesting edge case for our method. In the CoLA dataset there
are inputs that are grammatically acceptable and inputs that are unacceptable.
The task of a model is to ﬁnd out to which category the input belongs. The
language model in OLM mostly saw acceptable sentences during training,
thus it can be assumed that OLM tries to resample such that grammatically
acceptable input appears whenever possible. This can be seen as ﬂawed,
because on average the resampling should lead to a similar class distribution
as the original dataset.
Therefore, in theory, OLM is able to identify important words if replacements
make the sentence acceptable, because it assigns relevance if the prediction
of the model changes from ungrammatical to grammatical. However, it does
not identify the opposite case, where an input is grammatical only because of
a speciﬁc construction. OLM would not modify the input to be unacceptable.
4.2. CoLA Corner Case
35
In other words, CoLA is a task where the approximation pdata ≈pLM in
Eq. (3.4) is not necessarily true, the resampling is not faithful to the data.
4.2.1
Statistical Analysis of Explanations
To investigate this, we try to answer the following question. How much do
the explanations for grammatically acceptable and unacceptable sentences
differ? We hypothesize that the explanations for unacceptable inputs have
higher values on average.
First, we have to set the classes on equal footing. We only use explanations
of inputs that were predicted correctly by the ROBERTABASE model from
section Correlation of Explanation Methods (4.1) and with a probability p
of at least 0.9. The relevances produced by OLM are always in the range
[p −1, p], as for all occlusion-based methods (see Eq. (3.1)). This ensures that
all explanations fall into the range [−0.1, 1]. We have 165 sentences labeled
as unacceptable and 678 labeled as acceptable with probability p ≥0.9.
We measure the sum, average and maximum of relevances over input sen-
tences. For each of these measures we get results for acceptable and unaccept-
able sentences, which can be compared with a statistical signiﬁcance test. We
choose Welch’s t-test (Welch, 1947) which enables samples sizes and variances
to be different for both classes. We can ignore that the samples are not from a
normal distribution because of the large sample size (Kendall, 1951). Table
4.6 shows results of these tests. The null hypothesis of the averages being
equal can be rejected for all comparisons because all three tests are highly
signiﬁcant.
We feel obliged to mention that this is not a conclusive test. Features of
inputs of different classes need not have equivalent properties. For accept-
ability datasets, there are many more possible constructions for unacceptable
sentences than acceptable sentences. Thus, we must not expect a symmetry
between the explanations of different classes.
The other two occlusion methods Delete and UNK ﬁnd more relevance in the
acceptable sentences. This is likely due to them perturbing grammatically
acceptable input such that it is not acceptable. The Delete method removes
words, the UNK method replaces them with the <UNK> token, which may
not share all syntactic properties with the original word. Thus, they are both
36
Chapter 4. Experiments
relevance aggregation
Avg.
Sum
Max
unacceptable sentence
0.275
1.89
0.893
acceptable sentence
0.0384
0.304
0.172
p-value
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
TABLE 4.6: Relevance values accumulated over inputs by the
method in the column header, averaged over all sentences with
correct classiﬁcation and probability p ≥0.9. For all accumu-
lations the averages differ dramatically, which indicates that
the resamples changed the prediction a lot more for unaccept-
able sentences. A Welch’s t-test was performed to compare the
means and yielded a p-value < 0.001 for all three methods.
likely to break the syntax of a sentence. This conﬁrms that our method does
differ signiﬁcantly from other occlusion-based methods.
We show some randomly selected examples of the explanations in Table
4.7. The sentences correctly classiﬁed as unacceptable all have words that
can be replaced to make the sentence acceptable. The sentences correctly
classiﬁed as acceptable have few words with high relevance, so the language
model rarely created sentences that the classiﬁer considered unacceptable.
id
relevances
max value
1
John paid me against the book .
0.99
2
The person confessed responsible .
1
3
Medea tried the nurse to poison her children .
0.92
4
to die is no fun .
0.49
5
This teacher is a genius .
0.056
6
Soaring temperatures are predicted for this weekend .
0.08
TABLE 4.7: Six randomly selected example sentences from the
CoLA dataset with explanations. The upper three examples
are grammatically unacceptable, the lower three examples are
acceptable. All examples are correctly classiﬁed with a prob-
ability of at least 0.9. The upper examples have words with
much higher relevance as the resampled words can make the
sentence acceptable. In the lower examples the resampled
words change the prediction only once. Sentences with likely
replacement words that changed the prediction can be found
in Table 4.8.
4.3. FAVA
37
id
orig. word
new sentence
prediction
1
paid
John pushed me against the book .
4e-4
1
paid
John pressed me against the book .
3.6e-4
1
me
John paid damages against the book .
4.3e-4
1
me
John paid taxes against the book .
7.9e-4
1
against
John paid me for the book .
3.7e-4
2
confessed
The person was responsible .
4.4e-4
2
confessed
The person is responsible .
4.4e-4
2
responsible
The person confessed himself .
4e-4
3
tried
Medea orders the nurse to poison her children .
3.5e-4
3
nurse
Medea tried the same to poison her children .
1.1e-3
4
die
to eat is no fun .
0.089
TABLE 4.8: Resampled sentences for Table 4.7. All resampled
words that changed the predicted class and were sampled at
least 10 out of 100 times are depicted. Most of the previously
unacceptable sentences are now acceptable and thus correctly
classiﬁed by the model. In the last row we can see that the only
frequent sample for acceptable sentences that changed the pre-
diction was misclassiﬁed by the model. The upper rows of the
table show that the interval of predictions for acceptable sam-
ples is very narrow. They have a probability between 0.035%
and 0.11% of being unacceptable, which is only a difference by
factor three.
Examples of these resampled sentences can be found in Table 4.8.
We take this as evidence that the language model is able to construct gram-
matical sentences even under adverse circumstances. The inspection of this
dataset with OLM can be a useful analysis. However, the approximation in
Eq. (3.4) of the language model distribution approximating the data distribu-
tion does not hold up. The relevances of words in unacceptable sentences is
ampliﬁed because the language model tries to choose words that build an
acceptable sentence. We consider the results of OLM on this task meaningful
but not unconditionally. The task shows investigating the approximation, or
adapting the language model for the classiﬁcation task, can be pondered.
4.3
FAVA
We conclude with an experiment that resembles CoLA but with a speciﬁc
linguistic aspect and a possibility for more model introspection. Kann et al.
(2019) introduce the Frames and Alternations of Verbs Acceptability (FAVA)
38
Chapter 4. Experiments
verb frame
relevances
max value
causative-
the chapter edited .
0.49
inchovative
david edited the chapter .
0.18
spray-
michael poured the bucket with the soup .
0.85
load
michael poured the soup into the bucket .
0.028
there-
there agreed with the politician a protester .
0.082
load
a protester agreed with the politician .
0.15
understood-
kelly joked david .
0.84
object
kelly and david joked .
0.42
dative
nicole proclaimed the greatest athlete to rebecca .
0.43
nicole proclaimed rebecca the greatest athlete .
0.25
TABLE 4.9: Randomly selected example explanations for sen-
tence pairs in the FAVA dataset. The examples are ordered by
verb frame, the unacceptable example is always the ﬁrst. All
examples are correctly classiﬁed with probability p ≥0.9. The
verbs are frequently identiﬁed as the most important word in a
sentence.
dataset. It contains constructed sentences around verb properties that yield
acceptable and unacceptable sentences. Most of these sentences come in
pairs of acceptable and unacceptable sentence, which are variations of each
other and at least one uses the given verb frame. This allows a direct com-
parison that exceeds the possibilities of CoLA. We only select these pairs for
evaluation. Example sentences and frames can be found in Table 4.9.
In this case we do not ﬁne-tune a model on the dataset but use the
ROBERTABASE model from TextAttack ﬁne-tuned on CoLA.5 Since this model
was trained on another dataset, this allows us to evaluate on the train, devel-
opment and test set. We do this to retrieve enough data. This dataset version
encompasses 6466 single sentences or 3233 pairs. The accuracy for the model
on our class-balanced version of the dataset is 84.3%. The best model in the
original paper (Kann et al., 2019) achieved an accuracy of 85.5% on the test
set of the whole dataset.
This dataset is split into ﬁve types of syntactic verb frame alternations. Verbs
5The model was originally published at https://github.com/QData/TextAttack. We
used the version from the transformers package https://github.com/huggingface/
transformers.
4.3. FAVA
39
unacceptable
acceptable
average verb relevance
0.400
0.0960
average word relevance
0.115
0.0429
p-value
<0.001
<0.001
TABLE 4.10: Relevance values averaged over all sentences
with correct classiﬁcation and probability p ≥0.9. For both
unacceptable and acceptable sentences the verb is signiﬁcantly
more relevant than the average word. A Welch’s t-test was
performed to compare the means and yielded a p-value < 0.001
for both averages.
can be seen as the central part-of-speech to this task, as constructions are
built around the fact that they work for some verbs but not for all. Thus, we
are interested whether verbs have a higher relevance than other words. We
perform signiﬁcance tests as in section Statistical Analysis of Explanations
(4.2.1). Table 4.10 shows statistical signiﬁcance for both acceptable and
unacceptable sentences. For unacceptable sentences the relevance of verbs
is more than three times as large as for the average word. For acceptable
sentences the relevance is more than two times as large. This shows that
OLM identiﬁes verbs as important words in this task which is centered on
verbs.
In Table 4.9 we show an example of the explanation of sentence pairs for each
of the syntactic verb frame alternations. For all verb frames the verb gets the
highest relevance in at least one of the two paired sentences. In only one of
the verb frames the verb has the highest relevance in both paired sentences.
As expected, the relevances of the unacceptable sentences are higher than
the relevances of acceptable sentences.
We also investigate how the relevances of verbs in sentence pairs are cor-
related. We already saw that the relevances are higher for words of unac-
ceptable sentences. Figure 4.1 provides a visualization of the relevances of
sentence pairs. The null hypothesis of the relevances not being correlated
is rejected with p-value < 0.005. The relevances are weakly negatively cor-
related with a Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient of r = −0.134. We interpret
this as a sanity check (Adebayo et al., 2018) that our method does not simply
assign high relevance to verbs.
The relevance of verbs in unacceptable sentences is higher on average, as is
40
Chapter 4. Experiments
FIGURE 4.1: Correlation of verb relevance for FAVA sentence
pairs. The x-axis denotes the relevance of the verb in the un-
acceptable sentence of a sentence pair. The y-axis denotes the
relevance of the verb in the acceptable sentence of a sentence
pair. Only pairs are depicted where both sentences were cor-
rectly predicted with probability p ≥0.9. Thus, the interval of
possible values for both axes is [−0.1, 1].
the case for an average of all words in the CoLA experiments. Few verbs
have high relevance in both sentences of a sentence pair. This can have two
possible reasons. If the classiﬁcation model does not contextualize a verb
completely, the verb as a feature itself inﬂuences the model prediction. This
would mean an imbalance for the resampling predictions. Also, the verbs are
unlikely to be special cases of both the unacceptable and the acceptable sen-
tence. Resampling is more likely to change the prediction if the construction
around the verb only does or does not work for few samples.
All in all, these experiments provide evidence that OLM is a useful tool for
analyzing black-box models. At the least, it provides easily interpretable
explanations. We identify language modeling as a standout feature of OLM
that makes its explanations vastly different from other methods. The intuitive
theory of OLM allows for evaluation and introspection of relevances even
for corner cases of the method.
41
5 Conclusion
We summarize the topics and central arguments of this thesis. Furthermore,
we point out weaknesses of our approach and how they could be alleviated.
Last, we elaborate some possible future work.
5.1
Summary
In the ﬁrst chapter of this thesis we provide the necessary theoretical back-
ground. We introduce Deep Learning by motivating interest in the topic,
mainly through its achieved results. Additionally, we discuss practical as-
pects, such as the architectures of deep neural networks and how to train
them. We round out this section by pointing to capabilities of neural net-
works and how they are important to this thesis.
We introduce the topic of explainability of neural networks. We summarize
central papers and surveys of this topics. Focus is laid on theoretical aspects
of explainability. This is done partly by showing work on axioms for expla-
nation methods. In this context we provide our ﬁrst contribution, a novel
axiom. It is guided by the principle that a feature of an input to a normalized
prediction function contributes as much to a set of classes as it detracts from
the complementary classes.
The second contribution is a theoretical argument against gradient-based
explanation methods in natural language processing. We show that input
in NLP is discrete and thus the data likelihood distribution is discrete. This
inhibits the functionality of gradients when analyzing the prediction function.
We contrast this with the likelihood function in vision.
Furthermore, we contribute another theoretical argument to explainability.
We discuss why a general evaluation of explanation methods is unlikely to
exist. The main argument is that the ground truth for the explanation is only
held in the model, which is exactly what an explanation method is trying to
42
Chapter 5. Conclusion
extract. Since this can only be done by approximation, we point out that there
is a false dichotomy between the evaluative rules for this approximation and
the explanation method that fulﬁlls them.
The central methods chapter introduces our main contribution, a novel ex-
planation method. It consists of the combination of two existing methods,
Occlusion and Language Modeling and is coined OLM. Occlusion is a tech-
nique in explainability that is used either to explain black-box models or
evaluate explanations. It can be seen as incomplete because it does not de-
termine how to replace occluded features. For this replacement we propose
using language modeling in NLP. We show that language modeling is espe-
cially suited to sample replacement. They excel at this task because language
understanding by language models is the foundation of state-of-the-art mod-
els in NLP.
We motivate OLM psychologically and through information theory. These
arguments lead us to selecting and evaluating likely alternatives to explain
features of the original input. The formula for OLM is achieved by inserting
sampling with a language model into the difference of probabilities formula.
We analyze our method by going over the axioms that we introduced in the
preceding chapter. We provide proofs of compliance. Since the formula for
OLM is a weighted mean of predictions, we add the standard deviation as an
additional measure OLM-S. This measure is intended as a sensitivity method,
not a relevance method.
We provide experimental evaluation of our method. As alluded to in the
second chapter, we do not consider a complete evaluation, like a single
benchmark, possible. We try to compare our method to existing methods
by a correlation experiment. We work under the assumption that sensible
methods correlate, but when introducing a novel method it is also important
to see that there is no perfect correlation. Both aspects are shown over three
tasks. The results on one task, CoLA, point to a possible problem of OLM.
The second experiment is a deeper dive into the relevances of our method on
CoLA. Linguistic acceptability is a context where it is wrong to assume that
the distribution of a language model is similar to the distribution of the data.
We show that this manifests in the explanations. We discuss how to interpret
these explanations and how they make sense once the context is understood.
The introspection with OLM is possibly deeper than with other relevance
5.2. Future Work
43
methods, as we can also provide the compared samples. Furthermore, we
show that the language modeling works as it is supposed to.
Finally, we experiment on a dataset that is even more speciﬁc than CoLA.
It contains pairs of sentences with verb frames that are either acceptable
or unacceptable. This provides the additional information that the verb
has to be very important for the model, as different verbs lead to different
classiﬁcations in the same structure. We show that our method is able to
identify verbs as very important. Furthermore, we show that relevances of
verbs in sentence pairs is weakly negatively correlated, which indicates that
our method does not blindly assign relevance to verbs.
5.2
Future Work
We describe some of the shortcomings, unexplored areas and possible ideas to
extend this work. All identiﬁed weaknesses concern the practical application
of our method.
There are three main problems with our approach. The major problem
we identiﬁed during method development and experiments is the approx-
imation of the data with a language model. While this is certainly valid
frequently, we saw that there are exceptions. A language model can always
provide syntactically correct data which does not make sense for the task. Of
all possible sentences, most sentences are not suitable for a dataset because
they do not indicate a class. A language model alone has no mechanism to
detect this.
One possibility to improve selection of resampled tokens would be to train a
generative adversarial network (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to detect whether
an input is part of the given dataset. The discriminator of this model could
determine whether proposed resampled tokens create a likely input and also
assign a probability. This probability could be used or combined with the
language model probability to select resampled tokens. This would ensure
that the resampled data ﬁts the task.
A second problem of our method is that we resample exactly one token in a
tokens previous place. If we choose words as replacement units, this prevents
the use of language models that produce sub-word tokens frequently. It
would be possible to use beam search to allow them to build a word from
44
Chapter 5. Conclusion
these sub-word tokens. Additionally, If we want to change the position, we
would not know where to position a replacement. This is problematic in
several ways. In general, if we take out the information of one word then
there are other sensible replacements that do not consist of just one word.
Furthermore, if the replaced word forces a syntactic structure in the input
that is not determined by any of the other inputs, it could be sensible to allow
this structure to change.
In an information theory sense, the removal of the information of one token
places the sentence into another set of possibilities that contain the informa-
tion of all other tokens but not necessarily in the exact phrasing as before.
This is the same phenomenon that humans have when thinking of formulat-
ing a sentence and changing the structure at the last moment because the last
word ﬁts the new structure better. To allow this, we need an architecture that
is invariant to rephrasing. It would be possible to use an encoder-decoder
architecture to encode the information of the sentence without the tokens of
interest. Then we have a representation of the sentence that can be used to
generate the replacement sentence. However, it would be difﬁcult to detect
whether there is information missing that needs to be sampled in the encoded
state. E.g., if a strong adjective is removed in a sentiment classiﬁcation task,
how do we produce a resampled sentence with sentiment?
Another interesting aspect is choosing other features as replacement units.
For tasks with many sentences it could be interesting to measure the effect
of sentences as features. However, we consider it unlikely that resampled
sentences produce vastly different results than removed sentences. Syntax is
no longer an issue, only context for other sentences may be important.
The third practical difﬁculty is the dependency of our approach on a language
model. Even state-of-the-art language models differ from the true likelihood
of language data. This problem is unlikely to be resolved practically, as
language models will presumably not become perfect in the future. Our
method depends on automatic generation of replacements. This complicates
resampling multiple features at the same time, as the approximation errors
are likely to accumulate.
All mentioned practical points concern the possibilities and difﬁculties of
generating good comparison samples. This thesis is an attempt towards
5.2. Future Work
45
explanation methods in natural language processing that do not use unjusti-
ﬁed inputs or methods. Therefore, a deeper analysis of sampling options to
improve the tailoring of OLM to NLP is an adequate future research direction.
46
Bibliography
Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. Peeking inside the black-box: A
survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai). IEEE Access, 6:52138–
52160, 2018.
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz
Hardt, and Been Kim. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 9525–9536, 2018.
David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. A causal framework for ex-
plaining the predictions of black-box sequence-to-sequence models. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 412–421, 2017.
Marco Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz Öztireli, and Markus Gross. Towards
better understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for deep neu-
ral networks. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Leila Arras, Franziska Horn, Grégoire Montavon, Klaus-Robert Müller, and
Wojciech Samek. "What is relevant in a text document?": An interpretable
machine learning approach. PloS one, 12(8):e0181142, 2017.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen,
Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for
non-linear classiﬁer decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation. PloS
one, 10(7):e0130140, 2015.
David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki Kawanabe,
Katja Hansen, and Klaus-Robert Müller. How to explain individual classi-
ﬁcation decisions. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(Jun):1803–1831,
2010.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate. International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2015.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
47
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and Christian Jauvin. A
neural probabilistic language model. Journal of machine learning research, 3:
1137–1155, 2003.
Jakob Bernoulli. Ars conjectandi. Impensis Thurnisiorum, fratrum, 1713.
Bernd Bohnet, Ryan McDonald, Gonçalo Simões, Daniel Andor, Emily Pitler,
and Joshua Maynez. Morphosyntactic tagging with a meta-bilstm model
over context sensitive token encodings. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 2642–2652, 2018.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. En-
riching word vectors with subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146, 2017.
Léon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of large scale learning. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 161–168, 2008.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Jennifer C.
Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. An estimate of an upper bound for the entropy
of english. Computational Linguistics, 18(1):31–40, 1992.
Ruth M. J. Byrne. The rational imagination: How people create alternatives to
reality. MIT press, 2007.
Augustin Cauchy.
Méthode générale pour la résolution des systemes
d’équations simultanées.
Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des séances de
l’Académie des Sciences, 25:536–538, 1847.
Anna Choromanska, Mikael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, Gérard Ben Arous,
and Yann LeCun. The loss surfaces of multilayer networks. In Artiﬁcial
intelligence and statistics, pages 192–204, 2015.
Dan Ciregan, Ueli Meier, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Multi-column deep neu-
ral networks for image classiﬁcation. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 3642–3649. IEEE, 2012.
Li Deng and Dong Yu. Deep learning: methods and applications. Foundations
and Trends® in Signal Processing, 7(3–4):197–387, 2014.
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable
machine learning. CoRR, arXiv:1702.08608, 2017.
Finale Doshi-Velez, Mason Kortz, Ryan Budish, Chris Bavitz, Sam Gersh-
man, David O’Brien, Stuart Schieber, James Waldo, David Weinberger,
and Alexandra Wood. Accountability of ai under the law: The role of
explanation. CoRR, arXiv:1711.01134, 2017.
Jean-Baptiste Estoup.
Gammes sténographiques: méthode et exercices pour
l’acquisition de la vitesse. Institut sténographique, 1916.
Ruth C. Fong and Andrea Vedaldi.
Interpretable explanations of black
boxes by meaningful perturbation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3429–3437, 2017.
Robert Geirhos, Carlos R. M. Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H. Schütt, Matthias
Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Generalisation in humans and deep
neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
7538–7550, 2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-
Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative
adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
2672–2680, 2014.
Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. European union regulations on algo-
rithmic decision-making and a “right to explanation”. AI magazine, 38(3):
50–57, 2017.
Kyle Gorman and Steven Bedrick. We need to talk about standard splits.
In Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, pages 2786–2791, 2019.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca
Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi. A survey of methods for explaining black
box models. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 51(5):1–42, 2018.
Boris Hanin. Universal function approximation by deep neural nets with
bounded width and relu activations. CoRR, arXiv:1708.02691, 2017.
David Harbecke and Christoph Alt. Considering likelihood in NLP classiﬁ-
cation explanations with occlusion and language modeling. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Student Research Workshop, pages 111–117. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2020.
Zellig S. Harris. Distributional structure. Word, 10(2-3):146–162, 1954.
John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. A structural probe for ﬁnding
syntax in word representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4129–
4138, 2019.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model ﬁne-tuning
for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 328–339,
2018.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon
Tran, and Aleksander Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they
are features. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
125–136, 2019.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers), pages 3543–3556, 2019.
Michael I. Jordan. Artiﬁcial intelligence—the revolution hasn’t happened
yet. Harvard Data Science Review, 2019.
Daniel Kahneman and Dale T. Miller. Norm theory: Comparing reality to its
alternatives. Psychological review, 93(2):136, 1986.
50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. The simulation heuristic. Technical
report, Stanford University, CA, Department of Psychology, 1981.
Katharina Kann, Alex Warstadt, Adina Williams, and Samuel Bowman. Verb
argument structure alternations in word and sentence embeddings. In
Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguistics (SCiL) 2019, pages
287–297, 2019.
Maurice George Kendall. The Advanced Theory of Statistics: Vol: II. Charles
Grifﬁn and Co., Ltd., London, 1951.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fer-
nanda Viegas, and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution:
Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav). In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2673–2682, 2018.
Yoon Kim. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1746–1751. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2014.
Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Kristof T. Schütt, Maximilian Alber, Klaus-Robert
Müller, Dumitru Erhan, Been Kim, and Sven Dähne. Learning how to
explain neural networks: Patternnet and patternattribution. International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Sara Hooker, Julius Adebayo, Maximilian Alber,
Kristof T. Schütt, Sven Dähne, Dumitru Erhan, and Been Kim. The (un)
reliability of saliency methods. In Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining
and Visualizing Deep Learning, pages 267–280. Springer, 2019.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classi-
ﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language
independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 66–71, 2018.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky. Visualizing and
understanding neural models in nlp. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 681–691, 2016.
Seppo Linnainmaa. The representation of the cumulative rounding error of
an algorithm as a taylor expansion of the local rounding errors. Master’s
Thesis (in Finnish), University of Helsinki, 1970.
Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. Assessing the ability of
lstms to learn syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–535, 2016.
Zachary C. Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability. Queue, 16(3):31–57,
2018.
Nelson F. Liu, Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov, Matthew E. Peters, and
Noah A. Smith. Linguistic knowledge and transferability of contextual
representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1073–1094, 2019a.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen,
Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta:
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. CoRR, arXiv:1907.11692,
2019b.
Tania Lombrozo. The structure and function of explanations. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 10(10):464–470, 2006.
Zhou Lu, Hongming Pu, Feicheng Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Liwei Wang. The
expressive power of neural networks: A view from the width. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6231–6239, 2017.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y.
Ng, and Christopher Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 142–150, 2011.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze. Foundations of statistical natural
language processing. MIT press, 1999.
52
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mitchell Marcus et al. Treebank-3 LDC99T42, 1999. Philadelphia: Linguistic
Data Consortium.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Di-
agnosing syntactic heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 3428–3448, 2019.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient esti-
mation of word representations in vector space. CoRR, arXiv:1301.3781,
2013.
Tim Miller. Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insights from the social
sciences. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 267:1–38, 2019.
Sina Mohseni and Eric D. Ragan. A human-grounded evaluation benchmark
for local explanations of machine learning. CoRR, arXiv:1801.05075, 2018.
Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Methods
for Interpreting and Understanding Deep Neural Networks. Digital Signal
Processing, 73:1–15, 2018.
Isaac Newton. The method of ﬂuxions and inﬁnite series. Henry Woodfall, 1736.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur.
Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio books.
In
2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
Douglas B. Paul and Janet M. Baker. The design for the wall street journal-
based csr corpus. In Proceedings of the workshop on Speech and Natural
Language, pages 357–362. Association for Computational Linguistics, 1992.
Karl Pearson. VII. Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two
parents. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 58(347-352):240–242, 1895.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–
1543, 2014.
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher
Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 2227–2237, 2018.
Steven T. Piantadosi. Zipf’s word frequency law in natural language: A
critical review and future directions. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 21(5):
1112–1130, 2014.
Daniel Povey, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Galvez, Pegah Ghahremani, Vi-
mal Manohar, Xingyu Na, Yiming Wang, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Purely
sequence-trained neural networks for asr based on lattice-free mmi. In
Interspeech, pages 2751–2755, 2016.
Ning Qian. On the momentum term in gradient descent learning algorithms.
Neural networks, 12(1):145–151, 1999.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. CoRR,
arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
Joseph Raphson. Analysis Aequationum Universalis. London, 1690.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Why should i trust
you?: Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
pages 1135–1144. ACM, 2016.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method.
The annals of mathematical statistics, pages 400–407, 1951.
Marko Robnik-Šikonja and Igor Kononenko. Explaining classiﬁcations for
individual instances. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
20(5):589–600, 2008.
Neal J. Roese. Counterfactual thinking. Psychological bulletin, 121(1):133, 1997.
Neal J. Roese and James M. Olson. What might have been: The social psychology
of counterfactual thinking. Psychology Press, 2014.
Sebastian Ruder. Nlp’s imagenet moment has arrived. The Gradient, 2018.
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning
representations by back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536,
1986a.
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning
internal representations by error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart and
J. L. McClelland, editors, Parallel distributed processing: explorations in the
microstructure of cognition, volume 1, chapter 8, pages 318–362. MIT Press,
1986b.
Gerard Salton, Anita Wong, and Chung-Shu Yang. A vector space model for
automatic indexing. Communications of the ACM, 18(11):613–620, 1975.
Warren S. Sarle. Neural networks and statistical models. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth Annual SAS Users Group International Conference, 1994.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning impor-
tant features through propagating activation differences. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3145–3153, 2017.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural
networks via information. CoRR, arXiv:1703.00810, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre,
George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda
Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John
Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Master-
ing the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529
(7587):484, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou,
Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Ku-
maran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Simonyan, and Demis
Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess,
shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside con-
volutional networks: Visualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency
maps. CoRR, arXiv:1312.6034, 2013.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
Thomas Simpson. Essays on Several Curious and Useful Subjects, in Speculative
and Mix’d Mathematicks. H. Woodfall, 1740.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D.
Manning, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of
the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages
1631–1642, 2013.
Suraj Srinivas and François Fleuret. Full-gradient representation for neural
network visualization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 4126–4135, 2019.
Daniel Strigl, Klaus Koﬂer, and Stefan Podlipnig. Performance and scalability
of gpu-based convolutional neural networks. In 2010 18th Euromicro Con-
ference on Parallel, Distributed and Network-based Processing, pages 317–324.
IEEE, 2010.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic Attribution
for Deep Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
3319–3328, 2017.
Gabriel Synnaeve, Qiantong Xu, Jacob Kahn, Edouard Grave, Tatiana
Likhomanenko, Vineel Pratap, Anuroop Sriram, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, and
Ronan Collobert. End-to-end asr: from supervised to semi-supervised
learning with modern architectures. CoRR, arXiv:1911.08460, 2019.
Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information
bottleneck principle. In 2015 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW),
pages 1–5. IEEE, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5998–6008,
2017.
Ellen M. Voorhees and Dawn M. Tice. Building a question answering test col-
lection. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 200–207, 2000.
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual expla-
nations without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr.
Harv. JL & Tech., 31:841, 2017.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and
Samuel R. Bowman. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding. International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian
Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language understanding systems.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 3266–3280,
2019a.
Wei Wang, Bin Bi, Ming Yan, Chen Wu, Jiangnan Xia, Zuyi Bao, Liwei Peng,
and Luo Si. Structbert: Incorporating language structures into pre-training
for deep language understanding. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2019b.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R. Bowman. Neural network
acceptability judgments. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 7:625–641, 2019.
Bernard L. Welch. The generalization of student’s’ problem when several
different population variances are involved. Biometrika, 34(1/2):28–35,
1947.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 11–20, 2019.
John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen Livescu. Charagram:
Embedding words and sentences via character n-grams. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1504–1515, 2016.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage
challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers), pages 1112–1122, 2018.
D. Randall Wilson and Tony R. Martinez. The general inefﬁciency of batch
training for gradient descent learning. Neural networks, 16(10):1429–1451,
2003.
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mohammad Norouzi,
Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey,
Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Łukasz Kaiser,
Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith
Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith,
Jason Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes,
and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging
the gap between human and machine translation. CoRR, arXiv:1609.08144,
2016.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R. Salakhut-
dinov, and Quoc V. Le. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining
for language understanding. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 5754–5764, 2019.
G. Udny Yule.
On the methods of measuring association between two
attributes. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 75(6):579–652, 1912.
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolu-
tional networks. In European conference on computer vision, pages 818–833.
Springer, 2014.
Quanshi Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Interpretable convolu-
tional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8827–8836, 2018.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional
networks for text classiﬁcation. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 649–657, 2015.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun,
Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books. In
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages
19–27, 2015.
Luisa M. Zintgraf, Taco S. Cohen, Tameem Adel, and Max Welling. Vi-
sualizing deep neural network decisions: Prediction difference analysis.
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
George Kingsley Zipf. Human behavior and the principle of least effort. Addison-
Wesley Press, 1949.
