Title: Unveiling factors influencing judgment variation in Sentiment Analysis with Natural Language Processing and Statistics
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12055v1
--------------------------------------------------

Unveiling factors influencing judgment variation in Sentiment
Analysis with Natural Language Processing and Statistics
Olga Kellert 1*, Carlos G´omez-Rodr´ıguez 1, Mahmud Uz Zaman 2
1 Universidade da Coru˜na, CITIC, Grupo LyS, Depto. de Ciencias de la Computaci´on y
Tecnolog´ıas de la Informaci´on, Campus de Elvi˜na s/n, 15071 A Coru˜na, Spain
2 University of Augsburg, The Applied Computational Linguistics (ACoLi) Lab,
Universit¨atsstr. 10, 86159 Augsburg, Germany
* OK has the first authorship on this work.
¶Acknowledgements: European Research Council (ERC), which has funded this research
under the Horizon Europe research and innovation programme (SALSA, grant
agreement No 101100615), MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 (SCANNER-UDC,
PID2020-113230RB-C21), Xunta de Galicia (ED431C 2020/11), and Centro de
Investigaci´on de Galicia “CITIC”, funded by Xunta de Galicia and the European Union
(ERDF - Galicia 2014–2020 Program), by grant ED431G 2019/01.
¶Comments: Accepted manuscript to be published in PLoS One.
* Corresponding author: kellert-olga@gmx.de
Abstract
TripAdvisor reviews and comparable data sources play an important role in many tasks
in Natural Language Processing (NLP), providing a data basis for the identification and
classification of subjective judgments, such as hotel or restaurant reviews, into positive
or negative polarities. This study explores three important factors influencing variation
in crowdsourced polarity judgments, focusing on TripAdvisor reviews in Spanish. Three
hypotheses are tested: the role of Part Of Speech (POS), the impact of sentiment words
such as “tasty”, and the influence of neutral words like “ok” on judgment variation.
The study’s methodology employs one-word titles, demonstrating their efficacy in
studying polarity variation of words. Statistical tests on mean equality are performed
on word groups of our interest. The results of this study reveal that adjectives in
one-word titles tend to result in lower judgment variation compared to other word types
or POS. Sentiment words contribute to lower judgment variation as well, emphasizing
the significance of sentiment words in research on polarity judgments, and neutral words
are associated with higher judgment variation as expected. However, these effects
cannot be always reproduced in longer titles, which suggests that longer titles do not
represent the best data source for testing the ambiguity of single words due to the
influence on word polarity by other words like negation in longer titles. This empirical
investigation contributes valuable insights into the factors influencing polarity variation
of words, providing a foundation for NLP practitioners that aim to capture and predict
polarity judgments in Spanish and for researchers that aim to understand factors
influencing judgment variation.
Introduction
Sentiment Analysis (SA) holds a pivotal role in Natural Language Processing (NLP),
dealing with the identification of subjective assessments, such as opinions on hotels or
May 21, 2024
1/20
arXiv:2405.12055v1  [cs.CL]  20 May 2024
restaurants in textual content (subjectivity identification task), and predicting the
polarity of these assessments, i.e. whether they express a positive or negative view
(Polarity Classification task, PC), as exemplified in (1) [1].
Anne: This hotel is awesome. (PC: Positive )
Ben: This hotel is terrible. (PC: Negative)
(1)
While all SA approaches in NLP share the fundamental idea that subjectivity and
polarity are encoded in natural language to make a prediction about subjectivity and
polarity even possible, they differ in their assumptions regarding whether single (lexical)
words play a central role in this prediction. Some approaches, known as
dictionary-based methods, rely on specific sentiment words to perform SA tasks like
PC [1–4]. In examples like (1), we, humans, intuitively attribute subjectivity and
polarity to words that describe the evaluated entity or target, such as “awesome” and
“terrible”, also referred to as subjective, evaluative predicates or Personal Taste
Predicates (PTPs) in Linguistics [5–8] and as sentiment words in Sentiment Analysis
and Opinion Mining [1–4]. This hypothesis, namely that words can encode subjectivity
and polarity lexically, resonates with linguistic and philosophical discussions [5–8].
However, the question of which words encode subjectivity and polarity lexically in
virtue of their meanings and which words require further contextual information or
information about the communication context to express subjectivity and/or polarity is
a matter of ongoing debate [5–8]. Consider the subjective statement in (2).
This hotel is ok. (PC: ?)
(2)
The word “ok” likely does not possess a strongly positive polarity like “awesome” in
(1) and may be interpreted positively or negatively by different individuals, as in “this
hotel is ok, but nothing special.” or as in “this hotel is ok, it’s actually better than I
expected.” However, even if some people tend to interpret the word “ok” more
positively and some people more negatively, it is very unlikely that the polarity of “ok”
has the same strength as the polarity of “awesome” and “terrible” in (1) by the virtue
of the lexical meaning of “ok”. We thus expect to find some polarity variation of words
like “ok” that can be described as neutral in contrast to positive or negative words, but
this variation will be restricted by the lexical meaning of this word. The difference
between words like (1) and (2) has been observed in the linguistic literature [9,10] and
has been indirectly stated in NLP [11]. Alvarez-Carmona et al. (2023) have observed
that all NLP approaches that participated in the Shared Task Rest-Mex 2023 with the
goal of classifying automatically the polarity of TripAdvisor Reviews in Mexican
Spanish produced considerably more errors in the classification of reviews with neutral
polarity than in the classification of reviews with extremely positive or extremely
negative polarity. The error analysis could be seen as an indirect confirmation of the
difference between words in (1) and (2). However, this hypothesis has not been tested
on polarity variation of words yet.
A different case is the predicate “on the highway” in (3), which does not seem to
encode polarity lexically at all, as the statement in (3) can be perceived as (strongly)
positive by those who prefer proximity to the highway or as (strongly) negative by those
who do not favor proximity to the highway or as neutral by those who just do not care
about the location of the hotel at all. In Linguistics, expressions like “on the highway”
in (3) would not even be evaluated as subjective as the sentence in (3) is either
objectively false or true [5–8]. In short, the expression “on the highway” will probably
show a full range of polarity variation that depends on meaning external factors like
individual preferences. This prediction means that people will much more strongly
disagree in judgments using expressions like “on the highway” than using sentiment
words like in (1).
May 21, 2024
2/20
This hotel is on the highway. (PC: ?)
(3)
The question then arises whether we can distinguish between the three cases in (1),
(2) and (3) quantitatively on the basis of word polarity variation. The main assumption
is that the positive and negative PTPs like in (1) have the smallest polarity variation,
that is, people who use these words have the smallest judgment disagreement. Neutral
words like in (2) have a higher polarity variation than words in (1) and words like in (3)
have a full polarity variation. We assume an order of polarity variation going from the
highest polarity variation to the smallest variation from left to right:
Non-subjective predicates (e.g. “on the highway”)
> PTPs referring to middle scale (e.g. “ok”)
> PTPs referring to extreme ends of a scale (e.g. “terrible”)
(4)
Another factor we investigate in this article is the influence of the Part of Speech
(POS) of content words such as adjectives, nouns, verbs and adverbs on polarity
variation. The POS of content words has been studied in the research on polarity
ambiguity of words in languages like Chinese and English in the SemEval 2010 Task
18 [12,13]. In our preliminary study, we examined the difference between nouns and
adjectives in Spanish [14]. However, a complete study of all POS types of content words
and their relation to polarity variation has not been studied for Spanish yet.
The factors influencing polarity variation of Spanish words remain largely
unexplored in NLP, as well as in Linguistics and Philosophy (see the Related Work
section for details). Prevalent NLP approaches for SA are agnostic about the role of
sentiment words or lexical words in general. Instead, they utilize the entire input text,
harnessing Machine Learning and Deep Learning techniques [15,16] for tasks like
polarity classification [11], [1]. While powerful, these approaches lack transparency in
explaining how they leverage linguistic features such as sentiment words for prediction.
However, recent studies that combine sentiment dictionaries with Deep Learning
methods, referred to as hybrid approaches, have shown superior performance in SA
tasks ( [1]). This underscores the importance of investigating the polarity variation of
individual words, not only for evaluating dictionary-based approaches, but also for
enhancing hybrid approaches. In this paper, we undertake this study. The results of
this research will furnish NLP practitioners, regardless of their approach
(dictionary-based or hybrid), with an empirical foundation for subjectivity and polarity
classification, essential for effective Sentiment Analysis (SA). Furthermore, the results of
this study will contribute to the theoretical debate in Linguistics and Philosophy about
the extent to which words inherently encode polarity. The results will supply empirical
insights into the theoretical debate.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: the next section presents related
work in more detail, as well as our research hypothesis. This is followed by a Materials
and Methods section, outlining the datasets and methodology for hypothesis testing.
Then, we have a section to present and discuss the results; and a final section for the
conclusion and outlook of the paper.
Related Work and Research Hypotheses
Previous work on subjectivity and polarity in Linguistics is centered on predicative
adjectives or nouns as in “Chocolate is tasty” or “Jumping is fun” [5–8] and their
semantic classification. Predicative nouns and adjectives are words that are arguments
of predicative verbs like “be”, “seem”, etc. as in “Chocolate is tasty”. Despite the
numerous studies on lexical polarity in Linguistics that focus on the polarity of
indefinites like “some” or “none” (see, [17] for an overview), there are no quantitative
May 21, 2024
3/20
studies on lexical polarity of sentiment words similar to “tasty” and “fun” in other
syntactic contexts than predicative words [5–8]. This lack in quantitative studies is
partially explainable by the general trend in Linguistics using experts’ knowledge
and/or intuitions in linguistic studies on subjectivity and polarity [5–8]. More recently,
subjectivity and polarity have been also investigated quantitatively in NLP (see [1] for
an overview of NLP approaches on subjectivity and polarity). However, mainstream
NLP approaches do not address the question of lexical polarity and subjectivity [1] and
the only approaches that indirectly address this question are dictionary-based
approaches that use sentiment words, which presumably encode subjectivity and
polarity lexically [18,19]. However, sentiment dictionaries are often built on manually
selected sentiment words by few experts [18]. It is thus unclear whether sentiment words
from sentiment dictionaries of Spanish contain an exhaustive list of sentiment words
with lexical polarity or with a polarity that is inherent to these words. In our
preliminary study, we have evaluated the sentiment dictionary of Spanish SO-CAL [18]
showing that the sentiment words used in this dictionary are not optimally chosen as
they are statistically more ambiguous than non-manually chosen words from one-word
titles and other datasets [14]. The influence of POS of content words like verbs and
adjectives on word polarity is not well explored yet either. There are few studies on this
topic [12,13], [20–22]. However, these studies are based on other languages than Spanish
and most of these studies do not contain statistical information on ambiguity measures.
While the dataset of [12] includes manual annotations of ambiguous adjectives in
Chinese and English, the authors in [13] also consider other word classes than just
adjectives in the ambiguity study, showing that adjectives and verbs make up the most
frequent POS of ambiguous words in their study. However, these results are based on
few languages and it is thus not clear whether the same effects exist in Spanish.
Moreover, previous studies on POS and polarity ambiguity of words do not investigate
the relation of POS and other variables such as sentence length. In our preliminary
study, we have shown that sentence length plays an important role in lexical
ambiguity [14]. It is thus important to consider the sentence length in the study of the
relation between word ambiguity and POS. We have also shown in our preliminary
study that the distinction between content words like adjectives and functional words or
stop words like determiners as well as the difference between nouns and adjectives is
statistically important for ambiguity [14]. In this study, we aim to test other word types
of content words including verbs and adverbs and their relation to ambiguity. In
addition, we want to test whether the semantic class (+/- sentiment words or +/-PTPs)
such as sentiment words in (1) and non-sentiment words in (3) plays a role for
ambiguity. Finally, we test whether the polarity category (neutral, positive or negative)
matters for ambiguity assuming that neutral words like in (2) will be more ambiguous
than positive or negative words as in (1).
Our first hypothesis is that the POS of content words matters for ambiguity
(Hypothesis 1). Our second hypothesis is that the semantic class also matters for
polarity distribution. Linguists assume that words that refer to personal experience of
taste, smell, etc. like “tasty” (PTPs) encode subjectivity lexically [5–8], whereas words
or statements that are objectively measurable like in (3) are not subjective. The
subjective interpretation in (3) is not related to the word itself, but to the personal
preference of the truth-value in (3). Our next hypothesis is thus that PTPs like “tasty”
and “fun” influence polarity variation (Hypothesis 2). To test this hypothesis, we need
to define the semantic class of words like Personal Taste Predicates and objectively
measurable predicates, which is not a simple task and has not been undertaken so far in
Sentiment Analysis in NLP. In fact, approaches for SA in NLP do not make any
distinction between +/- objectively measurable predicates or predicates that can trigger
false or true statements [1,11,23–25]. There are studies in NLP that focus on the
May 21, 2024
4/20
identification of claims defined as “assertions about the world that can be checked” [26].
However, these studies have not been related to the research on subjectivity and
polarity. As a result, the distinction between +/- objectively measurable predicates has
not been tested yet with NLP and corpus-linguistic methods in the domain of Sentiment
Analysis. As developing NLP tools for the automatic distinction of +/- objectively
measurable predicates would necessitate a whole project by itself, we use a manual
annotation method of a relatively small dataset of ambiguous and non-ambiguous words
to test the semantic class in combination with other heuristic methods (see § Materials
and Methods).
Based on the discussion of the examples in (1) and (2), we also assume that the
polarity ambiguity is dependent on the polarity category (neutral, positive or negative)
as neutral words can be interpreted either positively neutral or negatively neutral. The
author in [9] has shown that words that belong to the middle polarity like “normal”,
“ok”, etc. are often interpreted negatively in a certain word context as in “He is (just) a
normal guy. Nothing special.” In some Romance varieties and languages including
Spanish, words with middle or neutral polarity can change into negative polarity
words [9]. For instance, the word “vulgaire” in Old French had previously the neutral
meaning of “common” or “normal” and then changed to the negative meaning of “rude”
or “vulgar” [9]. In short, we have reasons to believe that neutral words like “ok” are
more ambiguous than words that refer to extreme polarities. Our next hypothesis is thus
that words with a more neutral interpretation tend to be more ambiguous than words
with positive and negative polarity (Hypothesis 3). To summarize our hypotheses in (5).
• Hypothesis 1: POS (adjectives, nouns, adverbs and verbs) influence
polarity variation of words.
• Hypothesis 2: Personal Taste Predicates influence polarity variation.
• Hypothesis 3: Words with neutral polarity like “ok” are more ambigu-
ous than words with positive or negative polarity like “excellent” and
“terrible”.
(5)
Materials and Methods
Data
For testing our hypotheses from section 2, we are using the training dataset of Rest-Mex
2023 from TripAdvisor, where Spanish-speaking tourists provide their evaluation or
judgment on hotels, sightseeing’s and restaurants on a scale from 1 to 5, where 5 is the
best evaluation [11]. The Rest-Mex dataset collection was gathered from various tourist
destinations in Mexico, Cuba, and Colombia [11]. The data includes labeled information
about polarity, type of attraction, and the country of origin for each opinion (see
Table 1). This collection was obtained from the tourists who shared their opinion on
TripAdvisor between 2002 and 2023. Each opinion’s polarity is an integer between [1, 5],
where 1: Very bad, 2: Bad, 3: Neutral, 4: Good,5: Very good. The collection includes
70/30 partition of the train and test dataset. For our study, we use the train dataset,
which contains 251,702 labeled instances or reviews.
One important note about the dataset is that it is not balanced [11]. Polarity 5 is
the most frequent polarity, followed by 4, 3, 2, and 1 as shown in Fig 1. This bias in the
data needs to be considered when evaluating the polarity distribution of words.
Using whole reviews as a basis for investigation of the polarity variation of single
words is very challenging because words in full reviews appear in large contexts (up to 20
May 21, 2024
5/20
Table 1. Example 4 from the Rest-Mex 2023 train dataset [11]
Review
Title
Polarity
Country
Type
Justo lo que bus-
caba.
Sabores
exoticos,
buena
atenci´on,
lugar
tranquilo y bonito.
Full recomendado.
El sector tambi´en
es tranquilo.
Recomendado!
5
Colombia
Restaurant
‘Just what I looked
for.
Exotic fla-
vors,
good atten-
tion, quiet and nice
location.
Full rec-
ommendation. The
area is also very
quiet.’
Recommended!
Fig 1. Polarity Distribution in TripAdvisor reviews in Rest-Mex 2023 train
dataset. The X-axis represents the polarity judgment on TripAdvisor reviews (from
1=worst to 5=best) provided by TripAdvisor users. The Y-axis represents the frequency
of polarity judgments.
sentences) and the context can change or shift the polarity of the word such as negation
as in “not good”. In addition, long reviews contain various sentences that can be more
representative of the final polarity judgment of the reviewer than other sentences [3].
Figuring out what is the most important sentence for the polarity judgment adds noise
to using full reviews for the study of lexical subjectivity and polarity. For these reasons,
our basic dataset for testing our hypotheses is one-word-titles or short titles
(ShortT) [14]. One-word titles (henceforth: short titles or ShortT) contain only the
May 21, 2024
6/20
target word and no other word can influence the polarity of the target word, e.g.
“Excellent!”. To see how much the linguistic context of other words affects the polarity
variation of our target words, we also use datasets with longer titles that we divide into
titles without negation words like “no” ‘not’, “nunca” ‘never’, “nada” ‘nothing’ (PosT)
and titles with negation words (NegT) (see [3] for the list of negation words).
We end up with three datasets in total (see 6).
Main dataset = one-word titles (ShortT),
additional datasets for comparison =
titles without negation (PosT),
titles with negation (NegT)
(6)
Methods for testing Hypotheses
Part of the methodology we use in this paper is based on our preliminary study in
which we have shown that one-word titles have the smallest ambiguity in comparison to
other datasets [14]. For testing our Hypotheses and performing statistical calculations,
we first extract words from the datasets in (6) using a conventional lemmatizer and
POS-tagger of Spanish from Stanza [27], as we did in our preliminary study [14]. We
obtain the following numbers of lemmas for each of our datasets:
Nr. of lemmas in PosT = 20,827,
Nr. of lemmas in ShortT = 3,241,
Nr. of lemmas in NegT = 2,319
(7)
We create dictionary entries for each word that contain various information such as
the Standard Deviation (sdv) and Variance of word polarities per word (e.g.
sdv/variance ([5, 5, 4, 5, 4, 5, 5,. . . ..])) as shown in (8). The word dictionaries are
available for use under § Supporting Information (see, S1, S2, S3)
as well as on GitHub (https://github.com/olga-kel/LexPol):
Word statistics:
{’lindo’ (engl. ‘cute’): {’sdv’: 0.692, ’variance’: 0.484, ’mean’: 4.347,
’median’: 4, ’frequency’: 2979, ’POS’: ’ADJ’}}
(8)
Sdv characterizes the amount of variation or dispersion of the polarity set per each
word. Variance is the expectation of the squared difference of each data point from the
mean. Sdv is the square root of the variance. In this sense, both sdv and variance can
capture the polarity ambiguity of a word. The higher the sdv or variance of a word, the
higher the polarity ambiguity of this word [14]. To characterize the ambiguity of
different word groups (see Hypotheses in (5)), we measure the equality of the average of
sdv per word group, for which we use Student’s t-test [28]. The underlying idea behind
using the t-test for testing our hypotheses is the assumption that word groups such as
adjectives and nouns that are associated with clear polarity values will have a similar
polarity distribution or a similar dispersion of the polarity set. For instance, the
adjective “delicious” and the noun “deliciousness” will probably be associated almost
only with positive human judgments with a small rate of deviations. In case the word
groups have a different amount of polarity ambiguity, they will show different polarity
distributions, say the word “delicious” and the noun “restaurant”. The judgments for
the latter word might show a full range of polarity variation from positive to negative
without any bias towards one polarity. The polarity variation is measured by sdv. We
test the Null-Hypothesis that the averages of the sdv of our word groups are equal. This
idea is illustrated in Fig 2.
Before performing the statistical test of the Null-Hypothesis, we calculate the mean
of sdv per each group to see whether the means between our groups differ and perform
May 21, 2024
7/20
Fig 2. Demonstration of a possible polarity distribution of two word groups
(e.g., adjectives vs. nouns)
the statistical test using t-test function in Python from the scipy.stats library. The
output is something like:
t-test result:
(statistic=0.33617324893734357, pvalue=0.5692334858602581)
(9)
If the p-value of the test is less than .05, we reject the Null-Hypothesis according to
which the difference between the means of the sdvs of the tested word groups is not
statistically significant. This means for testing Hypothesis 1 that the mean of sdv of the
POS groups we consider, namely adjectives, nouns, adverbs and verbs, will be assumed
to be equal in short titles if the Null-Hypothesis is not rejected. If the Null-Hypothesis
is rejected, Hypothesis 1 is true or the mean difference of the considered word groups is
statistically significant. We focus on POS tags corresponding to content words in
Stanza [27] [ADJ, VERB, NOUN, ADV]. The reason why we consider only POS groups
of content words is that other POS groups like conjunctions or auxiliaries (e.g., “and”,
“have”) belong to functional POS groups, which rarely encode polarity or subjectivity
according to the literature and sentiment dictionaries [5–7,18] and they are rarely used
in one-word titles, which is the main dataset of this study. We tested the assumption
that functional words and content words will substantially differ in ambiguity in a
pre-test, expecting that the Null-Hypothesis would not be true, that is, the mean of sdv
between functional and content words would be equal. Our expectation was confirmed.
Functional words and content words show significant differences in the mean of sdv
according to the t-test as shown in (10)b. and the functional words have a higher mean
of sdv than content words as shown in (10)a.
a. Mean of sdv between functional words vs. content words: 0.96
vs 0.77,
b. Student’s t-test statistic: -4.47 p=8.0e-06 (<0.05)
(10)
The mean of sdv of functional words can be seen as an orientation for the evaluation
of content words. Those content words that are close to the mean of functional words
May 21, 2024
8/20
can be considered as very ambiguous and those content words that are distant from the
mean of functional words are less ambiguous or non-ambiguous.
Capturing the semantic class of words (Hypothesis 2) is not a trivial task. For
testing Hypothesis 2, we created two wordlists from short titles. These wordlists
represent the most ambiguous words and the least ambiguous words from short titles
according to our measurements, which we introduce below. We assume that the
percentage of PTPs or sentiment words and non-PTPs or non-sentiment words will
considerably differ in the two wordlists, because PTPs or sentiment words are used to
predict subjectivity and/or polarity [18] and thus should be ideally non-ambiguous.
The first wordlist contains words with low sdv (sdv < 0.4) and the second wordlist
contains words with high sdv (sdv > 0.8). The reason why we picked these thresholds
and not other thresholds is that they fulfill two conditions: they represent two extremes
(low ambiguity or low sdv and high ambiguity or high sdv) and at the same time they
provide enough words for both word lists. Lower sdv would produce fewer words in the
word list representing lower ambiguity and higher sdv would produce more words but
less extreme difference with the other word list. The chosen thresholds are thus the
optimal trade-of between the two requirements. We use three different methods to test
Hypothesis 2 or to classify words in our wordlists as PTPs or non-PTPs. Our first
method is a manual annotation (Method 1). We manually annotate words with low sdv
(sdv < 0.4) and words with high sdv (sdv > 0.8) according to their semantic class as
evaluative words or PTPs such as “tasty”, “fun”, etc. We follow the definition in the
linguistic literature for PTPs [5–8]. The most important property of PTPs is that they
characterize subjective tastes or evaluations of a person or judge and do not represent
objectively verifiable facts (compare “Chocolate is tasty” vs. “The earth is round”) (see
§ Supporting Information, S4). However, manual annotations can be subjective as they
depend on the annotator’s perspective, world- and fact knowledge [29]. For this reason,
we used two other automatic methods for the classification of PTPs and non-PTPs or
testing Hypothesis 2. We used the sentiment dictionary SO-CAL [18] to annotate
sentiment words in our word lists (Method 2). SO-CAL words and sentiment words in
general are usually chosen to predict polarity and thus should ideally function as
PTPs [18]. We assume that the two wordlists will differ with respect to the amount of
sentiment words and non-sentiment words (see Method 1). We should note that even
though sentiment dictionaries like SO-CAL are not perfect as they might also contain
ambiguous words (see [3] on this point), they can still be considered as a good source for
classifying words as sentiment words or non-sentiment words due to their usefulness in
Sentiment Analysis [3]. The third automatic method we used was to compare the
number of adjectives and other word types such as nouns in the two wordlists (Method
3). The authors in [23] have shown that words expressing subjectivity correlate with
adjectives. Our assumption is thus that the two wordlists will differ with respect to
their distribution of adjectives and other word types such as nouns. We assume that
words with PTPs will contain more adjectives than nouns.
For testing Hypothesis 3, we extract words that have polarity 5, polarity 1 and
polarity 3 as the most frequent polarity. Recall that according to Hypothesis 3 neutral
words or words with polarity 3 will be more ambiguous than words with extreme
polarities 1 and 5. We use The Counter’s most common(1) method in Python. For
example, the most frequent polarity of the word “excelente”, [5, 5, 4, 5, 4, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5,
5] is 5. We then test the equality of mean of sdv using Student’s t-test on words that
have the extreme polarity 5 and the non-extreme polarity 3 as the most common
polarity. We run the same test for words with extreme polarity 1 and non-extreme
polarity 3 as the most common polarity, assuming that the mean of sdv will be the
same under the Null Hypothesis. If it is not the same, our Hypothesis 3 is confirmed. In
contrast to our preliminary study [14], we also test the word groups of our interest for
May 21, 2024
9/20
the equality of variance of sdv using Levene’s test, which is a statistical test for the
equality of group variances [30]. Contrary to Student’s t-test, which we use here to
compare the level of ambiguity between two word groups (represented by the mean of
the sdv), Levene’s test compares the “uniformity of word ambiguity” (represented by
the variance of the sdv). This provides us information about whether words from a
word group tend to be equally or uniformly ambiguous (low variance of the sdv,
regardless of whether its mean is high or low), or, on the contrary, whether the group
contains highly ambiguous and non-ambiguous words (high variance of the sdv). In
other words, we assume that a lower variance of sdv of a word group x tells us that the
level of ambiguity of this word group is very much the same among the words belonging
to the word group x. Note, however, that said level of ambiguity could be either high or
low: the variance of sdv of the word group x does not give us information about its
mean of sdv, hence, both metrics (and their corresponding statistical texts) have
orthogonal goals. Fig 2 can be taken as a visual example of data points where we would
expect the null hypothesis of the t-test to not be rejected (because sdv means coincide,
i.e., both word groups are equally ambiguous on average) whereas the null hypothesis of
Levene’s test could be rejected (because the sdv distribution is more scattered for one
group than the other). We applied the test on the word groups of content words and
functional words. Our assumption is that the mean of sdv of functional words will be
higher than that of content words due to their ambiguity [14], but the variance of sdv of
functional words will be lower than the variance of sdv of content words, because
functional words are always ambiguous (they carry no polarity by themselves, so
polarity in texts containing them can vary greatly depending on context), whereas
content words can be either ambiguous like (2) or unambiguous like (1). The results of
this pre-test in (11), together with the one previously shown in (10) (repeated here in
12) show that our assumptions are confirmed. Functional words have a lower variance of
sdv than content words, but a higher mean of sdv than content words:
Variance of sdv between functional words (fw) vs. content words
(cw): 0.09(cw) vs 0.07(fw),
Levene’s test statistic: 9.21 p=0.0002 (<0.05)
(11)
a. Mean of sdv between functional words vs. content words: 0.96
vs 0.77,
b. Student’s t-test statistic: -4.47 p=8.0e-06 (<0.05)
(12)
In short, Student’s t-test provides us the results on equality of the means of sdv
which tells us about the level of ambiguity of a word group, whereas Levene’s test
provides us the results on the equality of variance of sdv which tells us about the
uniformity of the ambiguity of a word group. We present the results on the t-test and
the results on Levene’s test in §Results and Discussion.
Results and Discussion
Hypotheses testing
Hypothesis 1 is confirmed as the POS influences the polarity variation in short titles
(see Table 2). The mean sdv between adjectives and nouns is not equal in short titles
and across other datasets (PosT and NegT). As expected, the mean sdv of adjectives is
lower than the mean sdv of nouns suggesting that adjectives are less ambiguous than
nouns in short titles. The difference in mean of sdv between adjectives and verbs as well
as between adjectives and adverbs is not significant in short titles. This suggests that
verbs, adverbs and adjectives are very similar in their ambiguity. However, the
May 21, 2024
10/20
difference in mean of sdv between adjectives, verbs, and adverbs is significant across
longer titles (PosT and NegT), suggesting that the textual context or the length of the
sentence influences the polarity variation in such a way to induce a significant difference
in polarity variation between adverbs, adjectives, and verbs. Adjectives have a lower
mean of sdv in longer titles suggesting that their ambiguity remains low even in the
presence of textual context and sentence length variation. This is an important result
for Sentiment Analysis and Sentiment Dictionaries as it emphasizes the importance of
adjectives in polarity classification (see §Related Work and §Conclusion). However, it is
important to note that the effect size of the ambiguity between adjectives and nouns as
measured by the mean difference in various datasets (ShortT, PosT, and NegT) is much
smaller than the effect size of the ambiguity between content and functional words
(mean 0.06 among all three datasets vs. 0.19). This shows that the discrepancy in
polarity ambiguity is much higher between functional and content words than between
different POS classes of content words.
Table 2. Testing Hypothesis 1
Adj
vs.
Verbs
Adj
vs.
Nouns
Adj vs. Adv
ShortT
0.57 (verbs)
0.56 (nouns)
0.43 (adv)
0.49 (adj)
0.49 (adj)
0.49 (adj)
stat=1.28
stat=3.56
stat=0.50
pval=0.19
pval=0.0004
pval=0.61
PosT
0.85 (verbs)
0.76 (nouns)
0.86 (adv)
0.73 (adj)
0.73 (adj)
0.73 (adj)
stat=5.8
stat=2.25
stat=4.25
pval=8.6e -9
pval=0.02
pval=2.54 e-5
NegT
1.12 (verbs)
1.08 (nouns)
1.14 (adv)
0.99 (adj)
0.99 (adj)
0.99 (adj)
stat=3.051
stat=3.057
stat=3.44
pval=0.002
pval=0.002
pval=0.0007
Results of Student’s t-test on equality of the mean of sdv for words with different POS
across datasets. Each column shows results for different datasets (ShortT, PosT, NegT)
with respect to sdv difference between two POS, the statistics and the pvalue.
Table 3 shows that Hypothesis 2 is confirmed using three different independent
methods. The amount of PTPs (measured in percent) is higher than the amount of
non-PTPs in the word list with lower sdv, whereas the opposite is the case for the
wordlist with higher sdv according to method 1 and method 2. The third method does
not measure PTPs directly, but the POS, which should correspond to PTPs [23]. The
results from the third method confirm that lower ambiguity words contain more
adjectives than nouns, whereas higher ambiguity words contain more nouns than
adjectives, confirming thus that lower ambiguity words contain more PTPs than higher
ambiguity words.
Table 4 shows that Hypothesis 3 is confirmed for short titles and all other datasets.
The mean sdv of middle polarity words is higher than the mean sdv of extreme polarity
words (Polarity 1 and 5) in short titles. However, the mean of sdv of middle polarity
words is lower than that of words with extreme polarity words across positive and
negative titles suggesting that middle polarity words are less ambiguous than words
with extreme polarity in longer titles.
In order to understand why middle polarity words are less ambiguous than words
with polarity 5 in NegT (see Table 4, last row), we have inspected negative titles and
May 21, 2024
11/20
Table 3. Testing Hypothesis 2
Word freq >5 and sdv!=0
and >0.8 (= high ambigu-
ity) Total=219
Word freq >5 and sdv!=0
and < 0.4 (=low ambiguity)
Total=111
Method 1 =
Manual
an-
notation
of
PTPs
PTSs:
15% (31/219) vs.
non-PTPs: 85% (183/219)
PTPs:
71% (79/111) vs.
non-PTPs 29% (32/111)
Method
2
=
SO-CAL
Match
PTPs:
31% (67/219) vs.
non-PTPs: 69% (152/219)
PTPs:
54% (60/111) vs.
non-PTPs 46% (51/111)
Method 3 =
POS Match
Nouns (65%) vs. Adj.(27%)
Counter(
’NOUN’:
42,
’ADJ’:
61,
’VERB’:
8,
’PUNCT’:
4,
’INTJ’:
2,
’ADV’: 1, ’PRON’: 1)
Nouns (41%) vs. Adj.(56%)
Counter(’ADJ’:
59,
’NOUN’:
46,
’ADV’:
2,
’VERB’:
2,
’NUM’:
1,
’INTJ’: 1)
Results of the relative frequency of PTPs and related POS of PTPs. Each column shows
results for different ambiguity levels (high ambiguity and low ambiguity) per method.
Table 4. Testing Hypothesis 3
Pol 5 and 1
Pol 3 and 1
Pol 5 and 3
ShortT
0.31 (Pol 1)
0.31 (Pol 1)
0.48 (Pol 5)
0.48 (Pol 5)
0.70 (Pol 3)
0.70 (Pol 3)
stat=2.35
stat=-5.30
stat=-4.45
pval=0.01
pval=2.4 e-6
pval=1.74 e-5
PosT
1.16 (Pol 1)
1.16 (Pol 1)
0.71 (Pol 5)
0.71 (Pol 5)
0.96 (Pol 3)
0.96 (Pol 3)
stat=12.89
stat=5.80
stat=-11.51
pval=3.16 e -37
pval=1.26 e -8
pval=3.35 e-30
NegT
1.33 (Pol 1)
1.33 (Pol 1)
1.10 (Pol 5)
1.10 (Pol 5)
1.00 (Pol 3)
1.00 (Pol 3)
stat=4.29
stat=9.21
stat=4.40
pval=2.20 e-5
pval=2.39 e-18
pval=1.21 e-5
Results of Student’s t-test on mean of sdv equality for words with different polarity
category across datasets. Each column is showing results for different datasets (ShortT,
PosT, NegT) with respect to variance difference, the statistics and pvalue.
have found that titles from NegT with polarity 5 often contain recommendations with
verbs like “No puedes perderselo!” “You can’t miss it!”, whereas titles from NegT with
polarity 3 often contain negation of adjectives like “No tan bonito” ‘Not so nice’ or
“Bonito, pero no mucho” ‘Nice, but not so much.’. Given the results from our Hypothesis
1 that have shown statistical differences between adjectives and verbs in NegT, we
assumed that the POS could be the triggering factor of the difference in mean of sdv
between middle polarity words and words with positive polarity in NegT. This
assumption is confirmed in Fig 3 showing that adjectives are more frequent than verbs
in the case of words with polarity 3 but not in the case of of words with polarity 5 (see,
§ Supporting Information, S5). In short, POS is the trigger of the difference in mean of
sdv between words with polarity 3 and 5 taken from NegT.
May 21, 2024
12/20
Fig 3. Number of POS instances (ADJ, NOUN, VERB, ADV,
FUNCTIONAL) per polarity in NegT
Note that the effect size of the ambiguity between words of middle polarity (Pol 3)
and words of extreme polarities (Pol 1 and Pol 5) as measured by the mean difference in
ShortT is bigger than the effect size of the ambiguity between content and functional
words (mean 0.26 vs. 0.19). This shows that the discrepancy in polarity ambiguity is
higher between different polarity categories (middle and extreme polarities) than
between functional and content words. If we compare the mean differences between
polarity categories with the mean differences between POS classes in ShortT, we
observe that the effect size of the ambiguity between polarity classes is much higher
than between POS classes such as nouns and adjectives (0.07 vs. 0.26) (compare
Table 2 first row and Table 4 first row). The differences in effect size of POS classes,
polarity classes and functional/content word classes thus show that the effect size of
polarity categories is the highest among other classes. This is a new observation that we
discuss in §Conclusion.
We summarize our results for testing our Hypotheses in Table 5.
Levene’s Test on uniformity of ambiguity
To complement our results, we now apply Levene’s test which, as explained above, can
be used to compare word groups in terms of uniformity of polarity ambiguity. Table 6
shows that adjectives have statistically smaller variance of sdv than nouns in short titles
and across other datasets (e.g. negative titles), which suggests that adjectives are
uniformly unambiguous or that their low ambiguity level does not vary much from one
word to another word. This is different with nouns. The variance of sdv is higher for
nouns than for adjectives, which suggests that their ambiguity level changes much more
relative to adjectives. We will explain this effect given that nouns can be used as topic
words such as “servicio” ‘service’ or as sentiment words “excelencia” ‘excellency’ and
thus change from highly ambiguous to non-ambiguous (see §Conclusion).
Table 7 shows that the uniformity of ambiguity across words with different polarity
is the same in short titles, meaning that their ambiguity level does not change much.
Words with middle and extreme polarities are uniformly ambiguous in short titles.
However, they don’t have a uniform ambiguity level in datasets with longer titles. In
positive titles, middle polarity words show a more uniform ambiguity than words with
extreme polarities 1 and 5 suggesting that the polarity variation of middle polarity
May 21, 2024
13/20
Table 5. Overall results of our Hypotheses.
H1
POS influ-
ences ambi-
guity
H2
Semantic
class
in-
fluences
ambiguity
H3
Polarity category influ-
ences ambiguity
Short
tiles
✓between
adjectives
and nouns
✓
✓all categories (1, 3, 5)
(# the mean of sdv of
Pol 3 is higher than the
mean of sdv of Pol.
5
and 1 in short titles as
expected)
Longer
tiles
✓for all POS
Not tested
✓all categories (1, 3, 5)
(# the mean of sdv of
Pol 3 is smaller than the
mean of sdv of Pol.
5
in negative titles due to
POS)
Overall results of our hypotheses.
Table 6. Results on variance differences of words with different POS across
datasets
Adj
vs.
Verbs
Adj
vs.
Nouns
Adj vs. Adv
ShortT
0.09 (verbs)
0.10 (nouns)
0.16 (adv)
0.06 (adj)
0.06 (adj)
0.06 (adj)
stat=3.85
stat=14.89
stat=1.71
pval=0.05
pval=0.0001
pval=0.19
PosT
0.08 (verbs)
0.10 (nouns)
0.08 (adv)
0.08 (adj)
0.08 (adj)
0.08 (adj)
stat=2.73
stat=6.43
stat=0.08
pval=0.09
pval=0.01
pval=0.77
NegT
0.13 (verbs)
0.07 (nouns)
0.08 (adv)
0.05 (adj)
0.05 (adj)
0.05 (adj)
stat=20.9
stat=4.83
stat=3.82
pval=8.12 e-6
pval=0.03
pval=0.05
Results on variance differences of words with different POS across datasets.
words is much more robust than the polarity variation of extreme polarity words.
In short, we have shown that adjectives are uniformly unambiguous across all
datasets and that words with polarity categories 1, 3 and 5 have a uniform ambiguity
level in short titles.
Conclusion
Hypothesis 1 has been confirmed as expected. POS matters for polarity variation as
adjectives and nouns show significant differences in the mean of sdv. The mean of sdv is
higher for nouns than for adjectives. Nouns can be very ambiguous if they are used as
May 21, 2024
14/20
Table 7. Results on variance differences of words with different polarities
across datasets
Pol 5 and 1
Pol 3 and 1
Pol 5 and 3
ShortT
0.05 (Pol 1)
0.05 (Pol 1)
0.08 (Pol 5)
0.08 (Pol 5)
0.06 (Pol 3)
0.06 (Pol 3)
stat=0.88
stat=0.46
stat=0.21
pval=0.34
pval=0.05
pval=0.64
PosT
0.18 (Pol 1)
0.18 (Pol 1)
0.12 (Pol 5)
0.12 (Pol 5)
0.05 (Pol 3)
0.05 (Pol 3)
stat=14.39
stat=70.67
stat=49.06
pval=0.00
pval=7.4 e -16
pval=2.91 e-12
NegT
0.12 (Pol 1)
0.12 (Pol 1)
0.05 (Pol 3)
0.13 (Pol 5)
0.05 (Pol 3)
0.13 (Pol 5)
stat=0.10
stat=21.86
stat=58.20
pval=0.74
pval=4.12 e-6
pval=8.4 e-14
Results on variance differences of words with different polarities across datasets.
topic words (e.g., “As to the service, I like it” or “As to the service, I don’t like it.”)
and not for characterization of a target, hence the stronger ambiguity of nouns than
adjectives in short titles. Interestingly, the same effect holds for other datasets as well
(positive and negative titles), suggesting that the influence of context words does not
change the difference in ambiguity between adjectives and nouns. In addition, we have
shown that adjectives have a lower variance than nouns suggesting that they are
uniformly unambiguous, whereas nouns are less uniform showing that some nouns are
more ambiguous than others. The latter observation is coherent with nouns having
different functions in titles (topic words and sentiment words).
Verbs and adverbs did not show any difference in ambiguity from adjectives in short
titles suggesting that these POS groups are well chosen to characterize the target of
evaluation in short titles. This result can be used to enhance sentiment dictionaries like
SO-CAL [18] by adverbs and verbs from short titles. Our results showing that verbs,
adverbs, and adjectives have the same ambiguity level in short titles contradict previous
results in the NLP literature according to which adjectives and verbs belong to the most
ambiguous word group [12,13]. We assume that this discrepancy is due to the lack of
statistical methods and the lack of control for sentence length in previous studies as well
as due to the methodological differences chosen for testing POS ambiguity. This
conclusion is confirmed by the choice of the most ambiguous adjectives in previous
research on polarity ambiguity. The authors in [12,13] provide examples of ambiguous
adjectives like long, short, few, big, huge, small, tall, etc, which belong to a particular
adjective group in linguistic research, namely to adjectives that can be modified by
measure phrases like “180 cm tall” [6]. This adjective group is known for being
ambiguous between subjective and objective interpretation [6]. The sentence “He is 180
cm. tall” is an objective statement that does not represent a personal opinion as in “I
find him tall” [6]. Moreover, depending on the linguistic neighbor, the adjectives “big”
and “small” considered ambiguous words in previous literature can be interpreted
positively or negatively, e.g. “big problem” vs. “big talent”. As our experiments
consider words from TripAdvisor reviews, especially from one-word titles, and not all
adjectives in general that might exist in a language, this methodological focus might
explain the discrepancy between our results and results in previous studies. Short titles
contain more qualitative adjectives than adjectives combinable with measure phrases
such as “tall”. In this sense, our study focuses on the distinction between POS classes
May 21, 2024
15/20
in a particular context such as one-word titles context. In this context, adjectives are
less ambiguous than nouns and as ambiguous as verbs and adverbs.
Our results also show that, in longer sentences, verbs and adjectives show differences
in ambiguity suggesting that verbs are more ambiguous than adjectives in longer
sentences. We have shown that this effect correlates with polarity differences of words
in negative titles (Fig 3). According to our data in Table 2, adverbs and adjectives do
not show any difference in the mean of sdv in short titles. We can explain this effect,
given that adverbs in short titles have content information like “great” or “super” and
encode polarity lexically. However, there is a difference between adverbs and adjectives
in longer titles, which needs to be explained in the future. In short, the results from
testing Hypothesis 1 have provided new information about the differences of POS with
respect to their ambiguity level and ambiguity uniformity in short titles and other
datasets in Spanish that has been missing in Linguistics and NLP (§Related Work).
We have tested Hypothesis 2 according to which evaluative predicates or PTPs
encode subjectivity and polarity lexically showing that evaluative predicates or PTPs
are relatively more frequent among words with the lowest ambiguity (sdv < 0.4) than
among words with the highest ambiguity (sdv > 0.8) in short titles. Moreover, words
with the lowest ambiguity match relatively more often with sentiment words than words
with the highest ambiguity and the words with the lowest ambiguity contain more
adjectives than nouns. These results confirm the observation in NLP showing that
subjective words often correlate with adjectives [23]. Our results provide new empirical
support for the importance of PTPs in studies on subjectivity [5–8]. One interesting
result from the study on Hypothesis 2 is that the classification of PTPs and non-PTPs
of short titles by sentiment words from SO-CAL dictionary (method 2) produced a less
strong difference between PTPs and non-PTPs in short titles than the manual
annotation in method 1. For instance, the discrepancy between PTPs and non-PTPs is
much higher for words with lower ambiguity in the first than in the second method (see
Table 3). This result can be interpreted as a confirmation that what counts as a PTP or
as a sentiment word is subjective by itself and it emphasizes the difficulty of defining
sentiment words that are inherently subjective. At the same time, the observation that
both methods converge on the overall classification and the results for testing
Hypothesis 2 shows that there is some agreement among humans on what counts as a
PTP or sentiment word. We leave the analysis of matches and mismatches between
manual annotations (method 1) and annotations by SO-CAL (method 2) for future
research.
Our results from testing Hypothesis 3 confirm Hypothesis 3 on the basis of short
titles. Middle polarity words are indeed more ambiguous than words with extreme
polarities confirming the intuition of the difference between (1) and (2) and the
literature in §Related Work. This result has practical implications for lexicographers or
sentiment dictionary builders. We suggest a revision of existing sentiment words with
middle polarity values like “ok”, “average”, “normal”, etc. in sentiment dictionaries and
the development of a method for dealing with polarity ambiguous words in sentiment
dictionaries [31]. Our recent results from testing dictionaries in polarity prediction tasks
show that considering the polarity ambiguity of sentiment words improves the accuracy
of dictionary-based approaches [32]. By testing the variance difference of sdv among
words with polarity 1, 3 and 5, we have shown that the uniformity of ambiguity is equal
among these words in short titles. This suggests that these word groups are equally
uniform in their ambiguity.
However, our results from testing Hypothesis 3 on longer titles produced different
results than expected, as the mean of sdv for words with polarity 3 is lower than the
mean of sdv for words with polarity 1 and 5 in longer titles. We have explained this
effect showing that it correlates with POS (see Fig 3). However, according to [11], all
May 21, 2024
16/20
NLP approaches that participated in the Shared Task of Rest-Mex 2023 made bigger
errors in predicting in-between polarities like 2, 3, and 4 than predicting polarity 1 and
5 of the Rest-Mex 2023 test dataset (see §Related Work). One possibility to explain the
discrepancy between our results on testing Hypothesis 3 on longer titles and the error
analysis of [11] is to assume that the error analysis would change substantially if only
the polarity 3 would be compared to polarity 5 and 1 and not the sum of all in-between
polarities (including polarity 2 and 4). We suspect that predicting polarity 2 and 4 is
indeed harder than predicting polarity 1 and 5. However, predicting polarity 3 might be
easier than predicting polarity 5 in negative titles. The error analysis of the polarity
classification of the Rest-Mex dataset needs to be analyzed more closely in the future.
Another possible explanation of the conflicting results is that the error analysis
mentioned by [11] and our results from testing Hypothesis 3 are not comparable as we
focus in our study on words taken from titles, whereas the source of polarity
classification in the Rest-Mex shared task is based on entire reviews. In order to test
the second explanation, we need to use our methodology on entire reviews to see any
difference in polarity variation. This step is reserved for future work.
The discussion of the differences in effect sizes measured by the mean difference of
tested word groups as represented in Table 2 and Table 4 has shown that the effect size
is the highest among polarity categories, compared to those among functional and
content word classes and POS groups. This result suggests that the polarity category
(middle and extreme polarities) has a much more important influence on ambiguity than
the POS classes. To our knowledge, this discovery has not been observed in linguistic
research and Sentiment Analysis in NLP yet [1–8].
Our results from this study have contributed to the theoretical research on
subjectivity and polarity and they are useful for NLP practitioners who base their
analysis on sentiment dictionaries or hybrid approaches for polarity classification tasks
in Sentiment Analysis. More precisely, our results can be used for testing how much
NLP approaches that use linguistic features such as POS, sentence length, polarity
category, content vs. functional word distinction and the semantic class (+/- PPTs) can
improve performances. Testing approaches in Sentiment Analysis, especially in the
polarity classification tasks enriched with linguistic information, will be done in the
future.
Our work also contributes to the new rising field of analyzing and modeling
judgment variation in NLP in order to capture individual preferences and biases of
annotators or judgment providers [29]. We hope that our work has contributed to this
field as well, by studying the impact of linguistic factors influencing judgment variation.
Some limitations in our study need to be addressed in future research. The present
study focuses on Spanish TripAdvisor Reviews that are biased toward positive
statements. It would be interesting for future work to confirm whether our findings
generalize to other languages and domains or not. We will apply our methodology to
other sentiment datasets such as complaints to get more words with negative polarity,
which have a low representation in the datasets used in this study.
To summarize the key findings of the present study and to emphasize their
significance in the broader context of sentiment analysis, we have tested the influence of
three linguistic variables on the polarity variation of words, which reflects lexical
ambiguity, namely the POS (e.g. adjectives and nouns), the semantic class (+/- PTPs)
and the polarity category (middle and extreme polarity categories). We found out that
all three variables influence the polarity variation or the lexical ambiguity. Our results
show that adjectives are less ambiguous than nouns, words with extreme polarities are
less ambiguous than words with middle polarities and sentiment words are less
ambiguous than other words. The polarity category has a bigger effect than other
variables on the ambiguity if we consider the effect size or the mean difference in sdv.
May 21, 2024
17/20
These key findings can be implemented for the improvement of polarity prediction tasks
in Sentiment Analysis in dictionary-based and hybrid-based approaches.
Supporting information
S1.
ShortT
S2.
PosT
S3.
NegT
S4.
Human annotations
S5.
NumbersFigure3
Acknowledgments
We thank Nicholas Hill Matlis for fruitful discussions on the interpretation of Levene’s
test results in the domain of lexical ambiguity.
References
1. Cui J, Wang Z, Ho SB, Cambria E. Survey on sentiment analysis: evolution of
research methods and topics. Artificial Intelligence Review. 2023; p. 1–42.
2. Vilares D, G´omez-Rodr´ıguez C, Alonso MA. Universal, unsupervised (rule-based),
uncovered sentiment analysis. Knowledge-Based Systems. 2017;118:45–55.
3. Kellert O, Zaman MU, Matlis NH, G´omez-Rodr´ıguez C. Experimenting with UD
Adaptation of an Unsupervised Rule-based Approach for Sentiment Analysis of
Mexican Tourist Texts. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings. vol. 3496; 2023. p.
216–225. Available from:
http://www.grupolys.org/biblioteca/KelZamMatGom2023a.pdf.
4. Hutto C, Gilbert E. Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
analysis of social media text. In: Proceedings of the international AAAI
conference on web and social media. vol. 8; 2014. p. 216–225.
5. Lasersohn P. Context dependence, disagreement, and predicates of personal taste.
Linguistics and philosophy. 2005;28:643–686.
6. Kennedy C. Two sources of subjectivity: Qualitative assessment and dimensional
uncertainty. Inquiry. 2013;56(2-3):258–277.
7. Umbach C. Evaluative Predicates: Beyond Fun and Tasty. The Wiley Blackwell
Companion to Semantics. 2020; p. 1–31.
8. Kennedy C, Willer M. Familiarity inferences, subjective attitudes and
counterstance contingency: towards a pragmatic theory of subjective meaning.
Linguistics and Philosophy. 2022;45(6):1395–1445.
9. Kellert O. Free choice indefinites in old and modern Italian. Journal of Historical
Syntax. 2021;5(1-13):1–27.
May 21, 2024
18/20
10. Alonso-Ovalle L, Royer J. Random choice from likelihood: The case of chuj
mayan. Journal of Semantics. 2021;38(4):483–529.
11. ´Alvarez-Carmona M´A, D´ıaz-Pacheco ´A, Aranda R, Rodr´ıguez-Gonz´alez AY,
Mu˜niz-S´anchez V, L´opez-Monroy AP, et al. Overview of rest-mex at iberlef 2023:
Research on sentiment analysis task for mexican tourist texts. Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural. 2023;71:425–436.
12. Wu Y, Jin P. SemEval-2010 Task 18: Disambiguating Sentiment Ambiguous
Adjectives. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation. Uppsala, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2010. p.
81–85. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/S10-1014.
13. Xia Y, Cambria E, Hussain A, Zhao H. Word Polarity Disambiguation Using
Bayesian Model and Opinion-Level Features. Cogn Comput. 2015;7:369–380.
doi:DOI 10.1007/s12559-014-9298-4.
14. Kellert O, Zaman M, G´omez-Rodr´ıguez C. Polarity variation of (sentiment)
words: A new approach of measuring lexical ambiguity. Journal of Quantitative
Linguistics. submitted;.
15. Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In: Burstein J, Doran C,
Solorio T, editors. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota:
Association for Computational Linguistics; 2019. p. 4171–4186. Available from:
https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
16. Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J. Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:13013781. 2013;.
17. Israel M. Polarity sensitivity as lexical semantics. Linguistics and philosophy.
1996; p. 619–666.
18. Brooke J, Tofiloski M, Taboada M. Cross-Linguistic Sentiment Analysis: From
English to Spanish. In: Proceedings of the International Conference
RANLP-2009. Borovets, Bulgaria: Association for Computational Linguistics;
2009. p. 50–54. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/R09-1010.
19. Baccianella S, Esuli A, Sebastiani F. SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical
Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. In: Calzolari N, Choukri
K, Maegaard B, Mariani J, Odijk J, Piperidis S, et al., editors. Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10). Valletta, Malta: European Language Resources Association (ELRA);
2010.Available from:
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/769_Paper.pdf.
20. Cao Y, Zhang P, Xiong A. Sentiment analysis based on expanded aspect and
polarity-ambiguous word lexicon. International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications. 2015;6(2).
21. Wang B, Huang Y, Wu X, Li X. A fuzzy computing model for identifying
polarity of Chinese sentiment words. Computational intelligence and
neuroscience. 2015;2015:47–47.
May 21, 2024
19/20
22. Yin F, Wang Y, Liu J, Lin L. The Construction of Sentiment Lexicon Based on
Context-Dependent Part-of-Speech Chunks for Semantic Disambiguation. IEEE
Access. 2020;8:63359–63367.
23. Hill F, Korhonen A. Learning Abstract Concept Embeddings from Multi-Modal
Data: Since You Probably Can’t See What I Mean. In: Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Doha, Qatar: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2014. p. 255–265.
Available from: https://aclanthology.org/D14-1032.
24. Wiebe J. Learning Subjective Adjectives from Corpora. In: Proceedings of the
Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth
Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence; 2000. p. 735–740.
25. Choi Y, Wiebe J, Mihalcea R. Coarse-grained+/-effect word sense
disambiguation for implicit sentiment analysis. IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing. 2017;8(4):471–479.
26. Konstantinovskiy L, Price O, Babakar M, Zubiaga A. Towards Automated
Factchecking: Developing an Annotation Schema and Benchmark for Consistent
Automated Claim Detection. CoRR. 2018;abs/1809.08193.
27. Qi P, Zhang Y, Zhang Y, Bolton J, Manning CD. Stanza: A Python Natural
Language Processing Toolkit for Many Human Languages. In: Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics; 2020. p.
101–108. Available from: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-demos.14.
28. Student. The probable error of a mean. Biometrika. 1908; p. 1–25.
29. Basile V, Cabitza F, Campagner A, Fell M. Toward a Perspectivist Turn in
Ground Truthing for Predictive Computing. CoRR. 2021;abs/2109.04270.
30. Levene H. In Contributions to Probability and Statistics: Essays in Honor of
Harold Hotelling. Stanford University Press. 1960; p. 278–292.
31. Vilares D, Peng H, Satapathy R, Cambria E. BabelSenticNet: A Commonsense
Reasoning Framework for Multilingual Sentiment Analysis. In: IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence, SSCI 2018, Bangalore, India, November
18-21, 2018. IEEE; 2018. p. 1292–1298. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI.2018.8628718.
32. Imran M, Kellert O, G´omez-Rodr´ıguez C. Faster and more Accurate Sentiment
Analysis with Neural Sequence Labeling Parser. in preparation;.
May 21, 2024
20/20
