Title: We Need to Talk About Data: The Importance of Data Readiness in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05464v1
--------------------------------------------------

We Need to Talk About Data: The Importance of Data Readiness in
Natural Language Processing
Fredrik Olsson∗
Gavagai
Sweden
fredrik.olsson@gavagai.io
Magnus Sahlgren∗
AI Sweden
Sweden
magnus.sahlgren@ai.se
Abstract
In this paper, we identify the state of data as be-
ing an important reason for failure in applied
Natural Language Processing (NLP) projects.
We argue that there is a gap between academic
research in NLP and its application to prob-
lems outside academia, and that this gap is
rooted in poor mutual understanding between
academic researchers and their non-academic
peers who seek to apply research results to
their operations. To foster transfer of research
results from academia to non-academic set-
tings, and the corresponding inﬂux of require-
ments back to academia, we propose a method
for improving the communication between re-
searchers and external stakeholders regarding
the accessibility, validity, and utility of data
based on Data Readiness Levels (Lawrence,
2017). While still in its infancy, the method
has been iterated on and applied in multiple in-
novation and research projects carried out with
stakeholders in both the private and public sec-
tors. Finally, we invite researchers and prac-
titioners to share their experiences, and thus
contributing to a body of work aimed at raising
awareness of the importance of data readiness
for NLP.
1
Introduction
NLP has always been an applied discipline, with
inspiration drawn both from basic reseach in com-
putational linguistics, computer science, and cog-
nitive science, as well as from business problems
and applications in industry and the public sector.
Even if some NLP researchers prefer to work at
lower Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs), while
others operate at a fairly high TRL range, most of
the work in NLP has the potential to climb the TRL
scale up to the more practical levels (i.e. from TRL
level 7 upwards) (Banke, 2017).
For those of us who work with external clients
and habitually deliver results in the form of demon-
∗The lion’s share of the work was carried out while at
RISE, Research Institutes of Sweden.
strators and prototypes at TRL 6 or 7, a consistent
and signiﬁcant challenge is the state of the data
available. In our experience, challenges regard-
ing data are much more common in client-facing
projects than challenges relating to the technical
nature of models or algorithms. We argue that
the lack of readiness with respect to data has be-
come a serious obstacle when transferring ﬁndings
from research to an applied setting. Even if the
research problem is sufﬁciently well deﬁned, and
the business value of the proposed solution is well
described, it is often not clear what type of data is
required, if it is available, or if it at all exists.
The border between academic research in NLP
and the application of the research in practical non-
academic settings is becoming increasingly blurred
with the convergence of NLP research to more or
less production-ready frameworks and implementa-
tions. On the one hand, research results have never
been more accessible, and it has never been easier
to obtain and adjust the architecture of, e.g., a state
of the art language model to accommodate a new
use case, and to construct a prototype showing the
value the model would contribute to an external
stakeholder. On the other hand, while the technical
maturity of the research community has improved,
the understanding of business value, and by exten-
sion, the understanding of the impact and impor-
tance of data are still largely lacking. It is our ﬁrm
belief that in order for NLP, and in particular the
research community that targets the lower TRLs,
to become even more relevant and thus also beneﬁt
from feedback from parties outside the ﬁeld, we
have to assume a more holistic approach to the en-
tire life cycle of applied research, with a particular
eye on data readiness.
The intention for this paper is therefore to raise
awareness of data readiness for NLP among re-
searchers and practitioners alike, and to initiate and
nurture much-needed discussions with respect to
the questions that arise when addressing real-world
arXiv:2110.05464v1  [cs.CL]  11 Oct 2021
Figure 1: Relative frequency of publications in the ACL
Anthology that mention the term “data” in the title for
the last 20 years.
challenges with state of the art academic research.
2
Related work
As is evident from Figure 1, which shows the rel-
ative frequency of publications in the ACL An-
thology1 that mention the term “data” in the title
over the last 20 years, there is an increasing inter-
est in questions relating to data within our ﬁeld.
While there are a lot of activity related to data in
the research community, few attempts at fostering
a discussion of the whole process, from business
problem to data access, has been made. Relevant
areas of academic research include the following.
Access to unlabelled training data.
Efforts
to collect and distribute text data at scale in-
clude corpora originating from CommonCrawl,
e.g., (Mackenzie et al., 2020; El-Kishky et al.,
2020), along with tools to facilitate corpus cre-
ation (Wenzek et al., 2020), as well as academic
initiatives such as ELRA2 and LDC3.
Creation of labelled training data. Research
in Active Learning, e.g., (Settles, 2012; Siddhant
and Lipton, 2018; Liang et al., 2020; Ein-Dor et al.,
2020), as well as Zero and Few-shot Learning (Sri-
vastava et al., 2018; Ye et al., 2020; Pelicon et al.,
2020) allows for the utilization of pre-compiled
knowledge, and human-in-the-loop approaches to
efﬁcient data labelling. However, these approaches
assume that there is a clear objective to address,
and that unlabelled data and expertise are available.
In our experience, this is rarely the case.
1www.aclweb.org/anthology/
2http://www.elra.info/
3https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
Bias, transparency, fairness are all areas that
have bearing towards the state of data. Much of the
research, however, is concerned with situations in
which the data has already been collected. Most
notable recent efforts include The Dataset Nutri-
tion Label, which is a diagnostic framework for
enabling standardized data analysis (Holland et al.,
2018); Data Statements for NLP that allows for ad-
dressing exclusion and bias in the ﬁeld (Bender and
Friedman, 2018); FactSheets intended for increas-
ing consumers’ trust in AI services (Arnold et al.,
2019); and Datasheets for Datasets for facilitating
better communication between dataset creators and
consumers (Gebru et al., 2020).
Model deployment. Tangential to our efforts to
provide stakeholders with prototypes at TRL 6-7
is the work of deploying machine learning models
to a production environment. Research in this area
that also touches on data readiness in some form
include that of Polyzotis et al. (2018) and Paleyes
et al. (2020).
Work on data readiness related to other modal-
ities than text include van Ooijen (2019) and Har-
vey and Glocker (2019) that both deal with data
quality in medical imaging. Austin (2018) out-
lines practical solutions to common problems with
data readiness when integrating diverse datasets
from heterogeneous sources. Afzal et al. (2020)
introduces the concept Data Readiness Report as a
means to document data quality across a range of
standardized dimensions.
We have not found any work that focuses specif-
ically on data readiness in the context of NLP. Our
contribution is therefore a set of questions that we
have found valuable to bring up in discussions with
new stakeholders in order to allow us, and them,
to form an understanding of the state of the data
involved in the particular challenge.
3
Data Readiness Levels
The notion of Data Readiness Levels (DRLs) pro-
vides a way of talking about data much in the same
way TRLs facilitate communication regarding the
maturity of technology (Lawrence, 2017). DRLs is
a framework suitable for exchanging information
with stakeholders regarding data accessibility, va-
lidity, and utility. There are three different major
Bands of the DRLs, and each band can be thought
of as consisting of multiple levels. The state of data
is usually a progress from Band C towards Band
A, with a particular business goal in mind. Figure
2 illustrates the three bands of the Data Readiness
Levels.
Band C concerns the accessibility of data. All
work at this level serves to grant the team intended
to work with the data access to it; once access is
provided, the data is considered to be at Band C -
Level C-1, and ready to be brought into Band B.
Issues that fall under Band C include: the existence
of data; format conversion and encoding; legal as-
pects of accessibility; and programmatic aspects of
accessibility.
Band B concerns the validity of data. In order
to pass Band B, the data has to be valid in the sense
that it is representative of the task at hand. Fur-
thermore, the data should be deduplicated, noise
should be identiﬁed, missing values should be char-
acterized, etc. At the top level of Band B, the data
should be suitable for exploratory analysis, and the
forming of working hypotheses.
Band A concerns the utility of data. The utility
of the data concerns the way in which the data is
intended to be used: Is the data enough to solve
the task at hand? A project should strive for data
readiness at Band A - Level A-1. Note that the
Data Readiness Levels should be interpreted with
respect to a given task.
4
Examples of challenges
The following are examples of typical challenges
we have encountered, framed as belonging to the
different DRLs.4
4.1
DRL Band C – Accessibility
Example 1: Data licensing. It was assumed that
the data to work with in the project was in the
public domain and readily available. It turned out
the data was a proprietary news feed under license
restrictions. The consequences of this were two-
fold: not having access to the data generation pro-
cess meant we could not address one of the stake-
holder’s major problems (de-duplication, relevance
assessment); and, the license restrictions prevented
the project from publishing the dataset along with
the research ﬁndings.
Example 2: Company culture. The ownership
of data was clearly speciﬁed, but the staff did not
adhere to management’s request to release the data
due to the uncertainty of the result of the project.
This resulted in delays. The fear of the loss of jobs
4The examples are deliberately kept vague since we do not
want to disclose the corresponding external stakeholder.
may impact availability of data – data readiness
depends on the overall introduction of data-driven
techniques in a new organization.
Example 3: Data format. Raw data was stored
as PDF ﬁles, generated by different sources. PDF
is an output format, not an input format. Projects
working with PDF ﬁles will always face challenges
having to do with data conversion since there is
currently no way of reliably converting an arbitrary
PDF ﬁle into a format useful for NLP.
4.2
DRL Band B – Validity
Example 4: Annotation guidelines. The exist-
ing annotation guidelines were elaborate, but fell
short in practical applicability. Partly due to the
misalignment between the annotation task and the
guidelines, it became very time consuming to anno-
tate data which resulted in a small dataset to work
with. In turn, this affected the range of possible
NLP techniques applicable to the problem at hand.
Annotation guidelines have to be unambiguous,
precise, and possible for an annotator to remember.
Example 5: Annotation quality. The data was
assumed to be of good quality, but additional inves-
tigations revealed a low inter-annotator agreement.
The consequence was that the existing data could
not be trusted, and the annotation work had to be
re-done. If the deﬁnition of a task is too hard for
human annotators to agree on, a machine trained
on the data will perform poorly.
Example 6: Annotation quality. Existing in-
formation produced by the stakeholder was as-
sumed to be useful in creating an annotated dataset
for the speciﬁc task at hand, but it turned out that
the information was incomplete and insufﬁcient.
The consequence of not being able to leverage ex-
isting data for distant supervision was that the range
of applicable techniques for addressing the stake-
holder’s problem became severely limited.
4.3
DRL Band A – Utility
Example 7: Annotation expectations.
It was
known that the data to work with was annotated,
but the way the annotations had been made had not
been communicated. Instead of sequence level an-
notations, the data was annotated at the document
level. As a consequence, we could not explore the
type of information extraction techniques we had
expected, but had to resort to document classiﬁca-
tion instead.
Example 8: Data sparseness.
The overall
amount and velocity of data were assumed to be
Figure 2: An overview of the different bands of Data Readiness Levels.
of sufﬁcient quantity, but when aligning data avail-
ability with use case requirements, it turned out the
data was too sparse. The task could not be pursued.
Example 9: Project scope. The stakeholder’s
team and the unannotated data they provided to
the project were at an exceptionally high DRL,
but annotations for training, validation, and testing
were very hard to obtain since the project had not
planned for annotation work. As a consequence,
we implemented a solution based on unsupervised
learning instead of a supervised one.
5
A method for DRL assessment
We introduce a method for gaining rapid and rough
assessment of the data readiness levels of a given
project. The method consists of a range of ques-
tions, intended to fuel the discussions between the
stakeholders involved in a project with respect to
its means and goals, as well as a simple way of
visualizing the responses to the questions in order
to bring attention to the areas that need more work.
We expect to evolve the method in coming projects.
So far, it has helped us to preemptively address
some of the issues exempliﬁed in Section 4; they
are a good starting point in reaching the appropri-
ate data readiness for solving real-world problems
related to NLP.
5.1
Pre-requisites
The pre-requisites for applying the method are
the following: there should be a clear business or
research-related objective for the project to achieve;
the objective lends itself to a data-driven solution;
and, there is data available that presumably is rele-
vant for the task.
The method should be scheduled for application
at suitable points in time for the project, i.e., any-
time the project enters a phase that relies on data
and experimentation to make progress in the project
plan. We suggest to apply the method at the very
beginning of the project, as well as (at least) before
entering the ﬁrst round of empirical experiments
with respect to the data at hand and the project’s
objective.
5.2
Post-conditions
The outcome of the method is two-fold: a visual
representation of the Data Readiness Levels of the
project at a speciﬁc point-in-time (as exempliﬁed
in Section 6); and, the insight into the state of
data achieved by venting the questions among the
project’s stakeholders.
5.3
The questions
The purpose of each question is to draw the stake-
holders’ attention to one aspect of the data readi-
ness of the project. However, since not all ques-
tions are relevant to all types of projects some may
be omitted depending on the characteristics of the
project at hand.
Each of the ﬁfteen questions below can be an-
swered by one of four options: Don’t know, No,
Partially, and Yes, where Don’t know is always
considered the worst possible answer, and Yes as
the answer to strive for. The admittedly very coarse
grained answer scale is intended to serve as a guide
in assessing the state of the project’s data readiness,
rather than as a deﬁnitive and elaborate tool for
detailed assessment.
5.3.1
Questions related to Band C
Band C, that concerns the accessibility of data,
is the band in that is the least dependent on the
actual objective of the project, but clearing it is still
required in order to make the project successful.
Q1 Do you have programmatic access to the
data? The data should be made accessible to
the people who are going to work with it, in a
way that makes their work as easy as possible.
This usually means programmatic access via
an API, database, or spreadsheet.
Q2 Are your licenses in order? In the case you
plan on using data from a third-party provider,
either commercial or via open access, ensure
that the licences for the data permit the kind
of usage that is needed for the current project.
Furthermore, make sure you follow the Terms
of Service set out by the provider.
Q3 Do you have lawful access to the data?
Make sure you involve the appropriate legal
competence early on in your project. Matters
regarding, e.g., personal identiﬁable informa-
tion, and GDPR have to be handled correctly.
Failing to do so may result in a project fail-
ure, even though all technical aspects of the
project are perfectly sound.
Q4 Has there been an ethics assessment of the
data? In some use cases, such as when deal-
ing with individuals’ medical information, the
objectives of the project require an ethics as-
sessment. The rules for such a probe into
the data are governed by strict rules, and you
should consult appropriate legal advisors to
make sure your project adheres to them.
Q5 Is the data converted to an appropriate for-
mat? Apart from being accessible program-
matically, and assessed with respect to li-
censes, laws, and ethics, the data should also
be converted to a format appropriate for the
potential technical solutions to the problem
at hand. One particular challenge we have
encountered numerous times, is that the data
is on the format of PDF ﬁles. PDF is an ex-
cellent output format for rendering contents
on screen or in print, but it is a terrible input
format for data-driven automated processes
(see, e.g., (Panait, 2020) for examples).
5.3.2
Questions related to Band B
Band B concerns the validity of data. In pursuing
projects with external parties, we have so far seen
fairly few issues having to do with the validity of
data. In essence, Band B is about trusting that the
data format is what you expect it to be.
Q6 Are the characteristics of the data known?
Are the typical traits and features of the data
known? Perform an exploratory data analysis,
and run it by all stakeholders in the project.
Make sure to exemplify typical and extreme
values in the data, and encourage the project
participants to manually look into the data.
Q7 Is the data validated? Ensure that the traits
and features of the data make sense, and, e.g.,
records are deduplicated, noise is catered for,
and that null values are taken care of.
5.3.3
Questions related to Band A
Band A concerns the utility of data. As such, it
is tightly coupled to the objective of the project.
In our experience, this is the most elusive data
readiness level in that it requires attention every
time the goal of a project changes.
Q8 Do stakeholders agree on the objective of
the current use case?
What problem are
you trying to solve? The problem formula-
tion should be intimately tied to a tangible
business value or research hypothesis. When
specifying the problem, make sure to focus
on the actual need instead of a potentially in-
teresting technology. The characteristics of
the problem dictates the requirements on the
data. Thus, the speciﬁcation is crucial for un-
derstanding the requirements on the data in
terms of, e.g., training data, and the need for
manual labelling of evaluation or validation
data. Only when you know the characteristics
of the data, it will be possible to come up with
a candidate technological approach to solve
the problem.
Q9 Is the purpose of using the data clear to
all stakeholders? Ensure that all people in-
volved in the project understands the role and
importance of the data to be used. This is to
solidify the efforts made by the people respon-
sible for relevant data sources to produce data
that is appropriate for the project’s objective
and the potential technical solution to address
the objective.
Q10 Is the data sufﬁcient for the current use
case?
Given the insight into what data is
available, consider the questions: What data is
needed to solve the problem? Is that a subset
of the data that is already available? If not: is
there a way of getting all the data needed? If
there is a discrepancy between the data avail-
able, and the data required to solve the prob-
lem, that discrepancy has to be mitigated. If it
is not possible to align the data available with
what is needed, then this is a cue to go back
to the drawing board and either iterate on the
problem speciﬁcation, or collect suitable data.
Q11 Are the steps required to evaluate a poten-
tial solution clear? How do you know if you
have succeeded? The type of data required to
evaluate a solution is often tightly connected
to the way the solution is implemented: if the
solution is based on supervised machine learn-
ing, i.e., requiring labelled examples, then the
evaluation of the solution will also require la-
belled data. If the solution depends on labelled
training data, the process of annotation usu-
ally also results in the appropriate evaluation
data. Any annotation effort should take into
account the quality of the annotations, e.g., the
inter-annotator agreement; temporal aspects
of the data characteristics, e.g., information
on when we need to obtain newly annotated
data to mitigate model drift; and, the repre-
sentativity of the data. Tseng et al. (2020)
provide a comprehensive set of best-practices
for managing annotation projects.
Q12 Is your organization prepared to handle
more data like this beyond the scope of the
project? Even if the data processing in your
organization is not perfect with respect to
the requirements of machine learning, each
project you pursue has the opportunity to ar-
ticulate improvements to your organization’s
data storage processes. Ask yourself the ques-
tions: How does my organization store incom-
ing data? Is that process a good ﬁt for auto-
matic processing of the data in the context of
an NLP project, that is, is the data stored on a
format that brings it beyond Band C (accessi-
bility) of the Data Readiness Levels? If not;
what changes would need to be made to make
the storage better?
Q13 Is the data secured? Ensure that the data
used in the project is secured in such a way
that it is only accessible to the right people,
and thus not accessible by unauthorized users.
Depending on the sensitivity of the project,
and thus the data, there might be a need to
classify the data according to the security stan-
dards of your organization (e.g., ISO 27001),
and implement the appropriate mechanisms to
protect the data and project outcome.
Q14 Is it safe to share the data with others? In
case the project aims to share its data with oth-
ers, the risks of leaking sensitive data about,
e.g., your organization’s business plans or abil-
ities have to be addressed prior to sharing it.
Q15 Are you allowed to share the data with oth-
ers? In case the project wishes to share its
data, make sure you are allowed to do so ac-
cording to the licenses, laws, and ethics previ-
ously addressed in the project.
6
Example application of the method
For the purpose of exemplifying the use of the
method described above, consider the ﬁctitious
case of project Project, an undertaking of a large
organization with good experience of running con-
ventional ICT projects, but little knowledge about
data-driven NLP-based analysis. The actual subject
matter and scope of Project is not important.
6.1
First application of the method
When the project is initiated, the project manager
involves its members in a session in which they
recognize all ﬁfteen questions as relevant for the
project’s objectives, then discusses each question,
and agrees on the appropriate answer. When the
session is over, the project manager plots the re-
sponses in a radar chart, as displayed in Figure 3,
in such a way that each of the questions answered
is present in the chart, starting with Q1 (Program-
matic access to data) up north, then progressing
clock-wise with each question.5 The responses are
plotted such that Don’t know (the worst answer)
is located at the center of the chart, while Yes (the
best answer) is closest to the chart’s edge. The aim
5The code for generating radar charts as part of assess-
ing the data readiness of your own project is available here:
https://github.com/fredriko/draviz
Figure 3: The ﬁgure illustrates the state of data readiness at the beginning of the ﬁctitious project.
of the assessment method is for the surface consti-
tuted by the enclosed responses to cover as large
an area as possible. The reasons are simple; ﬁrst,
all stakeholders, in particular those in executive
positions, will gain immediate visual insight into
the state of the data for the project and, hopefully,
feel the urge to act to increase the area; second, it is
easy to visualize the project’s progress at discrete
points in time by overlaying two (or more) radar
charts.6
From Figure 3, it can be seen that Project, at
its incarnation, is not very mature with respect to
data readiness. The area covered by the enclosed
responses is small, and the number of unknowns
are large. The only certainties resulting by the
initial assessment of Project, are that: there has
been no ethical assessment made of the data; the
data has not been converted to a suitable format; no
characteristics of the data are known; the data has
not been validated; there is not sufﬁcient data for
the use case; and the way to evaluate the success of
the project has yet to be deﬁned. On the bright side,
the stakeholder partially agrees on the objective of
the project, and the purpose of the data.
6Overlaying radar charts with the purpose of comparing
them only works when a small number of charts are involved;
we are experimenting with parallel plots when the number of
distinct charts exceeds 3.
6.2
Second application of the method
Fast forward to the second data readiness assess-
ment of Project. In this case, it is scheduled to
take place prior to the project embarking on the
ﬁrst rounds of empirical investigations of the state
of data in relation to the project’s business objec-
tive. The purpose of looking into the data readi-
ness of the project at this stage, is to support the
project manager in their work regarding prioriti-
zation, management of resources, and handling of
expectations in relation to the project’s progression
and ability to reach its goals.
Again, after all stakeholders have agreed on re-
sponses to the questions of the method, they are
plotted in a radar chart. Figure 4 shows the state of
the project after the second data readiness assess-
ment. Progress has been made; the area covered
by the responses is larger than it was at the initial
assessment (Figure 3). There are no unknowns
left among the responses. Data is available and
converted to a suitable format, its characteristics
are known and the data format is generally trusted
within the project. The fact that licenses, legal as-
pects of access, and ethics are not quite there yet
does not, technically speaking, prohibit the project
from moving on with the empirical investigation.
However, these issues should be properly addressed
before the project results are deployed to a general
audience.
Figure 4: The ﬁgure shows the corresponding state at the time where the project is ready to start making experi-
ments based on the data.
The stakeholders are still not in full agreement
on the project’s business objective, but they are
aware of the purpose of the data, which has been
deemed sufﬁcient for the use case. Given the un-
certainty with respect to the business objective, the
steps required to evaluate proposed solutions are
also unclear.
Beyond the scope of the project, the organization
is not yet set up to in a way that is required to re-
peat and reproduce the ﬁndings of Project to future
data, and data security is still work in progress. The
project is allowed to share the data if it wishes to
to so, but since management has decided to play
it safe with respect to giving away too much infor-
mation regarding the organization’s future plans in
doing so, it has been decided that data should not
be share with external parties.
7
Conclusions
Research in NLP has never been more accessible;
the impact of new results has the potential to reach
far beyond the academic sphere. But with great
power comes great responsibility. How can we
foster a better uptake of research among public
agencies, and in industry, and thereby gain valu-
able insight into the research directions that really
matter? We introduce a method for assessing the
Data Readiness Levels of a project, consisting of
ﬁfteen questions, and the accompanying means for
visualizing the responses. We have utilized the pro-
posed method and visualization technique in sev-
eral projects with stakeholders in both the private
and public sectors, and it has proven to be a very
useful tool to improve the potential for success-
ful application of NLP solutions to solve concrete
business problems.
The method is a work-in-progress, and we thus
invite researchers and practitioners in the NLP com-
munity to share their experience with respect to
applied NLP research and data readiness at the fol-
lowing GitHub repository https://github.com/
fredriko/nlp-data-readiness.
References
Shazia
Afzal,
Rajmohan
C,
Manish
Kesarwani,
Sameep Mehta, and Hima Patel. 2020. Data Readi-
ness Report.
arXiv:2010.07213 [cs].
ArXiv:
2010.07213.
Matthew Arnold, Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Michael Hind,
Stephanie Houde, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mo-
jsilovic, Ravi Nair, Karthikeyan Natesan Rama-
murthy, Darrell Reimer, Alexandra Olteanu, David
Piorkowski, Jason Tsay, and Kush R. Varshney.
2019.
FactSheets:
Increasing Trust in AI Ser-
vices through Supplier’s Declarations of Conformity.
arXiv:1808.07261 [cs]. ArXiv: 1808.07261.
C. C. Austin. 2018. A Path to Big Data Readiness. In
2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), pages 4844–4853.
Jim Banke. 2017.
Technology Readiness Lev-
els Demystiﬁed.
URL:
https://www.nasa.
gov/topics/aeronautics/features/trl_
demystified.html. Accessed: 2021-01-11.
Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018.
Data
Statements for Natural Language Processing: To-
ward Mitigating System Bias and Enabling Better
Science. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 6:587–604.
Liat Ein-Dor, Alon Halfon, Ariel Gera, Eyal Shnarch,
Lena Dankin, Leshem Choshen, Marina Danilevsky,
Ranit Aharonov, Yoav Katz, and Noam Slonim.
2020.
Active Learning for BERT: An Empirical
Study. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 7949–7962, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Ahmed El-Kishky,
Vishrav Chaudhary,
Francisco
Guzmán, and Philipp Koehn. 2020. CCAligned: A
massive collection of cross-lingual web-document
pairs.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 5960–5969, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione,
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal
Daum´se III, and Kate Crawford. 2020. Datasheets
for Datasets.
arXiv:1803.09010 [cs].
ArXiv:
1803.09010.
Hugh Harvey and Ben Glocker. 2019. A standardised
approach for preparing imaging data for machine
learning tasks in radiology. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Medical Imaging, pages 61–72. Springer.
Sarah Holland, Ahmed Hosny, Sarah Newman, Joshua
Joseph, and Kasia Chmielinski. 2018. The Dataset
Nutrition Label: A Framework To Drive Higher
Data Quality Standards.
arXiv:1805.03677 [cs].
ArXiv: 1805.03677.
Neil D Lawrence. 2017. Data readiness levels. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.02245.
Weixin Liang, James Zou, and Zhou Yu. 2020. ALICE:
Active Learning with Contrastive Natural Language
Explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 4380–4391, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Joel Mackenzie, Rodger Benham, Matthias Petri, Jo-
hanne R. Trippas, J. Shane Culpepper, and Alis-
tair Moffat. 2020.
CC-news-en: A large english
news corpus. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management, CIKM ’20, pages 3077–3084, New
York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D.
Lawrence. 2020.
Challenges in Deploying Ma-
chine
Learning:
a
Survey
of
Case
Studies.
arXiv:2011.09926 [cs]. ArXiv: 2011.09926.
Bogdan Panait. 2020. What’s so hard about PDF text
extraction?
URL: https://filingdb.com/b/
pdf-text-extraction. Accessed: 2021-05-11.
Andraž Pelicon, Marko Pranji´c, Dragana Miljkovi´c,
Blaž Škrlj, and Senja Pollak. 2020.
Zero-Shot
Learning for Cross-Lingual News Sentiment Classi-
ﬁcation. Applied Sciences, 10(17):5993. Number:
17 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute.
Neoklis Polyzotis, Sudip Roy, Steven Euijong Whang,
and Martin Zinkevich. 2018. Data Lifecycle Chal-
lenges in Production Machine Learning: A Survey.
SIGMOD Record, 47(2):12.
Burr Settles. 2012.
Active Learning, volume 2012.
Morgan & Claypool.
Aditya Siddhant and Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. Deep
Bayesian Active Learning for Natural Language Pro-
cessing: Results of a Large-Scale Empirical Study.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2904–2909, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Shashank Srivastava, Igor Labutov, and Tom Mitchell.
2018. Zero-shot Learning of Classiﬁers from Natu-
ral Language Quantiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers),
pages 306–316, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tina Tseng, Amanda Stent, and Domenic Maida.
2020.
Best Practices for Managing Data Anno-
tation Projects.
arXiv:2009.11654 [cs].
ArXiv:
2009.11654.
Peter MA van Ooijen. 2019. Quality and curation of
medical images and data. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Medical Imaging, pages 247–255. Springer.
Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Con-
neau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmaán, Ar-
mand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2020.
CCNet:
Extracting High Quality Monolingual Datasets from
Web Crawl Data. In Proceedings of the 12th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
4003–4012, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association.
Zhiquan Ye, Yuxia Geng, Jiaoyan Chen, Jingmin Chen,
Xiaoxiao Xu, SuHang Zheng, Feng Wang, Jun
Zhang, and Huajun Chen. 2020.
Zero-shot Text
Classiﬁcation via Reinforced Self-training. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 3014–
3024, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
