Title: Hierarchical Text Generation using an Outline
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.08802v1
--------------------------------------------------

Hierarchical Text Generation using an Outline
Mehdi Drissi
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA, USA
mdrissi@hmc.edu
Olivia Watkins
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA, USA
owatkins@hmc.edu
Jugal Kalita
University of Colorado Springs
Colorado Springs, CO, USA
jkalita@uccs.edu
Abstract
Many challenges in natural language pro-
cessing require generating text, including
language translation, dialogue generation,
and speech recognition. For all of these
problems, text generation becomes more
difﬁcult as the text becomes longer. Cur-
rent language models often struggle to
keep track of coherence for long pieces of
text. Here, we attempt to have the model
construct and use an outline of the text it
generates to keep it focused. We ﬁnd that
the usage of an outline improves perplex-
ity. We do not ﬁnd that using the outline
improves human evaluation over a simpler
baseline, revealing a discrepancy in per-
plexity and human perception. Similarly,
hierarchical generation is not found to im-
prove human evaluation scores.
1
Introduction
Recurrent neural networks have been successfully
used for a variety of tasks in dealing with natu-
ral language. Successes include language trans-
lation (Sutskever et al., 2014), speech recognition
(Graves, 2012), and text to speech (Kalchbrenner
et al., 2018).
They all learn to model the con-
ditional probability of a sequence and generate
words sequentially, typically using sequence to se-
quence models. These models have the advantage
that their negative log likelihood is differentiable,
allowing them to be directly trained through gra-
dient descent.
A similar task is language modeling. Here the
goal is to determine the probability of a sequence
of words. Being able to model text is important
for natural language understanding. These mod-
els can be used for re-ranking candidate transla-
tions (Cho et al., 2014), determining possible ways
to extend a piece of writing (Roemmele and Gor-
don, 2018), and generating text (Dauphin et al.,
2016). These problems all share the difﬁculty that
although in theory a recurrent model can preserve
information for arbitrarily long sequences, in prac-
tice recurrent models tend to struggle to keep track
of context as the sequence length becomes large.
Models for tasks like language translation tend to
avoid translating entire paragraphs and instead fo-
cus on only generating a sentence at a time. Sim-
ilarly, when one generates multiple sentences of
text from language models, they tend to be locally
coherent but not globally coherent.
The difﬁculty of generating large samples is not
unique to text and also occurs with images. In
the realm of images though, a different technique
is commonly used for generation. Here, genera-
tive adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
have been successfully used to generate images di-
rectly. Similar to text, initially these models only
worked well for generating small images. Gener-
ating large images (like 1024 by 1024) was difﬁ-
cult for these models. In some recent work, the
issue of large images was dealt with by generat-
ing images in a hierarchical manner. Instead of
directly learning to generate the desired image,
lower resolution images were ﬁrst generated and
then improved upon (Zhang et al., 2016). Initially,
this was done by generating one lower resolution
image and then directly the ﬁnal image. More re-
cently, this has been extended to starting off with
generating a small image and iteratively increasing
its resolution by double until reaching the desired
size (Karras et al., 2017).
Inspired by the idea of generating images in a
hierarchical manner, here we will explore gener-
ating text in a hierarchical manner.
Similar to
(Zhang et al., 2016), we will approach this by gen-
erating in two steps. One difﬁculty with hierar-
chical text generation is that meaningfully down-
arXiv:1810.08802v1  [cs.CL]  20 Oct 2018
sampling text is more difﬁcult than downsampling
images. The textual equivalent of decreasing reso-
lution is summarization, which is a difﬁcult prob-
lem in itself. To side-step this issue, we will use
a simple extractive summarization approach to get
an outline. Using an extractive summarization ap-
proach to acquire information to build upon has
been done previously in generating Wikipedia ar-
ticles (Liu et al., 2018). Their approach differs
from ours in that there they used summarization
to extract relevant information from references to
generate the article, while here we are summariz-
ing the target text to acquire an outline of it. We
generate complete documents hierarchically with
two models. First, one model component gener-
ates the outline. We then condition upon the out-
line to generate the entire document.
Our main contribution will be to explore gener-
ating text in a hierarchical manner by separating
text generation into two phases. The ﬁrst phase
generates an outline of the text, while the second
phase uses the outline to generate the complete ar-
ticle.
2
Background
Most sequence-to-sequence models consist of an
encoder and decoder model (Sutskever et al.,
2014). The encoder model’s purpose is to take in
an input sequence and construct representations of
each token in the sequence. The decoder’s hid-
den state is initialized with encoder’s ﬁnal hidden
state. At each step, the decoder predicts the next
token in the sequence until it predicts an end of
sequence token.
As it is difﬁcult to encode an entire sequence
into one vector, generally the decoder is allowed
to look back at the representations of the tokens
the encoder created through an attention mecha-
nism (Bahdanau et al., 2014). An attention mech-
anism scores the decoder’s hidden state against
the encodings of all the tokens in the input sen-
tence, converts these scores to probabilities, and
then takes a weighted average of each encoding to
produce the context vector. This context vector is
then fed in to the decoder to aid it in keeping track
of information from the entire sentence.
One weakness of conventional attention is that
it can only focus on words in the prompt sequence
and not in the target sequence.
Self-attention
(Vaswani et al., 2017) is a modiﬁcation that attends
to both words in the prompt and prior words in the
target. This is especially important for models that
generate long sequences to be able to keep track of
what has been made. A second weakness of con-
ventional attention when used on long sequences
of input text is that it only operates at the word
level, ignoring any information conveyed through
the fact that words are grouped into sentences. An
extension of attention to account for both word
level and sentence level information is hierarchical
attention (Ling and Rush, 2017), which constructs
and scores a vector for each sentence along with
each word. The probability of focusing on a word
is then the product of its associated word level at-
tention and sentence level attention.
For summarization, approaches fall into two
primary categories. Extractive summarization in-
volves choosing and directly copying the main
sentences/words from the document. Abstractive
summarization focuses on having a model gener-
ate the words directly for the summary. As our
goal is to simply have an outline of the text, ex-
tractive summarization is sufﬁcient. It would be
interesting future work to see how different meth-
ods of generating an outline affect document gen-
eration. Another possible future extension would
be to instead use topic modeling to extract a dif-
ferent form of useful context for the target text.
The summarization algorithm that will be used
is called SumBasic (Nenkova and Vanderwende,
2005). This algorithm is based upon choosing sen-
tences with words that are frequent in the docu-
ment. After choosing a sentence, the algorithm
down-weights the words in that sentence to avoid
choosing sentences that are too similar.
3
Methods
Our goal is to generate text in a hierarchical man-
ner by generating the topic sentences of the article
ﬁrst and then generating the entire paragraph by
conditioning on the topic sentence.
3.1
Model Overview
The model will be an extension of the model
used in Neural Story Generation (Fan et al.,
2018).
In that work, a sequence-to-sequence
model was used to convert a prompt into a com-
plete document. Our main extension is dividing
the sequence-to-sequence model into two com-
ponents to assist in the coherence for the gener-
ated text. One component will generate topic sen-
tences, and one will expand topic sentences into
Figure 1: This diagram gives a high level overview
of the article generation process. Outlines are pre-
pared with SumBasic. The prompt is converted to
an outline which is then converted to an article.
complete paragraphs.
3.2
First Component - Outline Generator
To generate a document from the prompt, we
ﬁrst generate the outline associated with the doc-
ument. This component will be trained using al-
most an architecture almost identical to the model
used by (Fan et al., 2018).
Their architecture
is a convolutional sequence-to-sequence model
(Gehring et al., 2017) that uses a gated form of
self-attention. The one difference is we did not
use the cold fusion (Sriram et al., 2017) mech-
anism, mainly to lower training time. Cold fu-
sion is a mechanism that involves ﬁrst training the
main model, freezing its weights, and then train-
ing a second randomly initialized version of the
main model, concatenating the two models’ out-
puts, and then adding a few layers to determine
the ﬁnal prediction.
3.3
Second Component - Article Generator
The second component will use the outline to
generate the entire article. It will also be based
upon the sequence-to-sequence model used by
(Fan et al., 2018) and similarly will not include
cold fusion. It will be extended in one way. The
self-attention heads in the decoder will remain the
same, but the attention over the encoded outline
will be replaced by hierarchical attention.
The
sentence vectors will be obtained by summing the
encoded word vectors for each word in the corre-
sponding sentence. The sentence vectors will then
also have the same type of attention mechanism
applied to them. Similar to how the prior decoder
attention was gated, the hierarchical attention is
also gated and uses the same gating. Both model
components will be trained separately by directly
optimizing the negative log likelihood.
3.4
Outlines
To train the model, we require a dataset of out-
lines corresponding to complete articles. As the
primary focus of this work is not on new methods
of summarization, these outlines will be generated
using prior text summarization methods.
Sum-
Basic (Nenkova and Vanderwende, 2005) is one
frequency-based method for determining the topic
sentence. It tries to ﬁnd sentences whose words
are common in the document. One way to avoid
overweighting common words like ’the’ is to pe-
nalize words that are common across many arti-
cles. TF-IDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document
Frequency) does this by multiplying by the nega-
tive log probability of a word appearing in a doc-
ument. SumBasic is often tweaked to use TF-IDF
instead of directly using word frequencies (Allah-
yari et al., 2017).
As the outline is intended to contain information
about each section of the text, instead of directly
applying SumBasic to the full document, it will be
applied at the meta-paragraph level. Here, meta-
paragraph does not refer to the actual paragraphs
in the text, because their lengths are very incon-
sistent. The paragraphs of many of the documents
in the training data only consist of one or two sen-
tences. Extracting a topic sentence from each of
these paragraphs as an outline would be problem-
atic as we would effectively be letting the outline
contain too much of the document. To avoid this
issue, the actual paragraphs will be aggregated to-
gether using the rule that any paragraph under a
threshold number of sentences k will be combined
with the next paragraph to form a meta-paragraph.
As a side effect, every meta-paragraph except for
possibly the last one will end up having at least k
sentences.
Lastly, some preprocessing is done before di-
rectly applying SumBasic.
Stop words are re-
moved using a list of NLTK’s (Loper and Bird,
2002) English stop words, numbers are removed,
punctuation is removed, and words are stemmed
using Porter stemming (Porter, 1980).
3.5
Training the Models
Strictly speaking the probability of an entire doc-
ument can only now be obtained by marginaliz-
ing over all possible outlines. A lower bound for
the probability can be obtained by instead generat-
ing the most likely outline for a given prompt and
then ﬁnding the probability of the document con-
ditioned on that outline. This lower bound how-
ever is intractable to compute as it involves gener-
ating many outlines. Due to the long length of the
sequences and the relatively slow generation time,
even only using 10 outlines for the approximation
would take approximately 100 days just to evalu-
ate on the validation/test set on one 1080 Ti. It also
turns out to be intractable as the memory needed
to do a beam search with such long sequences is
too high and it runs out of memory if you increase
the beam size beyond 2.
As the two components are trained separately,
this similarly leads to the overall training loss not
corresponding to the actual article negative log
likelihood. Using that loss properly would require
being able to efﬁciently compute the probability of
a document, but this is intractable for the reasons
given in the prior paragraph.
A second discrepancy that arises is that since
the components are trained separately, the second
component is only trained on good outlines. It’s
never trained to deal with poorly generated out-
lines, so if the ﬁrst component generates a bad
outline, the second component is unlikely to be
able to recover from the mistake. This is unlike
the training for StackGAN (Zhang et al., 2016)
where the second part of the model was trained us-
ing the output of the ﬁrst part of the model. Train-
ing this model in an end-to-end manner is difﬁcult
because the slow outline generation time would
increase the training time by a factor of roughly
30 which was unfeasible given our computational
resources. Training on a small amount of gener-
ated samples to ﬁne-tune the model is feasible and
could be done in future work.
3.6
Code
A github repository containing our model code
can be found here: https://github.com/
hmc-cs-mdrissi/fairseq. The dataset of
prompts, articles, and outlines can be found at
this link: https://www.dropbox.com/s/
jupoljc2cx0to7y/datasets.zip?dl=
0.
4
Evaluation Approach
4.1
Datasets
We used the Wikitext-103 dataset described in
(Merity et al., 2016). It consists of a large col-
lection of preprocessed Wikipedia articles. As this
dataset does not come with prompts, the prompt
used was the ﬁrst sentence of the article, with the
goal being generating the entire article. We pre-
processed the dataset to eliminate tables, to canon-
icalize numbers, and to lowercase each word.
4.2
Possible Evaluation Metrics
The two automated evaluation metrics used pre-
viously by (Fan et al., 2018) were perplexity and
prompt relevance. BLEU and ROUGE were not
used as the primary goal is generating new, diverse
text rather than matching the target text precisely.
Perplexity and prompt relevance are problematic
for the hierarchical model as they both involve
computing the probability of a article. Due to the
previously discussed computational intractability
of computing article probabilities, neither can be
used for the hierarchical model.
For the non-
hierarchical models and the components of the hi-
erarchical model, we can still measure the perplex-
ity to see how well the model captures the text
distribution. Perplexity is the exponential of the
cross entropy of the model distribution compared
to the data distribution and is deﬁned in Equation
1, where q(x) is the probability the model assigns
to x.
perplexity = 2−1
N
PN
i=1 log2 q(xi)
(1)
Recently, (Semeniuta et al., 2018) explored var-
ious evaluation metrics for language models. One
automated metric they explored was the Frechet
Infersent Distance (FID). The FID metric is com-
puted by encoding all of the generated and real
documents as vectors and then comparing the dis-
tributions of these vectors by approximating them
as Gaussian. The FID metric is problematic as it
requires a model that can encode the meaning of
a document well. In their work, they only focused
on sentence-level generation and were able to use
a model that could create sentence vectors. A sec-
ond issue with the FID metric is that they did not
ﬁnd it sensitive to word order, which indicates that
Table 1: Model Perplexity
Model
Validation Perplexity
prompt-to-outline
45.63
outline-to-article
21.08
outline-to-article + h.a.
20.49
prompt-to-article
30.96
the metric does not correlate well with human per-
ception of quality.
One, method applicable to any model is human
evaluation.
We generated about 27 articles for
each model using the ﬁrst sentences of articles in
our test set as prompts. We then had native En-
glish speakers evaluate ten articles on both global
coherence and overall quality on a 5 point Likert
Scale. The questions that were used are shown in
Figure 2.
4.3
Models
The models that will be compared are a model
from prompt-to-outline, outline-to-article, outline-
to-article + hierarchical attention (h.a.), prompt-
to-article, hierarchical prompt-to-article + h.a..
5
Evaluation Results
5.1
Perplexity Evaluation
The model perplexity experiments revealed multi-
ple interesting ﬁndings. The biggest one is that the
perplexity of prompt-to-article is lower than the
perplexity of prompt-to-outline, indicating that it
is easier on average word-wise to generate the full
article than just the outline. One possible explana-
tion for this is that in generating the outline there
are much more abrupt shifts in topic when com-
pared to generating the article, and as each word
is conditional on the prior words, the topic ﬂow-
ing more smoothly may make it easier to guess the
next word. There is a signiﬁcant improvement in
perplexity (about 10 points) when conditioning on
outlines compared to conditioning on prompts.
The other interesting result is that hierarchical
attention led to a small improvement in perplexity.
In the prior work by (Ling and Rush, 2017), hierar-
chical attention improved the model by providing
a computationally efﬁcient attention mechanism
over long sequences and was not found to be help-
ful otherwise. A similar magnitude improvement
using hierarchical attention occurred when com-
paring the two models on the stories dataset used
by (Fan et al., 2018). Two plausible explanations
are either that hierarchical attention works better
for some tasks/datasets, or that the discrepancy oc-
curred because we used gated attention for both
the word-level attention model and the hierarchi-
cal attention model. The gating may have helped
the sentence attention learn to focus on different
and useful things than the word attention. Lastly,
the hierarchical model is missing from the table as
computing perplexity for it was intractable.
5.2
Human Evaluation
The results can be found in Table 5.1 on the next
page. The number of articles evaluated total is 70.
For the three models, only one pair is signiﬁcantly
different in global coherence. That pair is hierar-
chical model vs prompt-to-article where the latter
is better (p = 0.005). The hierarchical model is
also signiﬁcantly different in quality from both of
the other two models (for both p = 0.049). The
worst model is still within a standard deviation
evaluation wise of the best model in both metrics,
indicating how noisy the quality of the articles and
the reviews of them are. Thus, for human percep-
tion all the hierarchical model performed slightly
worse, while the outline vs prompt models per-
formed equally well.
The biggest unexpected result is that the
prompt-to-article model performed better in hu-
man evaluation on global coherence than the
outline-to-article model. Considering the outline
describes the article more thoroughly, it should
have helped the model stay focused. It was also
unexpected that the overall quality of the outline-
to-article would be the same as the prompt-to-
article model.
Both of these results, are unex-
pected because there was a large improvement
in perplexity when conditioning on an outline.
This reveals that for this task, perplexity did not
correlate well with human perception of quality.
Lastly, overall quality and global coherence corre-
late strongly (r = 0.74, p < 0.001).
5.3
Best Cases
Due to space constraints, articles and outlines
were both truncated. unk was used for unknown
tokens, num was used for numbers, and newline
was used to keep track of paragraph breaks. The
article shown in Figure 3 came from the outline-
to-article model and tied for highest human evalu-
ation scores.
Question 1 (Global Coherence) The article should be well-structured and well-organized. The article
should not just be a heap of unrelated information, but should build from sentence to sentence and
paragraph to paragraph. Abrupt changes in topic without any transitions are problematic.
Question 2 (Overall Quality) How realistic is the article as a whole given that the article is meant to be a
Wikipedia article.
Figure 2: Questions for Human Evaluation of Generated Articles
Model
µ-Global Coherence
σ-Global Coherence
µ-Quality
σ-Quality
prompt-to-article
3.36
1.00
2.91
1.07
hierarchical prompt-to-article + h.a.
2.54
0.96
2.26
0.89
outline-to-article + h.a.
3.14
1.31
2.90
1.22
Table 2: The µ is for mean and σ is for standard deviation.
In both cases we see that the text conditioned
upon was very informative.
Doing a better job
of preprocessing would likely help in some cases,
as some of the other prompts end up being trun-
cated too heavily (mainly due to difﬁculty deter-
mining where a sentence ends). While the main
topic is preserved, often the facts will end up be-
ing changed. For the second article, originally the
player was a basketball player, but the model mor-
phed him into a baseball player.
5.4
Failure Cases
Here, we will examine one of the worst generated
articles. Worst is deﬁned as being rated as a 1 in
both global coherence and overall quality. The ar-
ticle, shown in Figure 4 was generated from the
hierarchical model.
This example looks to be a case where the ﬁrst
component of the hierarchical model did poorly
leading to the model struggling to generate a ar-
ticle from that outline. It is not the only exam-
ple where too many unknown word tokens end up
leading to poor articles. While repetition occurs
more broadly, unknown tokens have the worst ten-
dency to lead the article to become too repetitive.
This issue may be helped by training the second
component of the hierarchical model on not just
good outlines, but also sampled outlines so it can
learn to not be too reliant on the outline.
More broadly, the main type of error found in
generated articles is too much redundancy. Often
individual sentences would not be too bad, but a
very similar sentence would appear a bit later in
the paragraph. Article quality also generally be-
comes worse near the end of the article.
6
Conclusion
We have focused on generating text in a hierarchi-
cal manner for generating Wikipedia articles. The
primary automated metric, perplexity, for measur-
ing overall article generation quality was compu-
tationally intractable for the hierarchical model.
We found that conditioning on an outline heav-
ily improved perplexity, but did not improve hu-
man perceived quality. This indicates that, per-
plexity should be used more cautiously for text
generation if the motivation is generating text peo-
ple will ﬁnd believable. This issue should be ana-
lyzed more thoroughly in future work as perplex-
ity is the most commonly used evaluation metric
for language models currently. More generally, it
would be useful to develop automated metrics that
more closely correlate with human evaluation and
have a better understanding of what qualitative as-
pects good articles share.
Other interesting ﬁndings are that that one ma-
jor failure mode for the hierarchical model is dif-
ﬁculty dealing with poor outlines and that hierar-
chical attention led to a small improvement in per-
plexity for two different datasets unlike when it
was used previously by (Ling and Rush, 2017).
For future work, the main thing is to deal with
the issue of the hierarchical model not being able
to generate reasonable articles with poor outlines.
Training using only generated articles would be
ideal, but is computationally expensive due to gen-
eration time being hundreds of times slower than
training time. To make training feasible with gen-
erated samples, it will likely require only using
a small number of generated articles to help ﬁne
tune the model. This may also be feasible when
Outline 1: he was previously the head coach at butler university in indianapolis . newline on april num ,
num , he became the head coach after todd unk left to coach the iowa hawkeyes . newline in july num ,
he signed a six - year , num million dollar contract to become the head coach of the boston celtics in the
nba . newline bradley kent stevens grew up in unk , indiana , where he developed his love for basketball
. newline he wore no. num in high school in honor of indiana pacers guard reggie miller . newline he
earned three letters in basketball , three in track , and one in baseball during his days at unk . newline the
more success you had at lilly , the harder it would be to leave . ”
Generated Article 1: walter george stevens ( may num , num october num , num ) was an american major
league baseball ( mlb ) outﬁelder who played for the boston red sox ( num num , num num ) and the
yankees ( num num ) . stevens was an outﬁelder , placekicker and punter , and had played with the boston
indians and boston red sox from num to num . he was previously the head coach at butler university in
indianapolis . he played num seasons in major league baseball ( mlb ) for the boston red sox , and in num
played on the chicago red sox from num to num . newline stevens played num major league baseball (
mlb ) all - star team in num , and led the league to ﬁve consecutive national champions with a num num
conference record , the longest streak in career history . he was also the only player to reach the major
division i ’s num playoffs . the num and num seasons have taken place in the central division ( num num
) . newline at the time of the num mlb draft , he was known for the right to handle a hit . he was one to
only two players . in num , the red sox traded him in minor league organization with the red sox . the red
sox promoted him with the numth overall pick in the num mlb draft , while the red sox traded him to the
cleveland indians .
Figure 3: Well-generated Article
the training dataset size is small.
Another possible extension is to make better us-
age of the outlines. Speciﬁcally, for ideal outlines
we know that the sentences present in the outline
should also be present in the target text. Allow-
ing the model to copy an entire sentence would be
beneﬁcial and make it more likely to fully utilize
the outline. This does come with the downside
that a poor sentence in a generated outline being
copied would be problematic. That could be dealt
with by training on a mixture of generated and real
outlines.
7
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the UCCS NLP lab for many
helpful conversations. This material is based upon
work supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant No.
1659788.
Any opinions,
ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Na-
tional Science Foundation.
References
Mehdi Allahyari, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, Mehdi Asseﬁ,
Saeid Safaei, Elizabeth D. Trippe, Juan B. Gutierrez,
and Krys Kochut. 2017. Text Summarization Tech-
niques: A Brief Survey.
International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, (1).
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2014.
Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate.
Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
abs/1409.0473.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
Learn-
ing Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-
Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation.
Yann N. Dauphin, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and
David Grangier. 2016.
Language Modeling with
Gated Convolutional Networks. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hi-
erarchical Neural Story Generation. ArXiv e-prints.
Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis
Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional
Sequence to Sequence Learning. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
Generative
Adversarial Networks. pages 1–9.
Alex Graves. 2012. Sequence Transduction with Re-
current Neural Networks. International Conference
of Machine Learning.
Prompt 1: the portage to san cristobal of a.h. is a num literary and philosophical novella by george steiner
, in which jewish nazi hunters ﬁnd a ﬁctional adolf hitler ( a.h. ) alive in the amazon jungle thirty years
after the end of world war ii .
Generated Outline 1: he began work as a unk at the age of num . newline during world war ii , unk joined
the unk unk ( royal society ) in the united states where he made his world debut in the world . newline
unk ’s ﬁrst name was unk unk . newline he was promoted to unk ’s unk unk - unk in num . newline unk
became the new man ’s second - oldest student , unk unk - unk , as a student from unk - unk . newline
unk was one of the founding members of the unk unk - unk , the ﬁrst to be called unk .
Generated Article 1: unk unk ( unk , ” young woman ’s sister , the unk , ” to the unk ” ) is unk ( unk , ”
young woman ’s sister , the unk ) , ” girl ’s son , and the unk ” . the name unk is from the greek unk or ”
woman ’s mother unk ” , referring to her marriage to unk . after the marriage , her son , ila , is the only
person to be killed in the world . newline during world war ii , il began work as a unk at the age of num
. she was the ﬁrst female woman to be a unk ( unk ) . after being married , ila became the new man ’s
second - oldest student ; however , her marriage to unk was interrupted in num . newline during world
war ii , il joined the unk unk ( royal society ) in the united states where he made his world debut in the
world . the unk - unk unk ( unk ) , the ﬁrst of the ﬁrst unk ( unk ) , was the ﬁrst unk to be a unk , the
second unk in the world , and a member of the unk unk , one of the ﬁrst women ’s women ’s women ’s
women and is the ﬁrst female woman to be a unk . in her unk unk , ila was ﬁrst unk unk unk ; the other
two are the unk ( unk ) , the unk ( unk ) , the ( unk ) , the unk ( unk ) , the unk ( unk ) , the unk ( unk ) ,
the unk ( unk ) , the unk ( unk ) and the ( unk ) . ila ’s ﬁrst name was unk unk . she was also used to refer
to her .
Figure 4: A Poorly Generated Article
Nal Kalchbrenner, Erich Elsen, Karen Simonyan, Seb
Noury, Norman Casagrande, Edward Lockhart, Flo-
rian Stimberg, Aaron van den Oord, Sander Diele-
man, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2018. Efﬁcient Neu-
ral Audio Synthesis.
Tero Karras, Tima Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko
Lehtinen. 2017. Progressive Growing of GANs for
Improved Quality, Stability, and Variation.
Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
pages 1–25.
Jeffrey Ling and Alexander M. Rush. 2017. Coarse-to-
Fine Attention Models for Document Summariza-
tion. Proceedings of the Workshop on New Frontiers
in Summarization, (2015):33–42.
Peter J. Liu, Mohammad Saleh, Etienne Pot, Ben
Goodrich, Ryan Sepassi, Lukasz Kaiser, and Noam
Shazeer. 2018. Generating Wikipedia by Summariz-
ing Long Sequences. pages 1–18.
Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002.
NLTK: the
natural language toolkit.
Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodologies for
Teaching Natural Language Processing and Compu-
tational Linguistics, cs.CL/0205028.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2016.
Pointer Sentinel Mixture
Models.
Ani Nenkova and Lucy Vanderwende. 2005. The im-
pact of frequency on summarization. Technical Re-
port, Microsoft Research.
Martin F Porter. 1980. An algorithm for sufﬁx strip-
ping. Program, 14(3):130–137.
Melissa Roemmele and Andrew S Gordon. 2018. Lin-
guistic Features of Helpfulness in Automated Sup-
port for Creative Writing. Naacl, pages 14–19.
Stanislau Semeniuta, Aliaksei Severyn, and Sylvain
Gelly. 2018. On Accurate Evaluation of GANs for
Language Generation.
Anuroop Sriram, Heewoo Jun, Sanjeev Satheesh,
and Adam Coates. 2017.
Cold Fusion: Training
Seq2Seq Models Together with Language Models.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), pages 3104–3112.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention Is All
You Need. (Nips).
Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang,
Xiaogang Wang,
Xiaolei Huang,
and Dimitris
Metaxas. 2016. StackGAN: Text to Photo-realistic
Image Synthesis with Stacked Generative Adversar-
ial Networks.
International Conference on Com-
puter Vision.
