Title: A general-purpose material property data extraction pipeline from large polymer corpora using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.13136v1
--------------------------------------------------

A general-purpose material property data
extraction pipeline from large polymer corpora
using Natural Language Processing
Pranav Shetty,† Arunkumar Chitteth Rajan,‡ Christopher Kuenneth,‡ Sonakshi
Gupta,¶ Lakshmi Prerana Panchumarti,‡ Lauren Holm,‡ Chao Zhang,† and
Rampi Ramprasad∗,‡
†School of Computational Science & Engineering
‡School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 771 Ferst
Drive NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
¶Department of Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of
Technology, Indore
E-mail: rampi.ramprasad@mse.gatech.edu
Abstract
The ever-increasing number of materials science articles makes it hard to infer
chemistry-structure-property relations from published literature. We used natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) methods to automatically extract material property data from
the abstracts of polymer literature. As a component of our pipeline, we trained Mate-
rialsBERT, a language model, using 2.4 million materials science abstracts, which out-
performs other baseline models in three out of ﬁve named entity recognition datasets
when used as the encoder for text. Using this pipeline, we obtained ∼300,000 material
property records from ∼130,000 abstracts in 60 hours. The extracted data was ana-
lyzed for a diverse range of applications such as fuel cells, supercapacitors, and polymer
1
arXiv:2209.13136v1  [cs.CL]  27 Sep 2022
solar cells to recover non-trivial insights. The data extracted through our pipeline is
made available through a web platform at https://polymerscholar.org which can
be used to locate material property data recorded in abstracts conveniently.
This
work demonstrates the feasibility of an automatic pipeline that starts from published
literature and ends with a complete set of extracted material property information.
Introduction
The number of materials science papers published annually grows at the rate of 6 % com-
pounded annually. Quantitative and qualitative materials property information is locked
away in these publications written in natural language that is not directly machine-readable.
The explosive growth in published literature makes it harder to see quantitative trends by
just directly analyzing large amounts of literature.
Searching the literature for material
systems that have desirable properties also becomes more challenging. Moreover, material
information published in a non-machine-readable form contributes to data scarcity in the
ﬁeld of materials informatics where the training of property predictors requires painstaking
manual curation of the data of interest from literature. Here, we propose adapting techniques
for information extraction from the natural language processing (NLP) literature to address
these issues.
Information extraction from the written text is well studied within NLP and involves sev-
eral key components such as named entity recognition (NER), i.e., identifying categories to
which words in the text belong; relation extraction, i.e., classifying relationships between ex-
tracted entities; co-referencing, i.e., identifying clusters of named entities in the text referring
to the same object such as a polymer and its abbreviation, and named entity normalization,
i.e. identifying all the variations in the name for an entity across a large number of doc-
uments. The idea of “self-supervised learning” through transformer-based models such as
BERT,1,2 pre-trained on massive corpora of unlabeled text to learn contextual embeddings,
is the dominant paradigm of information extraction today. A common architecture for NER
2
and relation extraction is to feed a labeled input to BERT and use the output vector em-
bedding for each word along with the corresponding labels (which could be entity labels
or relation labels) as inputs to a downstream machine learning model (typically a neural
network) that learns to predict those labels. The tasks mentioned above are label intensive.
Extending these methods to new domains requires labeling new data sets with ontologies
that are tailored to the speciﬁc domain of interest.
ChemDataExtractor,3 ChemSpot,4 and ChemicalTagger5 are tools that perform NER to
tag material entities. For example, ChemDataExtractor has been used to create a database of
Neel temperatures and Curie temperatures that were automatically mined from literature.6
It has also been used to generate a literature extracted database of magnetocaloric materials
and train property prediction models for key ﬁgures of merit.7 In the space of polymers, the
authors of Ref. 8 used a semi-automated approach that crawled papers automatically and
used students to extract the Flory-Huggins parameter (a measure of the aﬃnity between two
materials, eg., a polymer and a solvent). Word embedding approaches were used in Ref. 9
to generate entity-rich documents for human experts to annotate which were then used to
train a polymer named entity tagger. Most previous NLP-based eﬀorts in materials science
have focused on inorganic materials but limited work has been done to address information
extraction challenges in polymers. Polymers in practice have several non-trivial variations in
name for the same material entity which requires polymer names to be normalized. Moreover,
unlike inorganic entities, polymer names cannot typically be converted to SMILES strings
that are usable for downstream machine learning but the SMILES strings must instead be
inferred from ﬁgures in the paper that contain the corresponding structure.
Past work to automatically extract material property information from literature has fo-
cused on speciﬁc properties typically using keyword search methods or regular expressions.10
However, there are few solutions in the literature that address building general-purpose ca-
pabilities for extracting material property information, i.e., for any material property. More-
over, property extraction and analysis of polymers from a large corpus of literature has also
3
not yet been addressed. Automatically analyzing large materials science corpora has enabled
many novel discoveries in recent years such as Ref. 11, where a literature extracted data set
of zeolites was used to analyze interzeolite relations. Using word embeddings trained on such
corpora has also been used to predict novel materials for certain applications in inorganics
as well as polymers.12,13
In this work, we built a general-purpose pipeline for extracting material property data.
Starting with a corpus of 2.4 million materials science papers described in Ref. 12, we se-
lected 750 abstracts from the polymer domain and annotated each of the abstracts using our
own ontology that was designed for the purpose of extracting information from materials
science literature. Using these 750 annotated abstracts we trained an NER model, using our
MaterialsBERT language model to encode the input text into vector representations. Mate-
rialsBERT in turn was trained by starting from PubMedBERT, another language model, and
using 2.4 million materials science abstracts to continue training the model.14 The trained
NER model was applied to polymer abstracts and heuristic rules were used to combine the
predictions of the NER model and obtain material property records from all polymer rele-
vant abstracts. This pipeline is illustrated in Figure 1. We restricted our focus to abstracts
as associating property value pairs with their corresponding materials is a more tractable
problem in abstracts. We analyzed the data obtained using this pipeline for applications as
diverse as polymer solar cells, fuel cells, and supercapacitors and showed that several known
trends and phenomena in materials science can be inferred using this data. Moreover, we
trained a machine learning predictor for the glass transition temperature using automatically
extracted data (Supplementary Information Section S5).
This is the ﬁrst work to build a general-purpose material property data extraction
pipeline, for any material property. MaterialsBERT, the language model that powers our
information extraction pipeline is released in order to enable the information extraction ef-
forts of other materials researchers. We show that MaterialsBERT outperforms other similar
BERT-based language models such as BioBERT15 and ChemBERT16 on three out of ﬁve
4
materials science NER data sets. The data extracted using this pipeline can be explored
using a convenient web-based interface (https://www.polymerscholar.org) which can aid
polymer researchers in locating material property information of interest to them.
Figure 1: Pipeline used for extracting material property records from a corpus of abstracts
Results
Abstract annotation
Our ontology for extracting material property information consists of 8 entity types namely
POLYMER, POLYMER CLASS, PROPERTY VALUE, PROPERTY NAME, MONOMER,
ORGANIC MATERIAL, INORGANIC MATERIAL, and MATERIAL AMOUNT. For a
detailed description of these entity types, see Table 1.
This ontology captures the key
pieces of information commonly found in abstracts and the information we wish to utilize
5
for downstream purposes. Note that, unlike some other studies, our ontology scheme does
not annotate entities using the BIO tagging scheme, i.e., Beginning-Inside-Outside of the
labeled entity. Instead, we opt to keep the labels simple and annotate only tokens belonging
to our ontology and label all other tokens as ‘OTHER’. This is because, as reported in Ref.
14, for BERT-based sequence labeling models, the advantage oﬀered by explicit BIO tags is
negligible and IO tagging schemes suﬃce. More detailed annotation guidelines are provided
in the Supplementary Information Section S1.
A corpus of 2.4 million materials science
papers was ﬁltered to obtain a dataset of abstracts that were polymer relevant and likely
to contain the entity types of interest to us. We did so by ﬁltering abstracts containing the
string ‘poly’ to ﬁnd polymer-relevant abstracts and used regular expressions to ﬁnd abstracts
that contained numeric information.
Using the above-described ontology, we annotated 750 abstracts and split the abstracts
into 80 % for training, 10 % for validation, and 10 % for testing. Prior to manual annotation,
we pre-annotated the dataset using dictionaries of entities for the entity types where one
was available.17 This was intended to speed up the annotation process. This dataset was
annotated by three domain experts using the tool Prodigy (https://prodi.gy). Annotation
was done over three rounds using a small sample of abstracts in each round. With each
round, the annotation guidelines were reﬁned and the abstracts in the previous rounds were
re-annotated using the reﬁned guidelines.
In order to assess the inter-annotator agreement between the three annotators, we use
10 common abstracts to measure Cohen’s Kappa and Fleiss Kappa18 metrics. The Fleiss
Kappa metric was computed to be 0.885 and the pairwise Cohen’s Kappa metric to be (0.906,
0.864, 0.887) for each of the three pairs of annotators. These metrics are comparable to inter-
annotator agreements reported elsewhere in the literature19 and indicate good homogeneity
in the annotations.
6
Table 1: Description of each entity type in the ontology used for annotating polymer abstracts
Entity type
Description
POLYMER
Material entities that are polymers
ORGANIC MATERIAL
Material entities that are organic but not
polymers. Typically used as plasticizers or
cross-linking agents
MONOMER
Material entities which are explicitly indi-
cated as being the repeat units for a POLY-
MER entity
POLYMER CLASS
Material entities that don’t refer to a speciﬁc
chemical substance but are broad terms used
for a class of polymers
INORGANIC MATERIAL
Material entities which are inorganic and are
typically used as additives in a polymer for-
mulation
MATERIAL AMOUNT
Entity type indicating the amount of a par-
ticular material in a material formulation
PROPERTY NAME
Entity type for a material property
PROPERTY VALUE
Entity type including a numeric value and its
unit for a material property
OTHER
Default entity type used for all tokens that
do not lie in any of the above categories
NER model
The architecture used for training our NER model is depicted in Figure 2.
BERT and
BERT-based models have become the de-facto solutions for a large number of NLP tasks.1
It embodies the transfer learning paradigm in which a model is trained on a large amount of
unlabeled text using unsupervised objectives (not shown in the ﬁgure). The resulting BERT
encoder can be used to generate token embeddings for the input text that are conditioned
on all other input tokens and hence are context-aware. We used a BERT-based encoder to
generate representations for tokens in the input text as shown in Figure 2. The generated
representations were used as inputs to a linear layer connected to a softmax non-linearity
that predicted the entity type of each token. We used a number of diﬀerent encoders and
compared the performance of the resulting models on our dataset of annotated polymer
7
Figure 2: Model architecture used for named entity recognition: Each token in the input
sequence is converted to a contextual embedding by a pre-trained transformer model which
is then input to a single layer neural network. The output of the neural network is the entity
type of the input token.
abstracts. We compared these models for a number of diﬀerent publicly available materials
science datasets as well.
We used early stopping while training the NER model, i.e., the number of epochs of
training was determined by the peak performance of the model on the validation set as
evaluated after every epoch of training.20 We also ﬁne-tuned PubMedBERT on the abstracts
of the 2.4 million papers, referred to as MaterialsBERT. During ﬁne-tuning, we load the
model and weights of PubMedBERT and continue training using the unsupervised objectives
that PubMedBERT was originally trained on. The text of our corpus of abstracts forms the
unlabeled input to the model. This is one of the BERT-based encoders that we test.
8
Evaluation methods
The performance of the NER model is evaluated using precision, recall and F1 score of the
predicted entity tag compared to the ground truth labels. These are deﬁned as below:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(1)
where TP are the true positives, FP are the false positives and FN are the false negatives.
Each of the above metrics is reported as a % value. We consider a predicted label to be a
true positive only when the label of a complete entity is predicted correctly. For instance, for
the polymer ‘polyvinyl ethylene’, both ‘polyvinyl’ and ‘ethylene’ must be correctly labeled,
else the entity is deemed to be predicted incorrectly.
NER model performance
Table 2: Performance of various pre-trained BERT-based encoders on the test set of polymer
abstracts. Values are reported in %
Model
Precision
Recall
F1
MaterialsBERT (ours)
62.5
70.6
66.4
PubMedBERT
61.4
70.7
65.8
MatBERT
60.9
70.1
65.2
BioBERT
59.2
66.3
62.6
ChemBERT
52.2
62.6
57.0
BERT-base
52.1
61.0
56.2
The performance of various pre-trained BERT-based language models tested for training
an NER model using our annotated data set of polymer abstracts is shown in Table 2. We
observe that MaterialsBERT, the model ﬁne-tuned by us on 2.4 million materials science
9
abstracts using PubMedBERT as the starting point, outperforms PubMedBERT as well as
other language models used. This is in agreement with results previously reported where
the ﬁne-tuning of a transformer-based language model on a domain-speciﬁc corpus results
in improved downstream task performance.14 Similar trends are observed across two of the
four materials science data sets as reported in Table 3 and thus MaterialsBERT outperforms
other pre-trained language models in three out of ﬁve materials science data sets. These
NER datasets were chosen to span a range of subdomains within materials science, i.e.,
across organic and inorganic materials. A more detailed description of these NER datasets
is provided in Supplementary Information Section S2. Note that all pre-trained encoders
tested in Table 2 use the BERT-base architecture, diﬀering in their weights and hence are
comparable. MaterialsBERT outperforms PubMedBERT on all datasets except ChemD-
NER, which demonstrates that ﬁne-tuning on a domain speciﬁc corpus indeed produces a
performance improvement on downstream classiﬁcation tasks. ChemBERT is BERT-base
ﬁne-tuned on a corpus of ∼400,000 organic chemistry papers and also out-performs BERT-
base1 across the NER data sets tested. BioBERT15 was trained by ﬁne-tuning BERT-base
using the PubMed corpus and thus has the same vocabulary as BERT-base in contrast to
PubMedBERT which has a vocabulary speciﬁc to the biomedical domain. Ref. 21 describes
the model MatBERT which was pre-trained from scratch using a corpus of 2 million mate-
rials science articles. Despite MatBERT being a model that was pre-trained from scratch,
MaterialsBERT outperforms MatBERT on three out of ﬁve datasets. While the vocabu-
lary of MatBERT and MaterialsBERT are both relevant to the domain of materials science,
this performance diﬀerence can likely be attributed to the fact that PubMedBERT, the ini-
tial model for MaterialsBERT was pre-trained on a much larger corpus of text (14 million
abstracts and full text). All experiments shown in Table 2 and Table 3 were performed
by us. Note that we do not test BiLSTM-based architectures22 as past work has shown
that BERT-based architectures typically outperform BiLSTM-based ones.14,16,21 The perfor-
mance on MaterialsBERT for each entity type in our ontology is described in Supplementary
10
Information Section S3.
Table 3: Performance of various BERT based encoders on the test sets of publicly available
materials science NER datasets. Values are reported in %
Pre-trained en-
coder
ChemDNER23
Inorganic Synthe-
sis recipes24
Inorganic
Ab-
stracts17
ChemRxnExtractor16
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
MaterialsBERT
(ours)
70.1
68.2
69.2
69.1
68.3
68.6
85.3
86.7
86.0
73.5
69.5
71.4
PubMedBERT
71.5
69.0
70.2
69.9
65.3
67.6
84.0
86.2
85.0
68.1
59.5
63.6
MatBERT
71.7
66.9
69.2
68.6
67.7
68.2
85.6
86.7
86.2
67.4
58.0
62.4
BioBERT
70.6
65.7
68.0
64.4
63.7
64.0
85.6
87.1
86.4
74.8
65.4
69.8
ChemBERT
72.5
66.4
69.4
66.8
64.3
65.6
83.2
86.4
84.8
65.0
64.0
64.4
BERT-base
71.2
65.7
68.4
62.4
60.3
61.4
81.0
81.9
81.4
57.7
54.9
56.2
Quantifying the extracted data
Using our pipeline, we extracted ∼300, 000 material property records from ∼130, 000
abstracts. Out of our corpus of 2.4 million articles, ∼650, 000 abstracts are polymer relevant
and around ∼130, 000 out of those contain material property data. This extraction process
took 60 hours using a single Quadro 16 GB GPU. To place this number in context, PoLyInfo
a comparable database of polymer property records that is publicly available has 492,645
property records as of this writing.25 This database was manually curated by domain experts
over many years while the material property records we have extracted using automated
methods took 2.5 days using only abstracts and is yet of comparable size. The composition
of these material property records is summarized in Table 4 for speciﬁc properties (grouped
into a few property classes) that are utilized later on. For the general property class, we
compute the number of neat polymers as the material property records corresponding to
a single material of the POLYMER entity type. Blends correspond to material property
records with multiple POLYMER entities while composites contain at least one material
11
entity that is not of the POLYMER or POLYMER CLASS entity type. To compute the
number of unique neat polymer records, we ﬁrst counted all unique normalized polymer
names from records that had a normalized polymer name. This accounts for the majority
of polymers with multiple reported names as detailed in Ref. 26. Out of the remaining neat
polymer records that did not have a normalized polymer name, we then counted all unique
polymer names (accounting for case variations) and added them to the number of unique
normalized polymer names to arrive at the estimated number of unique polymers.
The
number of extracted data points reported in Table 4 is higher than the ﬁgures shown later
as additional constraints are imposed in each case in order to better study this data. For the
general property class, we note that elongation at break data for an estimated 413 unique
neat polymers was extracted. In contrast, Ref. 27 used 77 polymers to train a machine
learning model. For tensile strength, an estimated 926 unique neat polymer data points are
extracted while Ref. 28 used 672 data points to train a machine learning model. Thus the
amount of data extracted in the aforementioned cases is already comparable to or greater
than the amount of data being utilized to train property predictors in the literature. Note
that Table 4 accounts for only 39207 points which is 13 % of the total extracted material
property records. More details on the extracted material property records can be found in
Supplementary Information Section S4. The reader is also encouraged to explore this data
further through https://polymerscholar.org
General property class
We now analyze the properties extracted class-by-class in order to study their qualitative
trend. Figure 3 shows property data extracted for the ﬁve most common polymer classes in
our corpus (columns) and four most commonly reported properties (rows). Polymer classes
are groups of polymers that share certain chemical attributes such as functional groups.
These properties fall under the general property class as described in Table 4. The data
is extracted when a polymer of that polymer class is part of the formulation for which
12
Table 4: Number of material property records extracted for several key polymer properties
and ﬁgures of merit for certain applications
Property class
Property
Total number of
datapoints
neat
polymers/
blends/ compos-
ites
Estimated num-
ber
of
unique
neat polymers
General
Molecular Weight
9053
9053/-/-
2623
Glass Transition Tem-
perature
6155
4612/1036/507
1732
Electrical
conductiv-
ity
6030
3202/606/2222
1017
Tensile Strength
4382
2679/651/1052
926
Elongation at Break
1499
954/234/311
413
Polymer
Solar
Cells
Power Conversion Ef-
ﬁciency
3595
-
-
Open Circuit Voltage
1386
-
-
Short Circuit Current
1049
-
-
Fill Factor
966
-
-
Fuel Cells
Proton conductivity
1359
-
-
Areal Power Density
1235
-
-
Areal Current Density
295
-
-
Methanol
permeabil-
ity
174
-
-
Supercapacitors
Gravimetric
Energy
Density
1131
-
-
Gravimetric
Power
Density
898
-
-
a property is reported and does not necessarily correspond to homopolymers but instead
could correspond to blends or composites.
The polymer class is “inferred” through the
POLYMER CLASS entity type in our ontology and hence must be mentioned explicitly for
the materials record to be part of this plot. Several key trends are captured in this plot.
From the glass transition temperature (Tg ) row, we observe that polyamides and polyimides
typically have higher Tg than other polymer classes. Molecular weights unlike the other
properties reported are not intrinsic material properties but are determined by processing
parameters. The reported molecular weights are far more frequent at lower molecular weights
than at higher molecular weights; mimicking a power-law distribution rather than Gaussian
distribution. This is consistent with longer chains being more diﬃcult to synthesize than
13
Figure 3: Material property data extracted from abstracts for material systems that contain
a polymer from the polymer classes of polyurethane, polyimide, polyamide, polyester, and
polysiloxane in each corresponding column. These are the most commonly reported polymer
classes and the properties reported are the most commonly reported properties.
shorter chains. For electrical conductivity, we ﬁnd that polyimides have much lower reported
values which is consistent with them being widely used as electrical insulators. Also note
that polyimides have higher tensile strengths as compared to other polymer classes, which
is a well-known property of polyimides.29
Figure 4 shows mechanical properties measured for ﬁlms which demonstrates the trade-
oﬀbetween elongation at break and tensile strength that is well known for material systems
(often called the strength-ductility trade-oﬀdilemma). Materials with high tensile strength
tend to have a low elongation at break and conversely, materials with high elongation at break
tend to have low tensile strength.30 This known fact about the physics of material systems
14
emerges from an amalgamation of points independently gathered from diﬀerent papers. In
the next section we take a closer look at pairs of properties for various devices that reveal
similarly interesting trends.
Figure 4: Tensile Strength Vs Elongation at break for ﬁlms demonstrating the strength-
ductility trade-oﬀ
Knowledge extraction
Next, we consider a few device applications and co-relations between the most important
properties reported for these applications to demonstrate that non-trivial insights can be
obtained by analyzing this data. We consider three device classes namely polymer solar
cells, fuel cells, and supercapacitors and show that their known physics is being reproduced
by NLP extracted data. We ﬁnd documents speciﬁc to these applications by looking for
relevant keywords in the abstract such as ‘polymer solar cell’ or ‘fuel cell’. The total number
of data points for key ﬁgures of merit for each of these applications is given in Table 4.
15
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5: Co-relations between key properties extracted automatically from literature for
polymer solar cells a) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against short circuit current b) Power
Conversion Eﬃciency against ﬁll factor c) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against open circuit
voltage. Co-relations between key properties extracted manually from literature for polymer
solar cells d) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against short circuit current e) Power Conversion
Eﬃciency against ﬁll factor f) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against open circuit voltage.
Observe that the trends in this ﬁgure match well with NLP extracted data in Figure 5.
Reproduced here with permission from Ref. 31
16
Polymer solar cells
Polymer solar cells, in contrast to conventional silicon-based solar cells, have the beneﬁt of
lower processing cost but suﬀer from lower power conversion eﬃciencies. Improving their
power conversion eﬃciency by varying the materials used in the active layer of the cell is
an active area of research.32 Figure 5a)-c) shows the power conversion eﬃciency for polymer
solar cells plotted against the corresponding short circuit current, ﬁll factor and open circuit
voltage for NLP extracted data while Figure 5d)-f) shows the same pairs of properties for
data extracted manually as reported in Ref. 31. Each data point in Figure 5a)-c) is taken
from a particular paper and corresponds to a single material system. It is clear from Figure
5(c) that the peak power conversion eﬃciencies reported are around 16.71 % which is close to
the maximum known values reported in the literature33 as of this writing. The open-circuit
voltages (OCV) appear to be Gaussian distributed at around 0.85 V. Figure 5(a) shows a
linear trend between short circuit current and power conversion eﬃciency. It is clear that
the trends observed in Figure 5a)-c) for NLP extracted data are quite similar to the trends
observed from manually curated data in Figure 5d)-f).
Fuel Cells
Fuel cells are devices that convert a stream of fuel such as methanol or hydrogen and oxygen
to electricity. Water is one of the primary by-products of this conversion making this a
clean source of energy. A polymer membrane is typically used as a separating membrane
between the anode and cathodes in fuel cells.34 Improving the proton conductivity and
thermal stability of this membrane to produce fuel cells with higher power density is an
active area of research. Figure 6(a) and 6(b) show plots for fuel cells comparing pairs of key
performance metrics. The points on the power density versus current density plot (Figure
6(a)) lie along the line with a slope of 0.4 V which is the typical operating voltage of a fuel cell
under maximum current densities.35 Each point in this plot corresponds to a fuel cell system
extracted from the literature that typically reports variations in the polymer membrane.
17
Figure 6(b) illustrates yet another use-case of this capability, i.e., to ﬁnd material systems
lying in a desirable range of property values for the more speciﬁc case of direct methanol
fuel cells. For such fuel cell membranes, low methanol permeability is desirable in order to
prevent the methanol fuel from crossing the membrane and poisoning the cathode side.36
High proton conductivity is simultaneously desirable. The box shown in the ﬁgure illustrates
the desirable region and can thus be used to easily locate promising materials systems.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6: Co-relations between key properties extracted automatically from literature for
three diﬀerent applications a) Areal current Density Vs Areal Power Density for fuel cells.
the slope of the best bit line has a slope of 0.4V which is the typical operating voltage of a
fuel cell b) Proton Conductivity Vs Methanol permeability for fuel cells. The red box shows
the desirable region of the property space c) Up-to-date Ragone plot for supercapacitors
showing energy density Vs power density.
d) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against time
for fullerene acceptors and e) Power Conversion Eﬃciency against time for non-fullerene
acceptors f) Trend of number of datapoints extracted by our pipeline over time. The dashed
lines represent the number of papers published for each of the three applications in the plot
and correspond to the dashed Y-axis.
18
Trends across time
We show that known trends across time in polymer literature are also being reproduced in
our extracted data. A Ragone plot illustrates the trade-oﬀbetween energy and power density
for devices and supercapacitors are a class of devices that have high power density but low
energy density. Figure 6(c) illustrates the trade-oﬀbetween gravimetric energy density and
gravimetric power density for supercapacitors and is eﬀectively an up-to-date version of the
Ragone plot for supercapacitors.37 Historically, in most Ragone plots, the energy density
of supercapacitors ranges from 1 to 10 Wh/kg.38 However, this is no longer true as several
recent papers have demonstrated energy densities of up to 100 Wh/kg.39–41 As seen in Figure
6(c), the majority of points beyond an energy density of 10 Wh/kg are from the previous
two years, i.e., 2020 and 2021.
Figure 6(d) and Figure 6(e) shows the evolution of power conversion eﬃciency of polymer
solar cells for fullerene acceptors and non-fullerene acceptors. These are the two major classes
of acceptors which along with a polymer donor form the active layer of a bulk heterojunction
polymer solar cell. Observe that more papers with fullerene acceptors are found in earlier
years with the number dropping in recent years while non-fullerene acceptor based papers
have become more numerous with time. They also exhibit higher power conversion eﬃciencies
than their fullerene counterparts in recent years. This is a known trend within the domain
of polymer solar cells reported in Ref. 42. It is worth noting that the authors realized this
trend by studying the NLP extracted data and then looking for references to corroborate
this observation.
Figure 6(f) shows the number of datapoints extracted by our pipeline over time for the
various categories described in Table 4. Observe that the number of datapoints of the general
category have grown exponentially at a rate of 6% per year. Out of the three applications
considered in Figure 6(f), polymer solar cells have historically had the largest number of
papers as well as datapoints although that appears to be declining over the past few years.
Observe that there is a decline in the number of datapoints as well as the number of papers
19
in 2020 and 2021. This is likely attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic43 which appears to
have lead to a drop in the number of experimental papers published that form the input to
our pipeline.44
Discussion
A natural language processing pipeline that extracts material property records from abstracts
has been built and demonstrated. This however has some limitations in practice that we
describe below:
1. Materials property information is multi-modal and can be found in the text, tables,
and ﬁgures in the body of the paper. Co-referencing material entity mentions across
large spans of text and across ﬁgures and tables is a challenging problem. In addition to
this, relation extraction of material entities and property value pairs occurring across
sentences, are challenges that need to be addressed when extending this work from
abstracts to full-text.
2. The current ontology used consists of the most important entity types found in mate-
rials science literature. This makes it easier to combine material and property infor-
mation using heuristic rules but misses other information about the material property
record such as measurement methods or measurement conditions which in most cases
would inﬂuence the property value.
3. Converting polymer names to a structure (typically a SMILES string45) is also a bot-
tleneck to training downstream models as this must be done manually. Tools that can
reliably and robustly convert images of chemical structures found in the literature to
SMILES string are an area of future work for the community. The SMILES string so
generated can be used to generate a structural ﬁngerprint vector of the polymer which
in turn can serve as the input to a machine learning model. Expanding the scope of
20
this pipeline to images in the body of the paper would allow training downstream prop-
erty models without any additional curation for converting images to SMILES strings.
Training robust property predictors in this manner would in turn allow the continuous
and semi-automatic design of new materials, thus addressing a missing link in materials
informatics. An example of manually converting polymer names to SMILES strings
followed by the training of a property prediction model for glass transition temperature
is shown in Supplementary Information Section S5.
The automated extraction of material property records enables researchers to search
through literature with greater granularity and ﬁnd materials systems in the range of in-
terest. It also enables insights to be inferred by analyzing large amounts of literature that
would not otherwise be possible. As shown in the section “Knowledge extraction”, a diverse
range of applications were analyzed using this workﬂow to reveal non-trivial albeit known
insights. This is the ﬁrst work to build a general purpose capability to extract material
property records from published literature. ∼300, 000 material property records were ex-
tracted from ∼130, 000 polymer abstracts using this capability. Through our web interface
(https://polymerscholar.org) the community can conveniently locate material property
data published in abstracts. As part of this work, we also train and release MaterialsBERT,
a language model that is ﬁne-tuned on 2.4 million materials science abstracts using Pub-
MedBERT as the starting point and obtains the best F1 score across three of ﬁve materials
science NER data sets tested.
Growing the extracted material property data set further would require extending this
capability to the body of the paper. This would require more robust methods to associate
the entities extracted using named entity recognition. A few steps also remain in order to
utilize the extracted data to produce trained machine learning property prediction models.
The biggest bottleneck in the case of organic materials is obtaining SMILES strings for
material entities which can then be used to generate structural ﬁngerprints for downstream
machine learning models. There is also a wealth of additional information such as processing
21
conditions or measurement conditions that are not captured in our ontology. Addressing
these bottlenecks would enable automatic and continuous updates of materials databases
that can seamlessly power downstream property predictor machine learning models.
Methods
Corpus of papers
We have created a corpus of ∼2.4 million journal articles from the materials science domain.
The papers were downloaded from the APIs and websites from publishers such as Elsevier,
Wiley, Royal Society of Chemistry, American Chemical Society, Springer Nature, Taylor &
Francis, and the American Institute of Physics. The corpus used in this work is an expanded
version of the corpus described previously in Ref. 12. 750 abstracts of this corpus were
annotated and used to train an NER model. Furthermore, the trained NER model along
with heuristic rules is used to extract material property records from the abstracts of the
full corpus.
Preprocessing of documents
Because the documents in our corpus are HTML formatted, we stripped all HTML tags
to parse the plain text. Moreover, we replaced HTML superscripts and subscripts (<sup>
and <sub>) with plain text using the LaTeX convention of ˆ {} and
{}, respectively. This
is important in order to extract units of quantities as well as property values reported in
scientiﬁc notation. Property values recorded in this notation were converted back to ﬂoating-
point numbers downstream when the numeric value was to be recovered. We also mapped
characters such as spaces or special characters that have multiple Unicode representations but
have a similar appearance by creating a custom mapping. For tokenization, i.e., breaking
up text into units known as tokens which are used for downstream processing, we used
wordpiece tokenization which is the standard tokenization scheme used with BERT and
22
BERT-based models.1,46 For instance ‘The molecular weight of the result ##ant P ##LL
##A - rich polymer was enhanced .’ is what a sentence would look like post-tokenization.
The word ‘resultant’ and the polymer ‘PLLA’ have been broken into sub-words tokens. This
is necessary in order to tokenize arbitrary text inputs using a ﬁxed-sized vocabulary as a
larger vocabulary would increase the size of the model. Starting with a set of characters
(alphabets, numbers etc), certain combinations of characters are iteratively merged and
added to the vocabulary till the vocabulary reaches a certain ﬁxed size.47 The characters to
be merged are selected based on combinations that maximize the likelihood of the input text.
This typically breaks up words into meaningful subunits such as ‘resultant’ being separated
into ‘result’ and ‘##ant’ which reduces the size of the vocabulary. This does not always
happen though as seen with the example of ‘PLLA’.
Training MaterialsBERT
BERT-base, the original BERT model, was trained using an unlabeled corpus that included
English Wikipedia and the Books Corpus.48 The training objectives included using the
masked language modeling task, which masks a random subset of the input text and asks
the language model to predict it and the next sentence prediction task, which determines
for a given sentence pair whether one sentence follows the other in the training data.1 The
vocabulary of the tokenizer was ﬁxed at 30,000 tokens. It is known that a domain-speciﬁc
BERT encoder improves performance on downstream NLP tasks for that domain because
the vocabulary used for tokenization is more representative of the application of interest
and because the unlabeled text is also closer to the domain of interest resulting in ”better”
contextual embeddings.14 BERT-base was pre-trained from scratch using a general English
language corpus.15
Even though computationally expensive, pre-training NLP models from scratch has the
advantage of creating a model with a vocabulary that is customized for the domain of interest.
To give an idea of how resource-intensive this can be, note that RoBERTa, a similarly pre-
23
trained encoder used the computing power of 1024 V100 GPUs for one day.49 As this is not a
viable route for us, we ﬁne-tuned a model starting from previous checkpoints. The vocabulary
used while ﬁne-tuning a model in contrast remains the same as the underlying model which is
a compromise we must accept. We used PubMedBERT as our starting point and ﬁne-tuned
it using 2.4 million materials science abstracts.14 The PubMedBERT model used here is
itself pre-trained from scratch using the PubMed corpus (14 million abstracts from PubMed
as well as full text articles from PubMedCentral), using the BERT-base architecture. We
picked PubMedBERT as our starting point as its vocabulary is speciﬁc to the biomedical
domain which overlaps with materials science as material entities are frequently mentioned
in biomedical papers. During ﬁne-tuning, the model weights of the checkpoint to be used
are loaded and training is continued using the same training objectives as the model that
is ﬁne-tuned but using the unlabeled text from the ﬁne-tuning corpus as the input. The
hyperparameters used during ﬁne-tuning were identical to those used to train PubMedBERT.
We used the ”Transformers” library for ﬁne-tuning PubMedBERT.50 A similar strategy is
employed in ChemBERT,16 ClinicalBert,51 and FinBERT.52 We ﬁne-tuned PubMedBERT
for 3 epochs which took 90 hours on four RTX6000 16 GB GPU’s to obtain MaterialsBERT.
Material property records extraction
The trained NER model is one component of a system that is used to extract material
property records. Each component is explained below:
1. Train NER model: A subset of our corpus of papers is selected and annotated with a
given ontology to train an NER model (described in the Section “NER model”). This
model is used to generate entity labels for abstracts in the corpus.
2. Pick documents with ‘poly’: The corpus of abstracts is down-selected by searching
for the string ‘poly’ in the abstract as a proxy for polymer relevant documents.
3. Run NER model: The NER model previously trained is used for predicting entity
24
labels on each polymer relevant document obtained from the previous step.
4. Abstract ﬁltering: As not all polymer abstracts contain material property informa-
tion, the output of the NER is used as a heuristic to ﬁlter out those that do. Only
abstracts with speciﬁc material entities, i.e., POLYMER, POLYMER FAMILY and
MONOMER as well as the PROPERTY NAME and PROPERTY VALUE tags are
allowed through this stage. This acts as a second ﬁlter to locate polymer relevant
documents.
5. Entity extraction: The material entities, (PROPERTY NAME, PROPERTY VALUE)
and MATERIAL AMOUNT entities are extracted and processed separately.
6. Co-reference material entities: This step is applied to co-reference all mentions
of the same material entity. A common example of this is when a material is men-
tioned next to its abbreviation. We used the abbreviation detection system in Chem-
DataExtractor3 to ﬁnd material entity abbreviation pairs. In addition, we co-reference
material entities that are within a Levenshtein distance53 of one. Co-referencing is a
tractable problem in abstracts compared to full-text papers as there are no long-range
dependencies and typically no anaphora resolution is required.54
7. Normalizing polymer names: Polymers can have several diﬀerent variations in
names referring to the same chemical entity. In this step, we normalize these variations
to the most commonly occurring name for that particular polymer.
For instance,
‘poly(ethylene)’ and ‘poly-ethylene’ occurring in diﬀerent abstracts are both normalized
to ‘polyethylene’. This is done using a dictionary lookup on a dataset of polymer name
clusters that were normalized using the workﬂow described in Ref. 26. Note that we do
not normalize all polymer names but only the ones which are included in our dictionary.
In practice, this includes most commonly occurring polymers that have multiple names
in the literature.
25
8. Extract Property Value pairs: The PROPERTY NAME and PROPERTY VALUE
tag are associated by co-occurrence within a context window. The numeric value of the
property is separated from the units using regular expressions and all parsed property
values are converted to a standard set of units. The unit used is the most commonly
reported unit for that particular property. Any errors reported with the numeric value
are also parsed using regular expressions.
9. Extract Material amounts: Entities with the MATERIAL AMOUNT tag are ex-
tracted and the closest material entity within a context window is associated with
it.
10. Relation extraction: In order to obtain a material property record, it is necessary
to associate the material entities and the property value pair that correspond to a
single record.
This problem has been addressed in the literature using supervised
methods.55,56 However, the annotation process for relation labeling is time-intensive
and hence we employ heuristics in this work to obtain relations between entities. To
associate material entities with property value pairs, we associate the closest material
entity tagged in the same sentence as the property value pair. If no such material
entity is found then all the material entities mentioned in the abstract are associated
with the property value pair. This is because, most commonly, an abstract mentions a
major material system reported in the paper and reports its measured property values.
This step is reasonable in abstracts, which report this information compactly, using
heuristic rules. In contrast, the body of the paper would require coreferencing with
information found in tables and ﬁgures to extract material property records.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Oﬃce of Naval Research through grants N00014-19-1-2103
and N00014-20-1-2175.
26
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data and model availability
The material property data mentioned in this paper can be explored through https://www.
polymerscholar.org
References
(1) Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
2018,
(2) Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser,  L.;
Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems. 2017; pp 5998–6008.
(3) Swain, M. C.; Cole, J. M. ChemDataExtractor: a toolkit for automated extraction of
chemical information from the scientiﬁc literature. Journal of chemical information and
modeling 2016, 56, 1894–1904.
(4) Rockt¨aschel, T.; Weidlich, M.; Leser, U. ChemSpot: a hybrid system for chemical
named entity recognition. Bioinformatics 2012, 28, 1633–1640.
(5) Hawizy, L.; Jessop, D. M.; Adams, N.; Murray-Rust, P. ChemicalTagger: A tool for
semantic text-mining in chemistry. Journal of cheminformatics 2011, 3, 17.
(6) Court, C. J.; Cole, J. M. Auto-generated materials database of Curie and N´eel temper-
atures via semi-supervised relationship extraction. Scientiﬁc data 2018, 5, 1–12.
27
(7) Court, C. J.; Jain, A.; Cole, J. M. Inverse Design of Materials That Exhibit the Mag-
netocaloric Eﬀect by Text-Mining of the Scientiﬁc Literature and Generative Deep
Learning. Chemistry of Materials 2021, 33, 7217–7231.
(8) Tchoua, R. B.; Qin, J.; Audus, D. J.; Chard, K.; Foster, I. T.; de Pablo, J. Blending
education and polymer science: Semiautomated creation of a thermodynamic property
database. Journal of chemical education 2016, 93, 1561–1568.
(9) Tchoua, R. B.; Ajith, A.; Hong, Z.; Ward, L. T.; Chard, K.; Belikov, A.; Audus, D. J.;
Patel, S.; de Pablo, J. J.; Foster, I. T. Creating training data for scientiﬁc named entity
recognition with minimal human eﬀort. International Conference on Computational
Science. 2019; pp 398–411.
(10) Friedl, J. E. Mastering regular expressions; ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2006.
(11) Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Jensen, Z.; Olivetti, E.; G´omez-Bombarelli, R. Graph similarity
drives zeolite diﬀusionless transformations and intergrowth. Nature materials 2019,
18, 1177–1181.
(12) Shetty, P.; Ramprasad, R. Automated knowledge extraction from polymer literature
using natural language processing. iScience 2020, 24, 101922.
(13) Tshitoyan, V.; Dagdelen, J.; Weston, L.; Dunn, A.; Rong, Z.; Kononova, O.; Pers-
son, K. A.; Ceder, G.; Jain, A. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge
from materials science literature. Nature 2019, 571, 95–98.
(14) Gu, Y.; Tinn, R.; Cheng, H.; Lucas, M.; Usuyama, N.; Liu, X.; Naumann, T.; Gao, J.;
Poon, H. Domain-speciﬁc language model pretraining for biomedical natural language
processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15779 2020,
(15) Lee, J.; Yoon, W.; Kim, S.; Kim, D.; Kim, S.; So, C. H.; Kang, J. BioBERT: a pre-
28
trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioin-
formatics 2020, 36, 1234–1240.
(16) Guo, J.; Ibanez-Lopez, A. S.; Gao, H.; Quach, V.; Coley, C. W.; Jensen, K. F.; Barzi-
lay, R. Automated Chemical Reaction Extraction from Scientiﬁc Literature. Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 2021,
(17) Weston, L.; Tshitoyan, V.; Dagdelen, J.; Kononova, O.; Trewartha, A.; Persson, K. A.;
Ceder, G.; Jain, A. Named entity recognition and normalization applied to large-scale
information extraction from the materials science literature. Journal of chemical infor-
mation and modeling 2019, 59, 3692–3702.
(18) Fleiss, J. L. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological
bulletin 1971, 76, 378.
(19) Tabassum, J.; Lee, S.; Xu, W.; Ritter, A. WNUT-2020 task 1 overview: Extracting
entities and relations from wet lab protocols. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14576 2020,
(20) Liang, C.; Yu, Y.; Jiang, H.; Er, S.; Wang, R.; Zhao, T.; Zhang, C. Bond: Bert-
assisted open-domain named entity recognition with distant supervision. Proceedings
of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining. 2020; pp 1054–1064.
(21) Trewartha, A.; Walker, N.; Huo, H.; Lee, S.; Cruse, K.; Dagdelen, J.; Dunn, A.; Pers-
son, K. A.; Ceder, G.; Jain, A. Quantifying the advantage of domain-speciﬁc pre-
training on named entity recognition tasks in materials science. Patterns 2022, 3,
100488.
(22) Huang, Z.; Xu, W.; Yu, K. Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for sequence tagging.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01991 2015,
29
(23) Krallinger, M.; Rabal, O.; Leitner, F.; Vazquez, M.; Salgado, D.; Lu, Z.; Leaman, R.;
Lu, Y.; Ji, D.; Lowe, D. M., et al. The CHEMDNER corpus of chemicals and drugs
and its annotation principles. Journal of cheminformatics 2015, 7, 1–17.
(24) Mysore, S.; Jensen, Z.; Kim, E.; Huang, K.; Chang, H.-S.; Strubell, E.; Flanigan, J.;
McCallum, A.; Olivetti, E. The materials science procedural text corpus: Annotat-
ing materials synthesis procedures with shallow semantic structures. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.06939 2019,
(25) Otsuka, S.; Kuwajima, I.; Hosoya, J.; Xu, Y.; Yamazaki, M. PoLyInfo:
Polymer
database for polymeric materials design. 2011 International Conference on Emerging
Intelligent Data and Web Technologies. 2011; pp 22–29.
(26) Shetty, P.; Ramprasad, R. Machine-Guided Polymer Knowledge Extraction Using Nat-
ural Language Processing: The Example of Named Entity Normalization. Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 2021, 61, 5377–5385.
(27) Palomba, D.; Vazquez, G. E.; D´ıaz, M. F. Prediction of elongation at break for linear
polymers. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 2014, 139, 121–131.
(28) Doan Tran, H.; Kim, C.; Chen, L.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Batra, R.; Venkatram, S.;
Kamal, D.; Lightstone, J. P.; Gurnani, R.; Shetty, P., et al. Machine-learning predictions
of polymer properties with Polymer Genome. Journal of Applied Physics 2020, 128,
171104.
(29) Zhang, M.; Niu, H.; Wu, D. Polyimide ﬁbers with high strength and high modulus:
preparation, structures, properties, and applications. Macromolecular rapid communi-
cations 2018, 39, 1800141.
(30) Wang, C.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, L.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, L. Evading the strength–ductility trade-
oﬀdilemma of rigid thermosets by incorporating triple cross-links of varying strengths.
Polymer Chemistry 2020, 11, 6281–6287.
30
(31) Nagasawa, S.; Al-Naamani, E.; Saeki, A. Computer-aided screening of conjugated poly-
mers for organic solar cell: classiﬁcation by random forest. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 2018, 9, 2639–2646.
(32) Zhang, Z.-G.; Li, Y. Polymerized small-molecule acceptors for high-performance all-
polymer solar cells. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2021, 60, 4422–4433.
(33) Zhang, M.; Ma, X.; Zhang, H.; Zhu, L.; Xu, L.; Zhang, F.; Tsang, C.-S.; Lee, L. Y. S.;
Woo, H. Y.; He, Z., et al. Metallated terpolymer donors with strongly absorbing irid-
ium complex enables polymer solar cells with 16.71% eﬃciency. Chemical Engineering
Journal 2022, 430, 132832.
(34) Abdelkareem, M. A.; Elsaid, K.; Wilberforce, T.; Kamil, M.; Sayed, E. T.; Olabi, A.
Environmental aspects of fuel cells: A review. Science of The Total Environment 2021,
752, 141803.
(35) Larminie, J.; Dicks, A.; McDonald, M. S. Fuel cell systems explained; J. Wiley Chich-
ester, UK, 2003; Vol. 2.
(36) Shaari, N.; Kamarudin, S.; Basri, S.; Shyuan, L.; Masdar, M.; Nordin, D. Enhanced pro-
ton conductivity and methanol permeability reduction via sodium alginate electrolyte-
sulfonated graphene oxide bio-membrane. Nanoscale research letters 2018, 13, 1–16.
(37) Catenaro, E.; Rizzo, D. M.; Onori, S. Experimental analysis and analytical modeling
of enhanced-Ragone plot. Applied Energy 2021, 291, 116473.
(38) Shown, I.; Ganguly, A.; Chen, L.-C.; Chen, K.-H. Conducting polymer-based ﬂexible
supercapacitor. Energy Science & Engineering 2015, 3, 2–26.
(39) Uppugalla, S.; Srinivasan, P. Polyaniline nanoﬁbers and porous Ni [OH] 2 sheets coated
carbon fabric for high performance super capacitor. Journal of Applied Polymer Science
2019, 136, 48042.
31
(40) Li, Y.; Yang, Y.; Zhou, J.; Lin, S.; Xu, Z.; Xing, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Feng, J.; Mu, Z.;
Li, P., et al. Coupled and decoupled hierarchical carbon nanomaterials toward high-
energy-density quasi-solid-state Na-Ion hybrid energy storage devices. Energy Storage
Materials 2019, 23, 530–538.
(41) Javed, M. S.; Lei, H.; Shah, H. U.; Asim, S.; Raza, R.; Mai, W. Achieving high rate and
high energy density in an all-solid-state ﬂexible asymmetric pseudocapacitor through
the synergistic design of binder-free 3D ZnCo 2 O 4 nano polyhedra and 2D layered Ti
3 C 2 T x-MXenes. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2019, 7, 24543–24556.
(42) Fu, H.; Wang, Z.; Sun, Y. Polymer donors for high-performance non-fullerene organic
solar cells. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2019, 58, 4442–4453.
(43) Ciotti, M.; Ciccozzi, M.; Terrinoni, A.; Jiang, W.-C.; Wang, C.-B.; Bernardini, S. The
COVID-19 pandemic. Critical reviews in clinical laboratory sciences 2020, 57, 365–388.
(44) Gao, J.; Yin, Y.; Myers, K. R.; Lakhani, K. R.; Wang, D. Potentially long-lasting eﬀects
of the pandemic on scientists. Nature communications 2021, 12, 1–6.
(45) Weininger, D.; Weininger, A.; Weininger, J. L. SMILES. 2. Algorithm for generation
of unique SMILES notation. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences
1989, 29, 97–101.
(46) Wu, Y.; Schuster, M.; Chen, Z.; Le, Q. V.; Norouzi, M.; Macherey, W.; Krikun, M.;
Cao, Y.; Gao, Q.; Macherey, K., et al. Google’s neural machine translation sys-
tem:
Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144 2016,
(47) Song, X.; Salcianu, A.; Song, Y.; Dopson, D.; Zhou, D. Linear-Time WordPiece Tok-
enization. arXiv e-prints 2020, arXiv–2012.
32
(48) Zhu, Y.; Kiros, R.; Zemel, R.; Salakhutdinov, R.; Urtasun, R.; Torralba, A.; Fidler, S.
Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision. 2015; pp 19–27.
(49) Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.; Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettle-
moyer, L.; Stoyanov, V. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 2019,
(50) Wolf, T. et al. Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing. Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations. Online, 2020; pp 38–45.
(51) Huang, K.; Altosaar, J.; Ranganath, R. Clinicalbert: Modeling clinical notes and pre-
dicting hospital readmission. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05342 2019,
(52) Araci, D. Finbert: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.10063 2019,
(53) Levenshtein, V. I. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.
Soviet physics doklady. 1966; pp 707–710.
(54) Mitkov, R. Anaphora resolution; Routledge, 2014.
(55) Wang, L.; Cao, Z.; De Melo, G.; Liu, Z. Relation classiﬁcation via multi-level attention
cnns. Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2016; pp 1298–1307.
(56) Zhou, W.; Lin, H.; Lin, B. Y.; Wang, Z.; Du, J.; Neves, L.; Ren, X. Nero: A neural rule
grounding framework for label-eﬃcient relation extraction. Proceedings of The Web
Conference 2020. 2020; pp 2166–2176.
33
(57) Williams, C. K.; Rasmussen, C. E. Gaussian processes for machine learning; MIT press
Cambridge, MA, 2006; Vol. 2.
(58) Chai, T.; Draxler, R. R. Root mean square error (RMSE) or mean absolute error
(MAE). Geoscientiﬁc Model Development Discussions 2014, 7, 1525–1534.
34
Supplementary Information
S1. Annotation guidelines
We annotated abstracts that had material property information and hence the entity types
deﬁned in our ontology. We only labeled material entities that were explicitly part of the
material formulation for which a property value pair was reported in the abstract. This was
done in order to encode some notion of jointly extracting entities and relationships in the
model through minimal annotation eﬀort.
1. POLYMER: All polymer material entities that occur in a material formulation for
which property values are reported in the abstract should be labeled. Abbreviations
when found next to it in brackets should also be labeled (excluding brackets). This
includes homopolymers, copolymers and blends.
This should refer to a polymer name rather than a generic polymer family. If annotating
multiple polymer entries separated by a forward slash e.g. polyethylene/polypropylene,
tag each material entity on either side of the slash separately. End-functionalization
of a polymer can be omitted from the labeled token.
2. POLYMER FAMILY: All polymeric material entities that refer only to polymer fam-
ilies (e.g.: polyamide, polyimide, polybenzimadozole etc) that occur in a material
formulation for which property values are reported in the abstract should be labeled.
Abbreviations when found next to it in brackets should also be labeled (excluding
brackets).
3. ORGANIC: Label all organic compounds that are not polymers and are used in the
material formulation for which property values are reported. These could be organic
molecules used as plasticizers, crosslinkers, blended with the polymer or as grafts.
35
These are explicitly a part of the material formulation and the extracted record should
include this information.
4. MONOMER: Label all monomer repeat units for polymers for which property values
are reported in the abstract. These are being annotated separately as they are not
explicitly part of the material formulation of interest but are nevertheless commonly
reported in abstracts. It is hence necessary to distinguish between ORGANIC additives
and monomers. Look for contextual cues such as ‘synthesized from’, ‘prepared from’
or the presence of the word monomer.
5. INORGANIC: Label all inorganic materials (such as SiO2, TiO2 etc) explicitly used in
a material formulation.
6. MATERIAL AMT: Numerical quantity + unit denoting the amount of a material like
additive or blend for which a property value is reported. This is typically wt % or mol.
7. PROPERTY NAME: Name of property measured. Label properties for which a cor-
responding numeric value is reported in the abstract. Label the property name and
abbreviation in bracket (if present) separately.
8. PROPERTY VALUE: Numeric value + unit for a reported PROPERTY NAME.
S2.
NER Datasets used for testing BERT-based en-
coders
1. ChemDNER:23 This is a dataset of 10,000 PubMed abstracts annotated for chem-
ical entity mentions using 7 diﬀerent entity types such as ABBREVIATION, SYS-
TEMATIC, FORMULA, TRIVIAL, FAMILY, MULTIPLE, and IDENTIFIERS. The
dataset is split into 3500 abstracts for train, 3500 validation abstracts, and 3000 test
abstracts.
36
2. Inorganic Synthesis recipes:24 This is a dataset of 230 inorganic synthesis para-
graphs annotated using 21 entity types that are relevant in the context of materials
synthesis. 15 paragraphs each are used for validation and testing and the remaining
200 paragraphs are used for training.
3. Inorganic Abstracts:17 This is a dataset of 800 abstracts related to inorganic materi-
als in which 8 diﬀerent entity types related to inorganic materials are annotated namely,
inorganic material (MAT), symmetry/phase label (SPL), sample descriptor (DSC),
material property (PRO), material application (APL), synthesis method (SMT), and
characterization method (CMT). The dataset is split as 640/80/80 for training, vali-
dation, and testing respectively.
4. ChemRxnExtractor:16 This is a dataset of 329 organic synthesis paragraphs in which
the product of the synthesis is labeled using the BIO scheme. The dataset is split into
251, 41, and 37 paragraphs in the train, validation, and test set respectively.
S3. Performance of MaterialsBERT on annotated poly-
mer abstracts NER dataset
The performance of the various entity types for MaterialsBERT, the best-performing model
along with the distribution of various entity types in the annotated dataset of polymer
abstracts is shown in Table S1. It is clear that there is a positive correlation between the
number of occurrences of each entity type and the performance of the corresponding entity
type. The ORGANIC entity type has a low F1 score likely because it is diﬃcult to distinguish
between MONOMER and ORGANIC entity types. The POLYMER FAMILY entity type
has similarities with the POLYMER entity type which likely lowers the F1 score for this
entity type as well.
37
Table S1: Performance of an NER model using MaterialsBERT as the encoder across various
entity types in the ontology used in this work on the test set of polymer abstracts. Values
are reported in %
Entity type
Precision
Recall
F1
Occurrence
POLYMER
75.9
83.8
79.6
8814
PROPERTY VALUE
73.0
80.0
76.4
5749
PROPERTY NAME
72.6
74.7
73.6
4486
ORGANIC
34.7
21.0
26.2
2173
MONOMER
67.1
77.6
72.0
2073
POLYMER FAMILY
41.6
52.1
46.2
1476
INORGANIC
40.2
64.7
49.6
1261
MATERIAL AMOUNT
59.1
83.9
79.6
1140
S4. Details of extracted data
The number of entities extracted (accounting for variations in case) from the ∼300, 000
material property records is shown in Table S2. Note that these material entities are not
unique materials as for instance, ‘silica’ and ‘SiO2’ would be counted as separate entities but
are the same material. Similarly for property names, ‘Tg ’ and ‘glass transition temperature’
are counted as separate entities, even though they correspond to the same property.
Table S2: Number of entities extracted from the corpus of polymer relevant abstracts for
key entity types from the ontology used in this work
Entity type
Number of extracted entities
POLYMER
74396
MONOMER
50000
INORGANIC
26114
POLYMER FAMILY
5109
ORGANIC
2769
PROPERTY NAME
33642
The histogram of number of records extracted for each property is shown in Figure S1.
Only property entities with at least 10 material property records are shown in this plot.
Observe that the number of material property records appears to be power law distributed
with a small number of properties having a large number of records associated with them
38
Figure S1: Histogram of number of material property records for each property entity. The
threshold represents the cut-oﬀabove which the number of material property records is
reported for each property in Table S3
while the majority of property entities only have a small number of associated records.
We threshold this plot at 500 material property records and report the number of records
associated with all properties above this threshold in Table S3. Note that common variations
in names for each property such as abbreviations (e.g. IEC for ion exchange capacity) or
plural forms (e.g. activation energies) were accounted for in order to compute the number
of records. These account for a total of 111279 records, i.e., 37 % of ∼300, 000 material
property records.
Note that device properties such as power conversion eﬃciency, open
circuit voltage etc listed in Table 5 of the main paper are listed in Table S3 as well but are
more in number as they are not restricted to any particular application.
Index
Property name
Number of material property records
1
Molecular weight
9053
2
Power conversion eﬃciency
8096
3
Glass transition temperature
6155
4
Electrical conductivity
6030
39
5
Ionic conductivity
4933
6
Speciﬁc capacitance
4916
7
Tensile strength
4382
8
Number average molecular weight
4096
9
Water contact angle
3932
10
Discharge capacity
3632
11
Polydispersity index
3087
12
Speciﬁc surface area
2912
13
Gravimetric power density
2816
14
Adsorption capacity
2555
15
Activation energy
2408
16
Open circuit voltage
2343
17
Band gap
2245
18
Viscosity
2084
19
Youngs modulus
1904
20
Gravimetric energy density
1765
21
Short circuit current
1699
22
Melting temperature
1615
23
Sensitivity
1602
24
Dielectric constant
1534
25
Elongation at break
1499
26
Thermal Decomposition Temperature
1479
27
Fill factor
1431
28
Thermal conductivity
1429
29
Water ﬂux
1371
30
Density
1354
40
31
Current density
1337
32
Limiting Oxygen Index
1146
33
Transmittance
1135
34
Ion exchange capacity
1034
35
Porosity
1019
36
External quantum eﬃciency
915
37
Hole mobility
846
38
Capacity retention
843
39
Luminance
842
40
Compressive strength
814
41
Zeta potential
784
42
Sheet resistance
768
43
Lower critical solution temperature
712
44
CO2 permeability
685
45
Resistivity
668
46
Coulombic eﬃciency
632
47
Crystallization temperature
605
48
Refractive index
576
49
Separation factor
543
50
Impact strength
512
51
Highest occupied molecular orbital
506
Table S3: The number of material property records extracted for the most common properties
reported in the literature. This is not a complete list of extracted properties.
41
S5. Training Machine learning models using literature
extracted data
(a)
(b)
Figure S2: Glass Transition Temperature data a) Parity plot for machine learning model
trained using literature extracted glass transition temperature data, b) Parity plot for ma-
chine learning model trained using curated glass transition temperature data with the same
number of points as used in a). The test set in both cases is drawn from curated data.
Observe that the test RMSE in both cases is similar
In addition to the qualitative trends shown in the main paper that demonstrate the
utility of our workﬂow, we also demonstrate how the data collected through our workﬂow
can be used as inputs to machine learning models. We trained gaussian process regression
models with a Matern kernel57 to predict Tg using the material property data extracted from
our workﬂow. SMILES strings45 were used to encode the structure of the polymer. The
SMILES strings for a randomly selected subset of NLP extracted neat polymers Tg records
were added manually. The SMILES string was used as the input to ﬁngerprint the polymer
and the ﬁngerprint vector along with the literature extracted Tg value was the input to the
machine learning model. The polymer SMILES string is converted to a feature vector using
structural descriptors described elsewhere.28 The feature vector consists of atomic triples,
42
block level features, i.e., pre-deﬁned fragments such as benzene rings and ketone groups, and
chain level characteristics that are speciﬁc to a polymer such as length of longest side-chain,
etc. This ﬁngerprinting scheme leads to up to 600 non-zero ﬁngerprint components.
Figure S2(a) shows the parity plot for a machine learning model to predict glass transition
temperature trained using data extracted from literature. For comparison, we also trained a
model using the same number of data points but with polymers and corresponding Tg values
randomly sampled from a curated Tg data set reported in Ref. 28 (Figure S2(b)). The test
set is the same for both cases and is taken from the curated data set. There is an 80-20
split between the train and test set in both cases. The root mean squared error (RMSE)58
reported here on the test set is higher than the RMSE of the best Tg models trained on larger
data sets as reported in Ref. 28 (∼20 K). However, the test RMSE of the 2 plots in Figure
S2 is comparable, demonstrating that data extracted from literature can be used directly to
train machine learning models of properties, without manual curation. Thus, despite being
noisy, NLP extracted data in the context of organics and polymers can be used to train
machine learning models which is important for NLP extracted data to be used at scale in
materials informatics.
43
