Title: Performance Evaluation of a Natural Language Processing approach applied in White Collar crime investigation
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00992v1
--------------------------------------------------

Performance Evaluation of a Natural Language 
Processing approach applied in White Collar crime 
investigation 
Maarten Banerveld2, Nhien-An Le-Khac1 and M-Tahar Kechadi1 
1School of Computer Science & Informatics, University College Dublin 
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland 
{an.lekhac,tahar.kechadi}@ucd.ie 
 
2School of Computer Science & Informatics, University College Dublin 
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland 
maarten@imeel.net 
Abstract. In today’s world we are confronted with increasing amounts of 
information every day coming from a large variety of sources. People and 
corporations are producing data on a large scale, and since the rise of the 
internet, e-mail and social media the amount of produced data has grown 
exponentially. From a law enforcement perspective we have to deal with these 
huge amounts of data when a criminal investigation is launched against an 
individual or company. Relevant questions need to be answered like who 
committed the crime, who were involved, what happened and on what time, 
who were communicating and about what? Not only the amount of available 
data to investigate has increased enormously, but also the complexity of this 
data has increased. When these communication patterns need to be combined 
with for instance a seized financial administration or corporate document shares 
a complex investigation problem arises. Recently, criminal investigators face a 
huge challenge when evidence of a crime needs to be found in the Big Data 
environment where they have to deal with large and complex datasets especially 
in financial and fraud investigations. To tackle this problem, a financial and 
fraud investigation unit of a European country has developed a new tool named 
LES that uses Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to help criminal 
investigators handle large amounts of textual information in a more efficient 
and faster way. In this paper, we present briefly this tool and we focus on the 
evaluation its performance in terms of the requirements of forensic 
investigation: speed, smarter and easier for investigators. In order to evaluate 
this LES tool, we use different performance metrics. We also show 
experimental results of our evaluation with large and complex datasets from 
real-world application. 
Keywords: big data, natural language processing, financial and fraud investiga-
tion, Hadoop/MapReduce 
1 
Introduction 
Since the start of the digital information age to the rise of the Internet, the amount of 
digital data has dramatically increased. Indeed, we are dealing with many challenges 
when it comes to data. Some data is structured and stored in a traditional relational 
database, while other data, including documents, customer service records, and even 
pictures and videos, is unstructured. Organizations also have to consider new sources 
of data generated by new devices such as sensors. Moreover, there are other new key 
data sources, such as social media, click-stream data generated from website interac-
tions, etc. The availability and adoption of newer, more powerful mobile devices, 
coupled with ubiquitous access to global networks will drive the creation of more new 
sources for data. As a consequence, we are living in the Big Data era. Big Data can be 
defined as any kind of datasets that has three important characteristics: huge volumes, 
very high velocity and very wide variety of data. Obviously, handling and analysing 
large, complex, and velocity data have always offered the greatest challenges as well 
as benefits for organisations of all sizes. Global competitions, dynamic markets, and 
rapid development in the information and communication technologies are some of 
the major challenges in today’s industry. Briefly, we have had a deluge of data from 
not only science fields but also industry, commerce and digital forensics fields. Alt-
hough the amount of data available to us is constantly increasing, our ability to pro-
cess it becomes more and more difficult. This is especially true for the criminal inves-
tigation today. For instance, a criminal investigation department CID of the Customs 
Force in a European country has to analyse around 3.5 Terabyte of data (per case) to 
combat fiscal, financial-economic and commodity fraud safeguards the integrity of 
the financial system and to combat also organized crime, especially its financial com-
ponent. 
Actually, CID staff focuses on the criminal prosecution of: Fiscal fraud (including 
VAT/carousel fraud, excise duty fraud or undisclosed foreign assets); Financial-
economic fraud (insider trading, bankruptcy fraud, property fraud, money laundering, 
etc.); Fraud involving specific goods (strategic goods and sanctions, raw materials for 
drugs, intellectual property, etc.). Seizing the business accounts is usually the first 
step in the investigation. The fraud must be proved by means of the business accounts 
(among other things). Investigation officers not only investigate paper accounts, but 
also digital records such as computer hard disks or information on (corporate) net-
works. The fraud investigation unit uses special software to investigate these digital 
records. In this way we gain an insight into the fraud and how it was committed. In-
terviewing or interrogation of a suspect is an invariable part of the investigation. A 
suspect can make a statement, but may also refuse this. In any case, the suspect must 
be given the opportunity to explain the facts of which he is suspected.  During their 
activities the investigation officers can rely on the Information-gathering teams for 
information and advice. These teams gather, process and distribute relevant infor-
mation and conduct analyses. With digital investigations we respond to the rapid digi-
talization of society. This digitalization has led to new fraud patterns and methods, 
and all kinds of swindle via the Internet. In order to trace these fraudsters we use the 
same digital possibilities as they do. 
As the CID handles around 450 criminal investigations every year, the amount of 
(digital-) data that is collected increases year over year. A specific point of attention is 
that the CID operates in another spectrum of investigations as ‘regular’ police de-
partments. The types of crime that the CID needs to investigate mostly revolve around 
written facts. So the evidence that is collected by the CID by default contains of large 
amounts of textual data. One can imagine how much textual data a multinational firm 
produces, and how many e-mails are being sent in such companies. A specific chal-
lenge for law enforcement departments that are involved with fraud investigations is: 
how can we find the evidence we need in these huge amounts of complex data. Be-
cause of the enormity of the large and complex data sets the CID seizes, it is neces-
sary need to look for new techniques that make computers perform some analysis 
tasks, and ideally assist investigators by finding evidence. Recently, CID has devel-
oped a new investigation platform called LES.  This tool is based on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) techniques [1] such as Named Entity Extraction [2] and In-
formation Retrieval (IR) [3] in combining with a visualization model to improve the 
analysis of a large and complex dataset. 
In this paper, we evaluate the performance of LES tool because there are very few 
NLP tools that are being exploited to tackle very large and complex datasets in the 
context of investigation on white-collar crimes.  Indeed, theoretical understanding of 
the techniques that are used is necessary. This theoretical review can help explain the 
usage of these new techniques in criminal investigations, and pinpoint what work 
needs to be done before the most effective implementation and usage is possible. The 
rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 shows the background of this re-
search including related work in this domain. We present briefly LES tool and evalua-
tion methods in Section 3. We apply our method to analysis the performance of LES 
tool on a distributed platform in Section 4. Finally, we conclude and discuss on future 
work in Section 5. 
2 
Background 
2.1 
Natural Language Processing in Law Enforcement 
NLP implemented techniques can be very useful in a law enforcement environment, 
especially when unstructured and large amounts of data need to be processed by crim-
inal investigators. Already commonly used techniques like Optical Character Recog-
nition (OCR) [4] and machine translations [5] can be successfully used in criminal 
investigations. For example OCR is used in fraud investigations to automatically 
transform unstructured invoices and other financial papers into searchable and aggre-
gated spread sheets. In the past more difficult to implement techniques like automatic 
summarization of texts, information extraction, entity extraction and relationship ex-
traction [1] are now coming into reach of law enforcement and intelligence agencies. 
This is manly so because of the decline in cost per processing unit and the fact that 
these techniques need a large amount of processing power to be able to used effec-
tively. 
To zoom in on this a little further: for example the extraction of entities out of large 
amounts of text can be useful when it is unclear what persons or other entities are 
involved in a criminal investigation. Combined with a visual representation of the 
present relations between the extracted entities, this analysis can provide insight in the 
corresponding (social-) networks between certain entities. Indeed, the usage of NLP 
techniques to ‘predict’ criminality, for example grooming by possible paedophiles [6] 
or trying to determine when hit-and-run crimes may happen by analysing Twitter 
messages [7] is possible today. A movement from single available NLP techniques 
like text summarization, text translation, information and relationship extraction to-
wards more intelligent NLP based implementations for law enforcement like crime 
prediction, crime prevention, criminal intelligence gathering, (social-) network analy-
sis and anomaly detection can be observed in literature. Also theoretical frameworks 
and models in the field of ‘forensic linguistics’ [8] are proposed which can be used 
behind the technical implementation of NLP techniques in criminal investigations. 
When (commercial-) solutions using these techniques come available, this could 
lead to more extensive NLP based law enforcement systems that can handle Crime 
prediction, deliver automated intelligence on criminal activities, analyse the behaviour 
of subjects on social networks and detect anomalies in texts or other data.  The output 
of these systems is ideally presented in a visual comprehensible way so the criminal 
investigator can quickly assess the data and take appropriate action. 
2.2 
Big Data in criminal investigations 
No strict definition can be given for the concept Big Data [9] as such, but what can be 
concluded is that Big Data at least has some common elements and that Big does not 
necessarily mean large volumes. Complexity and the inner structure of the data are 
also very important to determine if a dataset belongs to the concept of Big Data or 
not. Another term that is commonly used when people talk about ‘Big Data’ is ‘Un-
structured Data ’. As law enforcement we are confronted with at least parts of the Big 
Data problem; for instance in fraud investigations the fraud investigation unit regular-
ly seizes a complete company (network-) environment including cloud storage and all 
belonging data. Because this data for the fraud investigation unit as outsiders is un-
structured, and from a variety of sources (computer images, servers, internal commu-
nication, wiretap data, databases etc.) these datasets fall under the definition, and 
elements, of Big Data in terms of volume and complexity (also known as variety of 
the data). But also a very large e-mail database containing millions of suspect e-mails 
can fall under the Big Data problem because of the complexity of this data set. Please 
note that in most descriptions Big Data is measured against three axes: Volume, Vari-
ety and Velocity. What we see is that in the fraud investigation unit’s types of inves-
tigation, the focus is mostly on the volume and variety of the large data set. Velocity 
is not really an issue as they are investigating a static data set. This is so because after 
seizure the data that needs to be investigated will not (rapidly) change anymore. 
What can be said is that the existence of Big Data poses new and unique challenges 
for law enforcement when evidence needs to be found in an investigation with these 
characteristics. What also was can be said is that not only the actual size of the total 
seized data matters, but also the rate of complexity of the data that determines if a 
case falls under a Big Data definition. 
As an example, in a large carousel fraud case that the fraud investigation unit in-
vestigated in the past, the suspect was a bank that operated from the fraud investiga-
tion unit’s territory and several countries abroad. In this case investigation data was 
collected and seized from a lot of sources: internet wiretaps, forensic disc images 
from tens of workstations, user data from server systems, e-mail servers with literally 
millions of e-mails, company databases, webservers, and the complete banking back-
end systems containing all bank transactions. This investigation had the characteris-
tics of Big Data on both levels, a high complexity of the data (the complete banking 
system had to be reconstructed and analysed) and a high amount of total data (the 
house searches were in 2006, and in that time a total of 15 terabyte of data was 
seized). 
This paper is about the usage of NLP techniques in fraud investigations, there are 
specific characteristics for these types of investigations that determine why another 
approach towards Big Data investigation is necessary. In fact our fraud investigation 
unit mostly investigates White Collar Crime cases. Most police departments focus on 
other criminal offenses like murder cases, child abuse, threats, hacking, malware etc. 
The fraud investigation unit on the other hand acts on criminal cases like money 
laundering, terrorism funding, (tax-) fraud, etc. For the fraud investigation unit this 
focus on White Collar crime means that the fraud investigation unit has to be able to 
investigate: (i) Complex (unstructured-) datasets; (ii) Large datasets; (iii) Company 
networks; (iv) Complex communication networks between suspects; (v) Mostly text 
based evidence. 
As you can see, this list shows that the fraud investigation unit will encounter Big 
Data problems because of the specific criminal investigation domain, and that the 
evidence the fraud investigation unit gathers is mostly text based. Before the introduc-
tion of NLP techniques running on the new fraud investigation unit platform LES, the 
fraud investigation unit had massive problems with handling the enormous amounts 
of data that are so specific for white-collar crime investigations. These problems can 
be summarized in: 
 
Time taken to process al data that was seized 
 
Forensic software not able to handle the huge amounts of data items coming 
from for instance e-mail databases 
 
Crashing software when querying the investigation tooling database, because 
of overload 
 
Unacceptable waiting time for investigators when performing a query on the 
data (up to 30 minutes per query) 
 
Too many search hits to make analysis of the evidence humanly possible in 
many cases 
 
Too much technical approach and interfacing for regular investigators by 
currently used tooling 
What also can be observed is that most police cases can make use of the Digital 
Forensics methodology and tooling as is described in literature [10]. Unfortunately 
the fraud investigation unit has to use tooling that is best suitable for criminal investi-
gations falling under Police Types of crime where evidence can be found in/from 
files, desktop/mobile devices, email, network/memory analysis, etc. 
2.3 
Related work 
There are very few researches of NLP in the context of Digital Forensics, especially 
to tackle the problem of Big Data of financial crimes. In the context of Digital Foren-
sics, [11] used NLP techniques to classify of file fragments. In fact, they use support 
vector machines [12] along with feature vectors consisted of the unigram and bigram 
counts of bytes in the fragment. The method proposed is efficient; it is however, not 
in the context of investigating documents related to financial crimes. In [13], authors 
proposed a corpus of text message data. This corpus can support NLP techniques in 
investigating data located on mobile devices. This corpus is very useful in analysing 
short text but it is not for long, complex documents such as MS word document, 
presentations, spread sheets, etc. Related to the forensics financial crimes, [14] pro-
posed a semantic search based on text mining and information retrieval. Authors 
however focus on documents from collaboration platform such as e-mail, forum as 
well as in social networks. Their main objective is how to optimise the searching que-
ries.    
3 
LES tool and Method of evaluation 
In this section, we present briefly LES, a NLP based tool that has been developed to 
study the possibilities and benefits the usage of NLP techniques can provide in com-
plex fraud investigations. Next, we describe the investigating process where we apply 
LES tool to analyse evidence files. Finally we present methods we used to evaluate 
this tool. 
3.1 
LES tool 
Because of the problems of handing Big Data investigations mentioned earlier, our 
fraud investigation unit decided to develop tooling in-house that would be able to 
handle these specific types of investigations. The three most important requirements 
for the new tool are: 
 
Improving the data processing time, to handle large amounts of data 
 
Improving the data analysis time needed, to handle complex datasets 
 
Enable end users to perform complex tasks with a very simple interface 
This tool was called LES (Figure 1) and its main characteristics are: 
 
Running on an Apache Hadoop platform [15] 
 
Ability to handle large amounts of data 
 
Use NLP techniques to improve evidence finding 
 
Visualisation of found (possible-) evidence 
 
A simple web based GUI with advanced search capabilities 
In house developed software components allow investigators to rapidly access fo-
rensic disk images or copied out single files. MapReduce [16] jobs are then executed 
over the data to make parallel processing possible over multiple server nodes. Other 
MapReduce jobs are built in LES tool for text extraction and text indexing. At this 
moment the following NLP techniques are implemented in LES: 
 
Information extraction 
 
Named Entity Recognition (NER) 
 
Relationship Extraction 
The Information and NER extraction process uses a combination of techniques to 
extract useful information: tabular extraction (for lists of known and described enti-
ties), regular expression extraction, and the Stanford NER library also known as 
CRFClassifier [17]. The relationships between entities are arbitrarily determined by 
the distance between these entities. If a distance is smaller than a threshold, a relation-
ship between two entities is stored in the LES system (a Hadoop cluster of computers 
running LES tool). This implementation of relationship extraction is based on co-
reference between words, which in system tests appears to perform quite well. 
 
 
Fig.1 High level design of LES tool 
3.2 
Investigation Process 
Evidence files are imported into the LES system by running specific MapReduce jobs 
in a predefined sequence: 
1) Prepare Evidence 
2) Extraction phase 
3) Indexing phase 
4) NER extraction phase 
5) Relationship Extraction 
6) Analysing 
The evidence acquired during house-searches by the digital investigators is mainly 
recorded in a forensic format like raw dd files or Encase format. During the prepara-
tion phase the evidence containers are mounted and integrity is checked. Then by 
default only the most relevant files are extracted for further processing. At this mo-
ment these files are the most common document and textual types and e-mail data. All 
files that need to be investigated by LES tool are placed in a so-called binary ‘blob’ or 
data stream on the Hadoop cluster. Pointers to the original files are recorded in the file 
index on the cluster. This makes later viewing and retrieval of the original file much 
easier. When all extracted files are present in the data stream the indexing job is run. 
Next, the NER and RE phase are performed and finally all results are imported in the 
LES Hadoop Elastic search environment.  
3.3 
Methodology 
Our evaluation method is based on the combination of Microsoft’s MSDN perfor-
mance testing methodology [18], TMap NEXT [19] from Sogeti and some custom 
evaluation items (quality characteristics). The combination of different methodologies 
has led to the following concrete test case parameters that were evaluated:  
 
 
Test data set processing time, split in time to generate NER, extract relations, 
generate keyword index 
 
Test data set  query response times 
 
Accuracy of the data retrieval: cross referencing with standard tooling 
 
Data controllability: completeness of the data, evidence integrity and chain 
of evidence reproducibility 
4 
Experiments and Analysis of Results 
In this section, we describe firtly the dataset we used in our experiments. We also 
show the platform where we performed our tests. Finally, we present and analyse the 
results of these experiments. 
4.1 
Dataset 
The dataset that was used is applicable for the two dimensions Volume and Variety 
(Complexity) of Big Data. Velocity is not an issue for our experiments at this stage. 
The data set that is used contains historical data from the period 2006 – 2012.  
 
The testing dataset consisted of: 
 
Total size of dataset:             
 
375GB 
 
Disk images (Encase E01):            
292 disk images 
 
Microsoft Exchange mail databases:         
96GB 
 
Office documents:              
 
481.000 
 
E-mails:              
 
 
1.585.500 
 
Total size of documents to investigate:      156GB 
 
Total size of extracted textual data:        
 21GB 
 
As we are looking for evidence in a fraud case we can expect that most incriminat-
ing content can be found in textual data, coming from documents, e-mails etc. LES 
will automatically extract all files containing textual information out of file containers 
like Encase images, Exchange databases, zip files etc.  
Next, from these files all text is extracted leading to a total size of pure flat text of 
21 GB out of a total dataset of 375 GB. As this investigation was performed in the 
past, we today know that finding and processing the evidence that was needed, took a 
total of six years investigation. Because the amount of total items to investigate, and 
the complexity of this dataset, the time needed for this investigation took a lot longer 
than was thought of at the start. Some statistics can be found as follows: 
 
 
Evidence items found in dataset:          2.718  
 
Total textual items in test dataset:         2.144.254 
 
Percentage of evidence found versus total textual items:      0,126% (2718 / 
2.144.254) x 100 = 0,126%) 
As we can see, the percentage of usable evidence for this case was only 0,126 per-
cent. This indicates the needle in the haystack problem we are facing for these types 
of investigations. 
4.2 
Testing Platform 
The testing system is a cluster consists of 14 physical servers with the following 
roles: 
-  2x Hadoop Namenode (for redundancy purposes) 
-  6x Hadoop Datanode (to store the data on) 
-  1x Hadoop Edgenode (for cluster management) 
-  4x Index nodes (to process the data) 
-  1x webserver (for the end-user GUI) 
Hadoop processing and storage: 
-  18TB storage 
-  24 cores Intel Xeon E5504 
Index nodes processing and storage: 
-  12TB storage 
-  12 cores Intel Xeon E5504 
Total cluster internal memory is 256GB. The cluster has been build and configured 
according to the Hadoop recommendations for building a Hadoop cluster. 
4.3 
Result Description and Analysis 
We evaluate first of all the performance perspective of LES tool. We compare the 
processing time between Forensic Toolkit (FTK) [20] and LES tool on the same test-
ing dataset. FTK has been configured in such a way that it approached the LES way 
of processing data the most. That means that all images and container items were read 
in FTK, but all extra options were disabled to make comparison fairer (Figure 2). As 
you can see, FTK has been configured to not perform Entropy test, carving, OCR. 
Indeed, only possible textual files were added as evidence to the case (documents, 
spreadsheets, e-mail messages). Only from this selection FTK was allowed to make a 
keyword based index. 
 
 
 
Fig.2 FTK case configuration 
According to the FTK processing log, the FTK processing time of the testing da-
taset, with the criteria shown above is 10 hours and 54 minutes. For LES tool, the 
total processing time is 1 hour and 24 minutes including 34 minutes of text extraction, 
38 minutes of generating NLP NER databases and 12 minutes of generating the 
searchable keyword index based on the testing datasets. 
In fact, the LES tool was evaluated by running various experiments on the testing 
datasets. As we can see, the overall processing time of this tool is 6 times faster than 
FTK with the same testing datasets. Furthermore, when LES is configured to only 
create a keyword based index, similar to Forensic Toolkit, the LES tool is even 11 
times faster than FTK running on the same datasets. LES does however need extra 
processing time to perform the needed NLP calculations, but enhances the ease of 
finding evidence by running these NLP processes.  
Besides, response times are significantly better when LES is used to search through 
the test data by using single keywords. Table 1 shows the response time of keyword 
searching. FTK shows some remarkable slow response times when using single key-
words to search for, whereas LES in most cases is a factor 1000 or faster when 
searching through the data. 
Table 1.   Response time of single keyword search 
Document 
Keywords 
FTK 
LES 
 
 
Response 
Time(s) 
Retrieve 
Time(s) 
Response 
Time(s) 
Retrieve 
Time(s) 
D-195 
(.msg) 
discontinue 
fraud 
revenue 
6 
3 
6 
27 
41 
287 
0.005 
0.078 
0.119 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
D-550 
(.ppt) 
scrubbing 
blacklists 
violation 
6 
5 
6 
17 
14 
365 
0.081 
0.099 
0.069 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
D-718 
(.xls) 
[NAME1] 
training 
crimecontrol 
18 
6 
7 
295 
383 
4 
0.138 
0.143 
0.195 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
D-735 
(.msg) 
[NAME2] 
[NAME3] 
NewYork 
3 
5 
5 
22 
52 
195 
0.006 
0.023 
0.141 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
D-805 
(.txt) 
[NAME4] 
Bermuda 
[NAME5] 
5 
5 
5 
4 
1190 
33 
0.038 
0.091 
0.020 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
< 0.5 
 
Furthermore, the retrieval times in LES tool are always under 0.5 seconds, but can-
not be shown in a counter, and therefore difficult to give an exact count in millisec-
onds. 
However, this is not a very efficient approach to find unique evidence items, most 
of the time using only one keyword leads to long lists of results. Also, it is very diffi-
cult to make up the best fitting keyword to find the evidence. Normally a combination 
of keywords or multiple search iterations is used, but in practice our investigators start 
hypothesis building by trying single keywords and see what comes back as a result. 
What can be seen from the FTK evaluation is that when using single keywords when 
trying to pinpoint evidence, the retrieval time can be very long.  When using single 
keywords only and keywords are not chosen well or are not unique enough, waiting 
time becomes unacceptable long from an end-user perspective when we choose a 
response time of 20 seconds maximum. Of course investigators also need to be 
trained to perform smart search actions when using FTK. It is essential to choose 
keyword combinations well. Next, we use the five known evidence items to locate 
and use an AND combination of keywords to evaluate response time and retrieval 
time of evidence items. Table 2 shows the results of this experiment. 
 
Table 2.   Response time of combined keyword search 
Document 
Keywords 
FTK 
LES 
 
 
Response 
Time(s) 
Retrieve 
Time(s) 
Response 
Time(s) 
Retrieve 
Time(s) 
D-195 
(.msg) 
discontinue, 
fraud, 
revenue 
28 
7.1 
0.006 
 < 0.5 
D-550 
(.ppt) 
scrubbing, 
blacklists, 
violation 
24 
5.2 
0.138 
 < 0.5 
D-718 
(.xls) 
[NAME1], 
training 
crimecontrol 
10 
18 
0.195 
< 0.5 
D-735 
(.msg) 
[NAME2], 
[NAME3], 
NewYork 
11 
5 
0.232 
< 0.5 
D-805 
(.txt) 
[NAME4], 
Bermuda, 
[NAME5] 
16 
4 
0.004 
< 0.5 
 
When a combination of keywords is used we see that the response times for FTK 
are worser than single keyword search. On the other hand, using multiple keywords in 
LES the response time is also milliseconds for the performed evaluations. From an 
end-user perspective a response in milliseconds is more or less instant and thus lead-
ing to a better investigation experience. When the various NLP techniques are used to 
search for evidence, the LES tool response times are also in milliseconds. For instance 
the selection of named entities and the drawing of a relation diagram are performed 
very fast by the system. 
Next, we evaluate the total amount of processed evidence items per file type ana-
lysing system and processing log files for FTK and LES (Table 3). 
Table 3.   Total number of processed evidence items per file type 
Document 
Number of items per file type 
Type 
FTK 
LES 
Email 
1.585.500 
1.641.063 
Word documents 
44.105 
44.837 
Spreadsheets 
68.101 
38.580 
Presentations 
6.548 
2620 
 
As we are not sure how FTK counts evidence items, and which types are counted 
and which are not, it is difficult to draw a conclusion from these figures. But what we 
do know is that FTK counts for instance every OLE object item as a unique evidence 
item for Microsoft Office documents. So that increases the count for FTK significant-
ly. However, since we have found all our randomly selected evidence items in both 
FTK and LES we can be carefully positive that no essential data is lost in LES. 
Looking at the functionality perspective, LES has more possible search paths to-
wards an evidence item; this could mean that evidence can be found faster using LES, 
because an investigator has more chance ‘hitting’ a useful search path. This coincides 
with the fact that in LES evidence can be found in more ways, because more search 
methods are implemented. These search methods increase the ways investigators can 
search for evidence. Especially the implemented NLP entity selection in combination 
with other search methods creates new evidence finding possibilities that previously 
were not possible. When looking at the data presentation parts of the software evalua-
tion we can see that LES has more ways of presenting data to the investigator; the 
visualization view of found evidence can help investigators finding new leads. Anoth-
er important functional part is the integrity and chain of evidence of the data. What 
can be seen is that FTK has better data control embedded, thus in FTK the chain of 
evidence is maintained more thoroughly. Also, FTK has better file control embedded; 
tracing back a file to its originating location is better implemented in FTK than in 
LES, thus the chain of evidence is maintained better. A big advantage of LES is that 
LES has been developed with the end-user in mind, in this case a financial and fraud 
investigator who needs to investigate a Big Data set. Specifically the LES query inter-
face is very flexible and helps analyzing complex and large data sets, especially the 
possibility to add query windows (widgets) and refine searches by doing that is very 
powerful. 
Specific evaluation requirements that were mostly focused on the implementation 
and usage of NLP techniques show that the implemented NLP techniques can help 
investigators finding evidence in another way, possibly faster and more efficient. At 
the minimum a new view towards complex data is presented for investigators. LES 
requires less search iterations to find evidence, because of the implementation of NLP 
NER and visualisation of evidence. On the other hand, FTK’s keyword based search 
requires investigators to work through more data and refine search queries a lot of 
times. 
Indeed, some noteworthy points that also came up during the evaluation were for 
instance that it was difficult to find literature that evaluates Accessdata forensic 
toolkit on a performance and data controllability level. It looks like this tooling has 
not been evaluated very thoroughly yet by a respectable authority. For Ha-
doop/MapReduce techniques we found that the usage of a Hadoop cluster seems to be 
very efficient when one needs to process large amounts of textual data. However, the 
programming paradigm of Hadoop/MapReduce are more complex than regular pro-
gramming problems because of the distributed and multi-processing nature of the 
Hadoop cluster. The issues that we found during the evaluation were that a (too-) 
large edges and nodes file leads to graphical representation problems. Too much 
named entities and extracted relations leads to information overload for the end-user. 
The forensic chain of evidence is more difficult to maintain in LES. This is because of 
the nature of LES’ inner workings, and the fact that it extracts textual information out 
of forensic images. 
At organization level, we found that the CID will need to explain the difference be-
tween forensic computer investigation and analysis of Big Data. When to use what 
tool all depends on the type of investigation, the needed evidence, and the amount and 
complexity of the data. As the CID mainly has large fraud cases, a logical choice 
would be to use LES as the preferred tool for these kinds of investigations. One re-
mark that must be made is that all data found in LES must be verified using a (foren-
sic-) tool until LES has a proven track record in court of law. 
As a conclusion, the usage of LES tool that uses NLP as key enabler to handle very 
large and complex data investigations. This means LES tool improves the ‘white col-
lar crime’ investigation process in terms of speed and efficiency. 
5 
Conclusions and future work 
In this paper, we present and evaluate LES tool that is based on NLP techniques to 
help criminal investigators handle large amounts of textual information. In fact, we 
evaluate different perspectives of LES tools. In terms of speed: the proposed solution 
is significantly faster in handling complex (textual) data sets in less time compared to 
traditional forensics approach. In terms of efficiency: the proposed solution is 
optimized for the fraud investigation process. The usage of NLP techniques helps in 
optimizing the investigation process. Investigators have more possibilities finding 
evidence in very large and complex dataset, aided by smart NLP based techniques. 
This greatly improves fraud investigation efficiency. 
 Some topics for further scientific and practical research is coming up. In terms of 
LES tool, more functions have being added such as automatic summarization of texts, 
author recognition, detection of cover language, detection of communication patterns, 
language detection, adding fraud domain knowledge to a NLP language corpus, visu-
alisation of searching results, etc. Therefore, we will also evaluate the performance of 
these upcoming features.   
References 
1. Liddy Elizabeth D., “Natural Language Processing”, 2nd ed. NY: Marcel Decker, Inc., 
2001, In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science 
2. Tjong K. S, Erik F., “Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 Shared Task: Language-Independent 
Named Entity Recognition”, In Proc. Conference on Natual Language Learning, Edmonton, 
Canada, June 2003 
3. Rijsbergen C.J., “Information Retrieval”, 2nd Ed., Butteworths, 1979 
4. Lais S., “Quick Study: Optical Character Recognition”, Computer World http://www. com-
puterworld.com/s/article/73023/ Optical_Character_Recognition (25-June-2014) 
5. http://www.systransoft.com/systran/corporate-profile/translation-technology/what-is-
machine-translation/ (25-June-2014) 
6. Jurafsky D., Martin James H., “Speech and Language Processing - An Introduction to Natu-
ral Language Processing”, 2nd Ed. Stanford University, University of Colorado at Boulder: 
Pearson Prentice Hall, January 2009 
7. Fromkin V., Rodman R., and Hyam N., “An Introduction to language”, 9th Ed.: Wadsworth, 
2011 
8. Rafferty A. N. , Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Manning C. D., "Finding Contradictions 
in Text," ACL 2008, http://nlp.stanford.edu/pubs/contradiction-acl08.pdf, (25-June-2014) 
9. Sokol L. and Ames R., "Analytics in a Big Data Environment," IBM Redbooks, 2012 
10. Innis Tasha R. et al., "Towards Applying Text Mining and Natural Language Processing for 
Biomedical Ontology Acquisition," TMBIO '06 Proceedings of the 1st international work-
shop on Text mining in bioinformatics, pp. 7-14, 2006 
11. Fitzgerald S. et al. “Using NLP techniques for file fragment classification”, Digital Investi-
gation (9), 2012 
12. Scholkopf B., “A short tutorial on kernels”. Microsoft Research, Tech Rep: MSR-TR-200-
6t, 2000 
13. O'Day D. R. and Calix R. A. "Text Message Corpus: Applying Natural Language Processing 
to Mobile Device Forensics," IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, San 
Jose, USA. July 15 - 19, 2013 
14. Dijk Van D., Henseler H., “Semantic Search in E-Discovery: An Interdisciplinary Ap-
proach”, Workshop on Standards for Using Predictive Coding, Machine Learning, and Other 
Advanced Search and Review Methods in E-Discovery, ICAIL 2013 
15. http://hadoop.apache.org (25-June-2014) 
16. Dean J., Ghemawat S., “MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters”, 
OSDI'04: Sixth Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation, San Francis-
co, CA, December, 2004 
17. Popowitch F., "Using text mining and natural language processing for health care claims 
processing," ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter - Natural language processing and text 
mining, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 59-66, June 2005. 
18. Meier J.D., et al., Microsoft Performance Testing Guidance for Web Applications. Red-
mond, 2007 (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb924375.aspx) 
19. Buist A. H., Kraaij W., and Raaijmakers S., “Automatic Summarization of Meeting Data: A 
Feasibility Study” In Proceedings of the 15th CLIN conference, 2005 
20. http://www.accessdata.com/solutions/digital-forensics/ftk (25-June-2014) 
 
