Title: Comprehensive Event Representations using Event Knowledge Graphs and Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04794v1
--------------------------------------------------

Comprehensive Event Representations using Event Knowledge
Graphs and Natural Language Processing
Tin Kuculo
Supervised by Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Nejdl, Prof. Dr. Elena Demidova and Dr. Simon Gottschalk L3S Research Center,
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, Germany
kuculo@L3S.de
ABSTRACT
Recent work has utilised knowledge-aware approaches to natural
language understanding, question answering, recommendation sys-
tems, and other tasks. These approaches rely on well-constructed
and large-scale knowledge graphs that can be useful for many down-
stream applications and empower knowledge-aware models with
commonsense reasoning. Such knowledge graphs are constructed
through knowledge acquisition tasks such as relation extraction
and knowledge graph completion. This work seeks to utilise and
build on the growing body of work that uses findings from the field
of natural language processing (NLP) to extract knowledge from
text and build knowledge graphs. The focus of this research project
is on how we can use transformer-based approaches to extract and
contextualise event information, matching it to existing ontologies,
to build a comprehensive knowledge of graph-based event repre-
sentations. Specifically, sub-event extraction is used as a way of
creating sub-event-aware event representations. These event repre-
sentations are then further enriched through fine-grained location
extraction and contextualised through the alignment of historically
relevant quotes.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Multi-task learning; • Informa-
tion systems →Ontologies; Document representation; Question
answering; • Theory of computation →Structured prediction.
KEYWORDS
knowledge graph, event extraction, event representation, quotes,
event geotagging
1
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs, structured representations of facts compris-
ing entities, relationships, and semantic descriptions, have recently
gained both academic and industrial attention [13]. By creating com-
prehensive machine-readable knowledge graphs about the world’s
entities, their semantic properties, and their relationships, remark-
able possibilities open up. Potential applications include the cre-
ation of machine-readable encyclopedias that can be queried with
high precision, similar to semantic databases; quick and accurate
mapping of textual phrases to entities in the knowledge graph; an
ability to answer natural language questions about entities such as
who, where, when. Finally, world knowledge is a crucial component
© Tin Kuculo 2022. This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your
personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in
Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2022, https://doi.org/10.1145/3487553.
3524199.
in providing disambiguating context for machine translation and
can be a catalyst for the acquisition of further knowledge, as well
as for the growth and maintenance of the knowledge graph [35].
Knowledge graphs mainly cover static information such as a per-
son’s date of birth and birthplace, illustrating the state of the world
rather than changes over time. However, considering the dynamic
nature of events can be very important for the reconstruction of
someone’s past or the extensive past of local industries, regions, or
organisations. It is, therefore, necessary to build a different type
of structured database based on events rather than entities and
entity-based real facts. Capturing this dynamic knowledge requires
considering events as the unit for storing knowledge [31]. This
need has resulted in the study and creation of event knowledge
graphs.
There are two different approaches to understanding and pro-
cessing events, one more from the Semantic Web and one more
from the NLP perspective. In knowledge graphs such as DBpedia
and Wikidata, typically, events are clearly distinguished and named
events such as Brexit, FIFA World Cup 2014. This is often seen in
knowledge graphs. The second view is that of fine-grained events
found in text, often as sub-events in a bigger context. For exam-
ple, a text about Brexit might cover the visit of the UK’s prime
minister Theresa May in Berlin: this is the approach often used in
NLP. In my work, I want to bring these two approaches together.
For example, consider a properly modelled Visit event, which is
linked to the Brexit event in a knowledge graph. To extract and
model this kind of information, we use Wikipedia as our source of
unstructured information and Wikidata to structure the outputs of
our NLP components.
In this work, by utilising event extraction, we find new events
and form their representations. Event representations can still ben-
efit from additional contextualisation. We provide this additional
context in two ways:
(i) Quotes: while static information such as the time and location
of a given event is understood across languages, the impact of a
given event on specific populations varies across linguistic and
cultural contexts of those populations. In our work, we argue that
this impact can be captured and analysed across time through the
lens of quotes. Specifically, the quotes said by persons of public
interest are often relevant from the historical perspective. Examples
include "Tear down this wall" by the United States President Ronald
Reagan in the context of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
(ii) Fine-grained locations: another perspective is the provision
of locations with higher precision. While knowledge graphs often
provide locations of events, they are often not fine-grained. For
arXiv:2303.04794v1  [cs.CL]  8 Mar 2023
example, for an event such as the 2022 Winter Olympics, knowl-
edge graphs might only contain the country, China, or the city, i.e.,
Beijing, but not the actual competition sites. In this example, we
want to do better and find the exact venues, such as the Beijing
Wukesong Sports Center.
2
PROBLEM
Given a set of named events, we want to extract all relevant knowl-
edge about them and contextually interlink them to persons and
their quotes. This is accomplished through three separate compo-
nents.
• Sub-event Extraction: A processing pipeline is created such
that for each event, all of its sub-events are extracted and
linked with its entity arguments to corresponding Wikidata
objects and classes.
• Fine-Grained Location Extraction: For additional contextual-
ization of events, OpenStreetMap is used to link geographic
entities present in the text of an event’s Wikipedia page.
Through a representation learning approach, correct geo-
graphic entities are then selected as the most precise avail-
able fine-grained location information about the event.
• Quote Extraction and Cross-lingual Alignment: The third
processing pipeline utilizes Wikiquote – an online collection
of quotes1. Using Wikiquote as a data source, we focus on
Wikiquote pages about persons. The quotes by these persons
are then extracted and interlinked with their contexts. Finally,
encoding the quotes using a cross-lingual language model,
we cluster them together across languages.
3
PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section, we briefly present our approach to the specific tasks
we focus on. These tasks are event extraction, and event enrichment
and contextualization. The general approach can be seen in Figure 1.
For the event extraction, a set of events of interest is defined. For
the selected events, we take their corresponding Wikipedia pages
and run our sub-event extraction pipeline. The pipeline consists
of three components: the event type extraction, the argument ex-
traction component, and the knowledge modelling component that
matches our extracted information to the Wikidata ontology.
To enrich and contextualize our events, we take on two tasks. In
the first, we address the extraction of fine-grained locations. While
some events’ locations can be accurately described by the names of
countries or cities they have occurred in, others would benefit from
more fine-grained location information, e.g., the specific building
in which the event occurred instead of the city. To increase the
precision of event location information, we take a mixed approach
of relation extraction, entity linking, and link prediction. Lastly, for
the contextualization of events, we extract quotes of public figures
and interlink them with event and entity information.
4
METHODOLOGY
In this section, the main components of the research project will be
described—namely, the event extraction and the contextualisation
and enrichment of events.
1https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Main_Page
4.1
Event Extraction
In the first step, a set of events is selected. For each of these events,
we take their corresponding Wikipedia page and run an event
extraction model [22]. The event extraction component runs on
each paragraph of the Wikipedia page and outputs a set of sub-
events found in the text. For example, consider the following excerpt
in Figure 2:
As of 20 January 2022, at least 1,488 protesters
and bystanders, have been shot and killed by
police forces and at least 8,702 people detained.
Figure 2: Taken from the English Wikipedia page on the
Myanmar Protests and modified for simplicity.2
The event extraction component identifies two sub-events: a Die
sub-event and an Arrest sub-event. In the following step, these are
mapped to Wikidata classes death (Q4)3 and legal action (Q2135540).
We extract all their subclasses to be candidate Wikidata classes rep-
resenting our subevents. Among the subclasses of death (Q4) there
exists a Wikidata class extra-judicial killing (Q2717573), similarly
among the subclasses of legal action (Q2135540) there is a detention
(Q1071447). For each of the candidate subclasses, we generate a
list of questions to be asked by the question answering model [16].
According to the returned answers, we select the correct Wikidata
class to be assigned as the sub-event type.
To evaluate the performance of this processing pipeline, we gen-
erate a test dataset based on existing sub-events in Wikipedia texts.
Specifically, here we are referring to sub-events already defined in
Wikidata.
For example, in the sentence shown in Figure 3, the 2016 Repub-
lican National Convention is an existing event in Wikidata, with
properties such as location, country, point in time. In addition to
this automatically generated test dataset based on Wikipedia links,
we also plan to manually annotate a selected subset of Wikipedia
event articles. To evaluate, we compare our model’s extracted prop-
erties with the ones present in Wikidata. This evaluation procedure
is done in tandem on different baselines. Firstly, to validate the
need for the question answering component, we ablate the ques-
tion answering part of the pipeline and match ACE ontology events
directly to Wikidata. This is followed by an evaluation of a SOTA
triple extraction model on existing sub-events. Finally, we compare
our full approach to an approach that extracts entities and does
triple extraction on text.
4.2
Event Contextualization and Enrichment
To further enhance our event representations, we look to two di-
rections: increasing the precision of our location information and
contextualising events through related quotes of persons of public
interest.
4.2.1
Fine-Grained Location Extraction. To further enrich event
representations, a processing pipeline is used to fill empty location
nodes and retrieve more precise location information for existing
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2021-2022_Myanmar_protests
3https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q4
2
Wikidata
OSM
Wikipedia
Wikiquote
Fine-Granular
Location Extraction
Sub-event
Extraction
Quote Extraction
and Alignment
QuoteKG
Quote Enriched
Sub-event Aware
Event Knowledge
Graph 
Figure 1: General structure of the research project.
On July 19, the second night of the 2016 Re-
publican National Convention, Pence won the
Republican vice presidential nomination by ac-
clamation.
Figure 3: Example sentence in the Wikipedia article on the
2016 Republican Party vice-presidential candidate selection.
Links are italicised.
ones. Specifically, we use a combined approach of link prediction
and location extraction. A multitask framework [32] is used to
train a model to jointly predict locations based on existing nodes in
EventKG [10] and extract fine-grained location information from
Wikipedia texts of corresponding events. The fine-grained location
information is determined via entity-linking to OpenStreetMap
(OSM) using WorldKG [7], and a relation extraction model trained
to extract candidate locations and rank them to determine the
correct location.
4.2.2
Quote Extraction and Cross-lingual Alignment. To support
the research of events through the lens of impactful quotes by public
figures, we align quotes across languages and enrich them with
context, creating the first multilingual knowledge graph of quotes,
QuoteKG [15]. QuoteKG is based on Wikiquote, another wiki-based
project. Like Wikipedia, Wikiquote has independent versions for
different languages. It consists of pages, each of which covers a
particular topic and is divided into subsections and sections. For
QuoteKG, we focus on Wikiquote pages about persons that contain
quotes attributed to them.
QuoteKG’s creation pipeline, shown in Figure 4, begins by pro-
cessing Wikiquote in all available languages and selecting the pages
about specific persons.
After we identify and enrich the quotes, we need to detect which
of them represent mentions of the same quote said by a person
of public interest. This task of cross-lingual alignment of quote
mentions is treated as a clustering task at the end of which each
cluster represents a quote with a set of mentions.
The clustering task is performed for each individual person sep-
arately. Given a person’s quote mention in a set of languages, the
aim is to create clusters of highly similar mentions. To derive a sim-
ilarity between two mentions, potentially from different languages,
we compute the cosine similarity of sentence embeddings derived
from the mentions’ texts. As an embedding model, a language-
agnostic transformer model pre-trained on millions of multilingual
paraphrase examples is used, namely, XLM-RoBERTa [5]. Given
these embeddings and the cosine similarity function, clustering
is performed by detecting communities of quotes using a nearest-
neighbour search. To do so, we utilise UKPLab’s Fast Clustering
algorithm4 as it is optimised for efficient similarity computations
of our embeddings.
5
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
So far, we have created the QuoteKG schema based on schema.org
as well as a pipeline that extracts quotes from the Wikiquote corpus
and aligns them across languages. The QuoteKG’s schema was made
to model quotes, their relationships with persons and other entities,
as well as their different mentions, e.g., translations, typically in
different contexts. To this end, QuoteKG is based on an extension
of the schema.org vocabulary that provides a so:Quotation5 class
which is re-used. QuoteKG has been made publicly available6 and
includes nearly one million quotes in 52 languages, said by nearly
69, 000 people of public interest. Table 1 provides detailed statistics
for selected languages.
For the sub-event extraction framework, the question answering
pipeline has been completed. We have established the mapping
between ACE event types and Wikidata classes. In addition, the
entity linking and the question answering part of the pipeline has
been built as well. So far, we have identified many cases of potential
new sub-events, for example, consider the following sentence taken
from the Wikipedia article on Battle of Latakia:
“the Israeli ships engaged a 560-ton Syrian T43-class minesweeper”
While a sub-event extraction model might detect an Attack sub-
event, our pipeline detects naval battle (Q1261499).
Lastly, although the fine-grained location extraction is still in an
early stage of development, we find the research well-motivated.
After our data collection, we have found 700, 000 events, of which
500, 000 have locations, but only 50, 000 have coordinates.
4https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/
applications/clustering/
5Prefix "so:" stands for https://schema.org/
6https://quotekg.l3s.uni-hannover.de/
3
Extraction of 
Page Trees
Cross-lingual 
Alignment of 
Quote Mentions
 Identification 
and Enrichment 
of Quotes
RDF Triples 
Creation
Figure 4: Pipeline to create QuoteKG from Wikiquote.
Table 1: Statistics of selected languages in QuoteKG.
Language
Persons
Quotes
Mentions
Mentions with Contexts
English
19,076
267,994
271,879
193,848
Italian
18,795
145,258
146,128
48,107
German
3,463
16,017
16,454
4,330
Croatian
2,720
11,019
12,944
2,045
Welsh
241
457
503
247
All Languages
69,539
882,969
964,009
412,801
6
STATE OF THE ART
In this section, the latest research in event extraction is addressed,
prominent event knowledge graphs, and work done on geoloca-
tion. This is followed by an overview of other knowledge graphs
containing quotes.
6.1
Event Knowledge Representation
Event knowledge graphs have come about as a way to address
the dynamic nature of the real world and as a way to capture the
temporal dimension of relations. This is shown in initial work on
temporal knowledge graphs such as the Integrated Conflict Early
Warning System (ICEWS) dataset and the Global Database of Events,
Language and Tone (GDELT). Recently, more work has been done in
the financial domain and work motivated by the news domain [1, 3].
Work that steps out of domain-specific focus [10] focuses on the big-
picture event properties such as the time, location, and participants
of a particular event, not delving into the specific sub-events of
an event. One notable exception is the NewsReader project [31]
where the authors focus on news articles and use a synset detection
based approach, whereas, in my work, the focus is creating enriched
representations of important events that contain sub-events as they
relate to them.
6.2
Event Extraction
Event extraction, a challenging research task in information ex-
traction, is at the heart of information extraction research. Event
extraction effectively converts unstructured plain texts into struc-
tured event information that describes "who, when, where, what,
why" and "how" of real-world events. Traditional event extraction
methods mainly relied on complex feature engineering and faced
error propagation issues. Some of these issues are ameliorated us-
ing deep learning approaches. The early deep learning approaches
[4, 28] used Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to automat-
ically extract lexical and sentence-level features. Other research
explores RNN-based architectures. JRNN [27] is proposed with a
bidirectional RNN for event extraction. While previous approaches
relied heavily on language-specific knowledge and existing NLP
tools, [9] show that learning automatically from data can result in
accurate multilingual event detection.
Sentence-level sequential modelling suffers from the low effi-
ciency in capturing very long-range dependencies. The modelling
of structural information in the attention mechanism has gradually
attracted the attention of researchers. The JMEE [21] uses a graph
convolution network based on attention to jointly model the graph
information to extract multiple event triggers and arguments. [26]
investigate a CNN based on dependency trees to perform event
detection and are the first to integrate syntax into neural event de-
tection. The network explicitly models the information from entity
mentions to improve performance for event detection.
Since the arrival of transformer models, research has shown its
efficacy on event extraction [36, 37] . [34] is a BERT-based frame-
work that models text spans and captures within-sentence and
cross-sentence context. Similar to our own work, [8, 19, 20] frame
event extraction as a question answering problem.
6.3
Event Geolocation
The task of event geolocation has most recently been studied as
a part of event detection in social media analysis [23, 24]. Other
research focuses on Geolocating entities in knowledge graphs [30]
or geotagging text content in general [2, 14, 17]. On the other hand,
work addressing geotagging of events [6, 12] tends to focus on a spe-
cific domain. While there is work focusing on fine-grained location
estimation [18], to my best knowledge, this has not been applied
specifically to events and OpenStreetMap geographic objects.
6.4
Quotes in Knowledge Graphs
DBQuote [29] is a system for collection and semantic annotation of
quotes extracted from Twitter and Wikiquote; however, it covers
only two languages (English and Korean) and has not been made
available. Other work [25] focuses on English news articles, quotes,
and topics to create a database intended for journalistic research.
Event-centric knowledge graphs, such as EventKG [11], offer in-
sights into human history and events of importance, but they lack
quotations that provide context to public figures and their actions.
As a consequence, quotes have only had insufficient coverage in
the Semantic Web: for example, Wikidata [33] has fewer than 400
instances of the class “Phrase”7 that are attributed to an author or
creator – most of them only consisting of few words (e.g., “cog-
ito ergo sum” and “covfefe”). To the best of my knowledge, our
knowledge graph of quotes, QuoteKG, is the first publicly available
knowledge graph of quotes.
7https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q187931
4
7
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, I have described my research project and its focus on
the creation of quote enriched sub-event aware event representa-
tions with very fine-grained location information. I have defined
the framework to be used for this purpose and have shown some
preliminary results. These include QuoteKG, a multilingual knowl-
edge graph of quotes, the state of event extraction framework, and
the statistics motivating my work on fine-grained event extraction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank my supervisors, Prof. Dr. tech. Wolfgang Nejdl, Prof. Dr.
Elena Demidova, and Dr. Simon Gottschalk for their feedback and
support. This work has been funded by European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement no. 812997 (Cleopatra).
REFERENCES
[1] Tareq Al-Moslmi and Marc Gallofré Ocaña. 2020. Lifting news into a journalistic
knowledge platform. (2020).
[2] Marco Avvenuti, Stefano Cresci, Leonardo Nizzoli, and Maurizio Tesconi. 2018.
GSP (Geo-Semantic-Parsing): geoparsing and geotagging with machine learning
on top of linked data. In European Semantic Web Conference. Springer, 17–32.
[3] Rudnik Charlotte, Ehrhart Thibault, Ferret Olivier, Teyssou Denis, Troncy
Raphael, and Tannier Xavier. 2019. Searching news articles using an event knowl-
edge graph leveraged by Wikidata. In International World Wide Web Conference
Committee.
[4] Yubo Chen, Liheng Xu, Kang Liu, Daojian Zeng, and Jun Zhao. 2015. Event extrac-
tion via dynamic multi-pooling convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of
the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. 167–176.
[5] Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guil-
laume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Unsupervised Cross-lingual Representation Learning
at Scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116 (2019).
[6] Agung Dewandaru, Dwi Hendratmo Widyantoro, and Saiful Akbar. 2020. Event
Geoparser with Pseudo-Location Entity Identification and Numerical Argument
Extraction Implementation and Evaluation in Indonesian News Domain. ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information 9, 12 (2020), 712.
[7] Alishiba Dsouza, Nicolas Tempelmeier, Ran Yu, Simon Gottschalk, and Elena
Demidova. 2021. WorldKG: A World-Scale Geographic Knowledge Graph. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management. 4475–4484.
[8] Xinya Du and Claire Cardie. 2020. Event extraction by answering (almost) natural
questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13625 (2020).
[9] Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2018. A language-independent neural
network for event detection. Science China Information Sciences 61, 9 (2018),
1–12.
[10] Simon Gottschalk and Elena Demidova. 2018. EventKG: a multilingual event-
centric temporal knowledge graph. In European Semantic Web Conference.
Springer, 272–287.
[11] Simon Gottschalk and Elena Demidova. 2019. EventKG–the Hub of Event Knowl-
edge on the Web–and Biographical Timeline Generation. Semantic Web 10, 6
(2019), 1039–1070.
[12] Andrew Halterman. 2019. Geolocating political events in text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.12713 (2019).
[13] Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and S Yu Philip. 2021.
A survey on knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2021).
[14] Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos, Symeon Papadopoulos, and Ioannis Kompatsiaris. 2017.
Geotagging text content with language models and feature mining. Proc. IEEE
105, 10 (2017), 1971–1986.
[15] Tin Kuculo, Simon Gottschalk, and Elena Demidova. 2022. QuoteKG: A Mul-
tilingual Knowledge Graph of Quotes. In European Semantic Web Conference.
Springer.
[16] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush
Sharma, and Radu Soricut. 2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning
of language representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942 (2019).
[17] Egoitz Laparra and Steven Bethard. 2020. A Dataset and Evaluation Frame-
work for Complex Geographical Description Parsing. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics. 936–948.
[18] Jennifer Lautenschlager, James Starz, and Ian Warfield. 2017. A Statistical Ap-
proach to the Subnational Geolocation of Event Data. In Advances in Cross-
Cultural Decision Making. Springer, 333–343.
[19] Fayuan Li, Weihua Peng, Yuguang Chen, Quan Wang, Lu Pan, Yajuan Lyu, and
Yong Zhu. 2020. Event extraction as multi-turn question answering. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. 829–838.
[20] Jian Liu, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Wei Bi, and Xiaojiang Liu. 2020. Event extraction
as machine reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 1641–1651.
[21] Xiao Liu, Zhunchen Luo, and Heyan Huang. 2018.
Jointly multiple events
extraction via attention-based graph information aggregation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.09078 (2018).
[22] Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Jin Xu, Xianpei Han, Jialong Tang, Annan Li, Le Sun, Meng
Liao, and Shaoyi Chen. 2021. Text2event: Controllable sequence-to-structure
generation for end-to-end event extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09232
(2021).
[23] Stuart E Middleton, Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos, Symeon Papadopoulos, and Yiannis
Kompatsiaris. 2018. Location extraction from social media: Geoparsing, location
disambiguation, and geotagging. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS)
36, 4 (2018), 1–27.
[24] Paul Mousset, Yoann Pitarch, and Lynda Tamine. 2020. End-to-End Neural
Matching for Semantic Location Prediction of Tweets. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS) 39, 1 (2020), 1–35.
[25] Chris Newell, Tim Cowlishaw, and David Man. 2018. Quote extraction and
analysis for news. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Data Science, Journalism and
Media, KDD. 1–6.
[26] Thien Nguyen and Ralph Grishman. 2018. Graph convolutional networks with
argument-aware pooling for event detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 32.
[27] Thien Huu Nguyen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ralph Grishman. 2016. Joint event
extraction via recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies. 300–309.
[28] Thien Huu Nguyen and Ralph Grishman. 2015. Event detection and domain
adaptation with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. 365–371.
[29] Guangyuan Piao and John G Breslin. 2015. DBQuote: A Social Web based Sys-
tem for Collecting and Sharing Wisdom Quotes. In Proceedings of the 5th Joint
International Semantic Technology Conference, Poster and Demonstrations.
[30] Peiyuan Qiu, Jialiang Gao, Li Yu, and Feng Lu. 2019. Knowledge embedding
with geospatial distance restriction for geographic knowledge graph completion.
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 8, 6 (2019), 254.
[31] Marco Rospocher, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen, Antske Fokkens, Itziar Aldabe,
German Rigau, Aitor Soroa, Thomas Ploeger, and Tessel Bogaard. 2016. Building
event-centric knowledge graphs from news. Journal of Web Semantics 37 (2016),
132–151.
[32] George Stoica, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, and Barnabás Póczos. 2020. Im-
proving Relation Extraction by Leveraging Knowledge Graph Link Prediction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04812 (2020).
[33] Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wikidata: a Free Collaborative
Knowledge Base. Commun. ACM 57, 10 (2014), 78–85.
[34] David Wadden, Ulme Wennberg, Yi Luan, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Entity,
relation, and event extraction with contextualized span representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.03546 (2019).
[35] Gerhard Weikum and Martin Theobald. 2010. From information to knowledge:
harvesting entities and relationships from web sources. In Proceedings of the
twenty-ninth ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database
systems. 65–76.
[36] Sen Yang, Dawei Feng, Linbo Qiao, Zhigang Kan, and Dongsheng Li. 2019. Ex-
ploring pre-trained language models for event extraction and generation. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 5284–5294.
[37] Tongtao Zhang, Heng Ji, and Avirup Sil. 2019. Joint entity and event extraction
with generative adversarial imitation learning. Data Intelligence 1, 2 (2019),
99–120.
5
