Title: Assessing Physics Students' Scientific Argumentation using Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.08910v2
--------------------------------------------------

Assessing Physics Students’ Scientific Argumentation using Natural Language Processing
Winter Allen
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, 525 Northwestern Ave, West Lafayette, IN 47907, U.S.A.
Carina M. Rebello
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, U.S.A.
N. Sanjay Rebello
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy / Dept. of Curriculum & Instruction, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, U.S.A.
Scientific argumentation is a core science and engineering practice and a necessary 21st Century workforce
skill. Due to the nature of large enrollment classes, it is difficult to individually assess students and provide
feedback on their scientific argumentation. The recent developments in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
and Machine Learning (ML) provide new opportunities to analyze large collections of student writing effi-
ciently. In this study, we investigate how undergraduate students’ scientific argumentation evolves across four
semesters of an introductory calculus-based physics course as increasingly structured argumentation scaffolds
were introduced. We investigate the use of NLP and ML, specifically topic modeling, to analyze student sci-
entific argumentation across those semesters. We report on the emergent themes present in each semester. Our
findings show a clear shift in the thematic focus of student arguments corresponding to the level of scaffolding
provided. In semesters with minimal scaffolding, students’ arguments emphasized procedural and surface-level
features, while semesters with explicit scaffolds exhibited greater concentration around physics-principle-based
themes. These results suggest that structured scaffolding supports students in constructing more conceptually
grounded scientific arguments and highlights the potential of NLP and ML as scalable approaches for evaluate
broad trends in students’ scientific argumentation.
arXiv:2504.08910v2  [physics.ed-ph]  13 Nov 2025
1.
INTRODUCTION
We live in an age where misinformation is spread with a
click of a button. We are constantly bombarded with dis-
senting information requiring strong critical thinking skills
to wade through to the truth. Students often view science as
another subject to memorize and regurgitate facts, rather than
as a dynamic, evolving body of knowledge. This fundamental
issue can be addressed by encouraging students to think criti-
cally about their work and engage in scientific argumentation
in a classroom.
Student problem solving has been a relevant and rich topic
in Physics Education Research (PER) for many years [1–3].
Students often prioritize memorizing final answers over de-
veloping a deeper understanding of the problem-solving pro-
cess [2, 4]. To foster growth in problem-solving, it is crucial
not only to understand why students solve problems the way
they do but also to help them reflect on their own problem-
solving strategies, allowing them to develop as both learners
and future scientists.
Several research-based strategies have attempted to address
the difficulties that students have with problem solving [1].
Research has shown that scientific argumentation can im-
prove problem solving [5]. This idea is deeply rooted in phi-
losophy [6] and has evolved significantly through educational
research [6, 7]. Scientific argumentation is a proven strategy
to help improve critical thinking that provides a schema for
justifying the relevance of the retrieved knowledge in prob-
lem solving [8–10]. To construct an argument students must
justify their methods and decisions as they solved a problem,
go through every step they took up to their solution, and pro-
vide evidence and reasoning for their process. In the context
of problem-solving in physics, scientific argumentation in-
volves not only an explanation of conceptual knowledge and
methods but the ability to justify reasoning with empirical ev-
idence and logical consistency. [11]
Within PER, scientific argumentation has been shown to
enhance students’ ability to link theoretical knowledge with
practical problem-solving skills [12]. This process encour-
ages students to think critically about the methods they use
and the evidence they gather, promoting skills that are essen-
tial for expert-like problem solving. Peer argumentation in
physics classrooms also fosters collaborative learning, where
students refine their ideas through group discussions and cri-
tique, further advancing their conceptual understanding and
reasoning abilities [13]. The iterative nature of scientific ar-
gumentation i.e. the process of reflecting and evaluating one’s
solution – aligns with the goals of promoting both content
mastery and the development of scientific critical thinking.
Scientific argumentation can be studied in both oral and
written modalities [14].
In this work, we focus on inves-
tigating scientific argumentation in written essays in which
students describe their strategies for solving problems. One
of the major challenges that we face is systematically teach-
ing and assessing student written essays in large enrollment
classes due to the prohibitive time it takes for instructors
or teaching assistants to read students’ written work and
gauge their argumentation quality. Recent developments in
Large Language Models (LLMs), Natural Language Process-
ing (NLP), and Machine Learning (ML) may afford us the
opportunity to address these challenges. ML is a subset of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) that is the development of algo-
rithms to detect patterns in datasets. NLP and LLM’s are
subsets within ML that focus on and aid in the understanding
of human language. Recently, there have been many studies
on using LLMs, NLP, and ML in assessing student writing
[15–18]. [19–23]. Researchers have used these tools, such as
supervised and unsupervised NLP, to assess student strategy
essays [23, 24] and explore the viability of utilizing LLMs
in physics education [19–22]. NLP and ML provide unique
tools for analyzing large amounts of student text, allowing for
the identification of patterns while still enabling qualitative,
in-depth studies.
We aim to address the gap in literature on longitudinal stud-
ies that investigate how students’ scientific argumentation, in
the context of physics problem-solving, develops over time in
response to the use of research-based instructional strategies
to improve scientific argumentation. Due to the large datasets
from large enrollment classes, it becomes increasingly diffi-
cult to track global student progress on argumentation in re-
sponse to scaffolding. However, with the advent of ML, it
is possible to leverage classic unsupervised machine learning
(UML) techniques to study the longitudinal development of
scientific argumentation skills for large numbers of students.
To approach assessing students’ argumentation with ML
in the context of problem-solving we have designed a study
that introduces scientific argumentation through a series of
scaffolds in the recitation portion of an introductory physics
course.
We offer increasing levels of scaffolds through a
four semester study. We then utilize unsupervised machine
learning techniques to assess how student arguments change
through the semesters.
Our research question (RQ) is:
How does the quality of students’ scientific argumenta-
tion in the context of problem-solving in physics, evolve
in response to scaffolding and fading over multiple
weeks of instruction?
The current article is structured as follows: in the next sec-
tion, we provide the background on prompt scientific argu-
mentation and unsupervised machine learning. In Section III,
we describe the study’s data, context, scaffolding, and analy-
sis. In the following section, we present the results and dis-
cussion. Finally, in Section V, we then conclude with study’s
implications, limitations, and directions for future research.
2.
BACKGROUND
A.
Scientific Argumentation
It has been shown that by constructing explanations stu-
dents may change their view of the nature of science [25].
As scientists, we know it is important to critically reflect on
our work, whether it be in research or solving a simple fresh-
man level problem. We not only need to understand what
decisions we made and why we made them in the problem-
solving process, but we need to be able to present a well sup-
ported argument in support of our process. Research suggests
that students tend to struggle with developing scientific argu-
ments [26, 27], especially with finding appropriate evidence
and constructing their reasoning [28, 29] and distinguishing
between various elements of an argument [30, 31].
Despite these difficulties, engaging in scientific argumen-
tation has shown to be beneficial to students. Not only does
it aid in their own understanding of the problem, but it helps
them learn to communicate and support their own findings
[32]. To aid students in constructing scientific arguments,
argumentation scaffolds can elicit students’ participation in
scientific argumentation [33] and a conducive learning envi-
ronment can support students to solve problems, compare so-
lutions, consider alternatives, and justify choices [28], [31].
Appropriate scaffolds include justification prompts [34] and
question prompts [11]in instructional materials that help stu-
dents articulate the rationale for their problem-solving steps
and urge them to reason using evidence and justifications
[7, 35] based on underlying principles [36]. However, most
undergraduate physics courses do not facilitate scientific ar-
gumentation. Curricula that facilitate more expert-like prob-
lem solving can positively influence students’ epistemic be-
liefs and expectations around problem solving [37]. In more
recent work, Rebello et al. [12, 38] found positive effects of
using scientific argumentation in physics courses for future
elementary teachers as well as future engineers.
In recent years, scientific argumentation has been studied
in various science disciplines including biology [39] [40],
chemistry [41], and physics [42]. There are multiple ways
to assess scientific argumentation [43] that rely on context in
which the argument is presented, nature of the task being per-
formed, and the specific learning goals [44]. For example,
scientific argumentation in inquiry-based tasks may be as-
sessed differently than in conceptual problem-solving activi-
ties. Moreover, these assessments must account for the com-
plexity of scientific reasoning, the use of evidence, and how
students articulate and justify their claims [45]. As a result,
educators and researchers have developed diverse methodolo-
gies, such as Toulmin’s argumentation model [6, 46], which
emphasize the structure of arguments, as well as rubrics that
measure the quality of evidence and reasoning in students’
responses [47].
Toulmin, a British philosopher, proposed breaking down
arguments into six components: claim, grounds, warrant,
qualifier, rebuttal, and backing. [6] A claim is the base pur-
pose of an argument. The grounds are the evidence of the ar-
gument that support the claim. The warrant links the grounds
to the claims. This can be explicitly stated or implied. The
qualifier is used in wording the claim, while the rebuttal and
backing are implied. The rebuttal acknowledges things that
may contradict the claim. The backing establishes the rele-
vance of the warrant. [46], [48] Toulmin’s model is based on
arguments present primarily in law; however, this model has
been particularly useful in examining how students construct
arguments and justify their claims.
McNeill and Krajcik [49] further adapted Toulmin’s model
for use in science education by simplifying it into the Claim-
Evidence-Reasoning (CER) framework. In their framework,
the claim is an assertion or conclusion about a phenomenon,
the evidence consists of scientific data supporting the claim,
and the reasoning explains the relevance of the evidence.
CER has become a popular framework in K-12 education,
where students are encouraged to construct arguments using
data to support their claims [50, 51]. Given the effective-
ness of CER in K-12, there is a strong rationale for exploring
its adaptation in undergraduate physics education, where de-
veloping students’ ability to argue scientifically can enhance
their problem-solving and critical thinking skills.
Scientific argumentation has been a rich topic to study in
science education in K-12 classrooms in recent years. Er-
duran and Park [52] performed a search for manuscripts fo-
cusing on argumentation in K-12 contexts between 2003 and
April 2022. During this period, they identified 13 published
studies that explored scientific argumentation in secondary
physics classrooms. These studies have provided critical in-
sights into how students develop argumentation skills at the
K-12 level, emphasizing the importance of scaffolding and
structured support for helping students engage with complex
scientific reasoning. However, despite the growing interest
in this area, the relatively small number of studies over two
decades suggests that research on argumentation, particularly
in physics, is still in its early stages. Furthermore, these find-
ings highlight the need for continued efforts to expand scien-
tific argumentation research, particularly given the increasing
emphasis on argumentation as a critical component of scien-
tific literacy in modern curricula [47].
Even less research has been completed on scientific argu-
mentation in undergraduate physics classrooms. While Er-
duran and Park [52] found 13 manuscripts on scientific ar-
gumentation in secondary settings from 2003 to 2022, only
nine manuscripts were published during the same period fo-
cusing on tertiary settings, highlighting the gap in research at
the undergraduate level. In these nine manuscripts, there was
a range of focus. The lack of study in this context does raise
concerns as argumentation plays a critical role in developing
advanced scientific reasoning and expert-like critical thinking
skills, which are essential for physics students at the tertiary
level as they transition into more complex problem-solving
tasks that will aid them in the 21st century job market.
In these nine manuscripts, a range of focus areas emerged.
Some research concentrated on the epistemic tools learners
use to construct scientific arguments [53], investigating how
students draw upon their knowledge, reasoning, and evidence
to build coherent, well-supported arguments. Other studies
examined the relationship between student content knowl-
edge and their performance on argumentation tasks [54],
showing that students’ ability to engage in scientific argumen-
tation often hinges on their depth of understanding of the un-
derlying physical principles. Additionally, some research has
explored the ways in which students use arguments across dif-
ferent disciplinary contexts, such as mathematics and physics,
highlighting the challenges students face when applying argu-
mentation strategies in varied subject areas [55].
Despite these valuable insights, the limited volume of re-
search on scientific argumentation in undergraduate physics
classrooms points to the need for continued research in
the topic.
There is a lack of comprehensive, longitudinal
studies that examine how scientific argumentation can be
systematically integrated into traditional physics curricula.
Most undergraduate physics courses emphasize procedural
problem-solving without incorporating active retrieval prac-
tices or argumentation-based activities that strengthen long-
term memory and conceptual understanding. As a result, stu-
dents have limited opportunities to engage in the kind of re-
flective, evidence-based reasoning that scientific argumenta-
tion requires. We aim to contribute to the existing literature
by examining how scientific argumentation can be effectively
integrated into undergraduate physics recitations to improve
the quality of students’ written arguments. Further, given the
large dataset of our investigation, we will employ systematic
machine learning methods to track these changes across large
textual datasets.
B.
Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) is a branch of artificial intelligence
(AI) that focuses on the development of statistical algorithms
to understand patterns in unseen data. ML includes both un-
supervised and supervised [56] methods that are summarized
below.
Supervised ML relies on known, labeled data to train an
algorithm to predict patterns in unseen data. In contrast, un-
supervised ML focuses on discovering hidden patterns within
datasets without explicit human guidance [56]. Some popular
examples of machine learning are clustering (i.e. K-Means
[57], DBSCAN [58], HDBSCAN [59] and topic modeling
(i.e. LDA [60], LSA [61], and NMF[62]).
In this study, we used unsupervised machine learning to
analyze our data. This decision is motivated by several fac-
tors. First, the large sizer of our data set makes it prohibitively
time consuming to qualitatively extract emergent themes in a
way that is reproducible and reliable. Second, although we
have expectations of student arguments that we expect to see,
based on the research-based strategies we have incorporated
[38, 63–65]; we aim to capture all possible emergent themes
at scale. Therefore, while supervised approaches could, in
principle, be used to label and predict features of student ar-
guments, doing so would require substantial manual annota-
tion and would likely limit the analysis to predefined cate-
gories (e.g., binary classifications). Unsupervised techniques
allow us to analyze large volumes of text data efficiently and
discover meaningful structure without the extensive human
labeling, thereby enabling a more exploratory and data-driven
understanding of students’ written arguments.
(i).
Topic Modeling
Topic modeling [60, 62] is an unsupervised machine learn-
ing technique used to uncover hidden thematic structures
within large collections of text. Rather than relying on la-
beled data, topic modeling algorithms infer topics based on
patterns of word co-occurrence across documents [66].
One widely used method of topic modeling is Non-
negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [62], which we em-
ployed in this study. NMF is rooted in linear algebra and
works by approximating an original document-term matrix
(e.g. student essay) as the product of two lower-dimensional
matrices. The key constraint in NMF is that all values must
be non-negative, which tends to produce more interpretable
results—especially useful when analyzing human language,
where negative values lack intuitive meaning.
A simple explanation of NMF is as follows: suppose we
have a document-term matrix V
∈Rm×n
+
, where m is
the number of documents and n is the number of unique
terms. NMF factorizes V into two non-negative matrices:
W ∈Rm×k
+
and H ∈Rk×n
+
such that their product approxi-
mates the original matrix:
V ≈WH
Where k represents the number of topics. Each row in W rep-
resents a document’s distribution over topics. H represents a
topic’s distribution over the terms.
In summary:
Wm×k × Hk×n = Vm×n
where m is the number of documents, k is the number of
topics, and n is the number of unique terms.
3.
METHODS
A.
Dataset
This study was implemented in a first-semester calculus-
based physics course for future engineers, at a large U.S. Mid-
western land grant University. The annual enrollment in the
course at the time of the study is approximately 2500 stu-
dents (1100 in fall and 1400 in spring). The course is built
around three key principles: momentum, energy, and angular
momentum, and it follows Chabay and Sherwood’s Matter
& Interactions [67]. The course has three components: lec-
tures (two 50-minute-long session), lab (one 110-minute-long
session, and recitations (one 50-minute-long session). The
recitations are the context of this study.
The recitations are led by one graduate teaching assistant
(GTA) with the aid of an undergraduate teaching assistants
(UTA). During each Recitation session, the GTA’s spend a
short time at the beginning of the recitation introducing the
problem and relevant information. They start off each section
by going over a provided Powerpoint presentation introduc-
ing the recitation problem. Each presentation takes around
5 to 10 minutes. In earlier weeks of the semesters, students
receive more help on both the conceptual aspects of the prob-
lem (i.e. identifying the relevant principles and concept) as
well as on the procedural aspects (i.e. selecting the appro-
priate system and surroundings). Students also receive scaf-
folding on the argumentation aspects of the problem, which
is described below in more detail. As the semester progresses
students continue to receive help on the conceptual aspects of
the problem, but less help on starting the procedural aspects
of it. Then students are expected to work together in groups
of 3-5 at their table to solve the problem. They often use
a whiteboard to create a collaborative workspace to discuss
and share their work. As students work together, the GTA
and UTA are available and walking around the room to help
groups when they have questions. Even though they work
in groups, every student is expected to provide their answers
to questions in an individual Jupyter Notebook file (.ipynb
extension). They edit this file on Google Colab in class. Stu-
dents discuss the questions collaboratively and enter their an-
swers to these questions and input an image of their written
work.
After they are finished, they are expected to submit the file
and a PDF of the file into the Learning Management System
(Brightspace). The notebook file is uploaded so we have ac-
cess to easily extract student responses. A PDF is uploaded
for grading purposes. Students are graded as a group by GTAs
on a rubric provided. GTAs choose one student randomly
from each group, grade their uploaded recitation file based on
a rubric, and assign everyone in the group this grade. Students
are not expected to spend much, if any, time on the recitation
outside of the 50-minute section, so there should be very little
individual work on the recitation other than expressing their
answers in their own words. Due to the nature of the grading,
students are encouraged to ask the TAs questions and make
sure everyone in the group is on the same page before they
leave the recitation session.
B.
Scaffolding Scientific Argumentation
Throughout the last four semesters (Fall 2022 through
Spring 2024), students were tasked with writing argumenta-
tion essays at the end of most recitations. Table 1 outlines
how the scaffolds progressed each semester. The example
question in the second row of each column represents the
question students were asked at the end of the semester af-
ter receiving their full set of scaffolds. The dataset we report
on is in response to question in Fig. 1.
The study started in Fall 2022 when students received no
instruction on how to construct an argument; they were given
the prompt shown in Table 1. In Spring 2023, we imple-
mented argumentation prompts based upon McNeil and Kra-
jcik’s model [7] within the recitation. We gave students the
definitions of claim, evidence, and reasoning (CER):
• A CLAIM is every decision you took to solve
the problem i.e.
choice of principle/concept, sys-
tem/surrounding, approximation/assumption, or key
steps you used in your problem-solving strategy – It
is an assertion that that the decision was the right one
to answer the key question(s) in the problem statement.
• EVIDENCE is the information either provided in the
problem or something that you know (e.g. from the
physics class) to be factually correct that helped you
make the decision above.
• REASONING is an explanation of why the EVI-
DENCE supports the CLAIM.
We provided the definitions starting with claims as the
semester progressed, while prompting students to list their
own CER in parts before writing a full argument of their own.
Finally in Fall 2023 and Spring 2024 students were given
similar scaffolds to that of Spring 2023. However, instead
of immediately having students list their own CER, we gave
students statements and had students label which statements
were claim, evidence, or reasoning. Then in the middle por-
tion of the semester students listed their own CER statements.
Finally they constructed their own arguments at the end of the
semester. The breakdown of these scaffolds and the final ar-
gumentation question asked to students are listed in Table 1.
C.
Topic Modeling
We analyzed open-ended student scientific arguments from
each of the four semesters separately.
Although, students
were given instructions to use only words and complete sen-
tences to construct their essays, the data still required sig-
nificant cleaning of the text. We thus began by employing
a comprehensive text pre-processing pipeline to clean student
argumentation essays. This included punctuation and number
removal, conversion to lowercase, and removal of stopwords
(e.g. ’the’, ’and’ , ’as’, etc.) filtering using the Natural Lan-
guage Toolkit (NLTK) [68]. Additionally, we implemented
automated spell checking using the PySpellChecker [69] li-
brary to correct common typos. Responses with fewer than
ten words were filtered out to reduce noise.
We applied Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) to
extract latent topics from the student essays. First, the pre-
processed text was vectorized using the TF-IDF method, cap-
turing term importance across the corpus. We then applied
the NMF algorithm [62] with ten components (topics). Each
component represents a distribution over words, and each es-
say is represented as a mixture of topics.
One common method to determine the optimal number
of topics is known as the "elbow method" where you plot
a model fit, such as reconstruction error[62] or coherence
scores [70], across a number of topics. To identify the op-
timal number of topics for NMF, we plotted both the recon-
struction error [62] and coherence scores [70] across topic
counts ranging from two to thirty. The reconstruction error,
which measures the discrepancy between the original TF-IDF
matrix and its reconstruction from the NMF model, was cal-
culated for each topic configuration. This metric is used to
assess how well the NMF model approximates the original
data. Though the reconstruction error decreased monotoni-
cally with additional topics reflecting better matrix approxi-
mation a definitive "elbow" did not emerge for any semester.
For the coherence scores, which measure the semantic inter-
pretability of topics, fluctuated and did not exhibit a clear
maximum. Since there was no clear quantitative metric to
identify ideal number of topics, we selected 10 topics in line
with prior work [16] using similar data context.
D.
Interpretation of Topics
To compare the semesters, we analyzed the representative
words of each topic, the number of essays in each topic,
and the overall distribution of student responses across top-
FIG. 1: Recitation Problem for Student Argumentation
TABLE 1: Summary of recitation scaffolds by semester.
Scaffolding
Fall 2022
Spring 2023
Fall 2023 / Spring 2024
Module 1
Students were asked to construct
arguments.
Students were given definitions
of CER and asked to list their
CER separately.
Students were given definitions
of CER and prompts to identify
CER statements.
Module 2
Students were asked to construct
arguments.
Students were given definitions
of CER and asked to construct
arguments.
Students were given definitions
of CER and asked to list their
CER separately.
Module 3
Students were asked to construct
arguments.
Students were given definitions
of CER and asked to construct
arguments.
Students were given definitions
of CER and asked to construct
arguments.
Study Question
In words, construct an argument
to explain and justify your
solution. Justify the various
decisions you took while
constructing your solution. In
your argument, incorporate why
the chosen
principle(s)/concept(s) and
assumption(s)/approximation(s)
are relevant to your proposed
solution.
In words, construct an argument
to explain, elaborate and justify
your solution. Your argument
should be in a paragraph and
contain the CLAIMS,
EVIDENCE, and REASONING
that support your solution.
In words, construct an argument
to explain, elaborate and justify
your solution. Your argument
should be in a paragraph and
contain the CLAIMS,
EVIDENCE, and REASONING
that support your solution.
ics using a concentration analysis [71] of each semester. To
interpret the topics across semesters, we examined the top-
weighted words associated with each component from the
NMF model. Each essay was assigned to the topic with the
highest topic weight. We then visualized topic distribution
across the corpus using histograms that highlight the number
of student essays per topic.
The concentration analysis introduced by Bao and Redish
[71] was originally developed to measure how students’ re-
sponses on multiple-choice questions are distributed. Since
we are interested in measuring student membership to a topic,
this analysis will apply a novel insight into our student distri-
bution. In this study, we have applied this method to quantify
how student essays are distributed over different topics. The
concentration factor, C, is calculated as:
C =
√m
√m −1 ×
Pm
i=1 n2
i
N
−
1
√m
Where, m represents the number of topics, ni represents
the total number of students who selected topic i, and N rep-
resents the total number of students in the semester. A high
concentration factor C ≈1 means most essays are concen-
trated in one or a few topics, where as C ≈0 suggests an
even spread across all topics.
4.
RESULTS
Our goal is to utilize topic modeling to determine if we can
capture the longitudinal change in the broad themes of student
arguments throughout the semester. To achieve this we report
on the top five words of each topic, exemplar essays from
relevant topics, and the essay distribution over topics of each
semester.
The resulting top five words were calculated to assess what
each topic represented, shown in Figure 2. The number of
essays in each topic are represented in the bar graphs of Fig-
ures 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d shown below. We strove to improve
students argumentation with the scaffolds in such a way that
students focused more on the underlying physics principles of
the problem as opposed to the surface features or mathemat-
ical steps of solving the problem. For this specific problem,
a correct solution would focus on using the Energy Principle:
∆Esystem = Wsurroundings and concepts involving energy.
Therefore, we would ideally see the top words of the topics
focused on types of energy and/or work.
First, we looked at Fall 2022 topic distribution and top
words in Figure 2a. We found the topics to be fairly evenly
distributed with minor peaks at Topics 0, 4, and 8. Our over-
all takeaway from these representative words is that there was
some focus on explicit physics principles (i.e. Topics 0 and
4), which became apparent from emergent words such as "en-
ergy", "kinetic", and "force". There was much more focus on
mathematical steps (i.e. Topics 3, 6, 7, 8, and 9) shown from
the representative words, such as "solution", "used", "equa-
tion" and "find". To further look into the topics we report on
a representative essay from the topic with the highest student
membership. For Fall 2022, this would be Topic 8. Each stu-
dent essay is comprised of variations of topics. For an essay
to be categorized in a certain topic the essay must have a ma-
jority percentage of that topic. In Topic 8, for example, one
of the most representative essays is classified as 84.41 % of
Topic 8, 11.03 % of Topic 2, and less than 5 % of other topics.
The student wrote "By setting the system to everything we can
make the equation equal to zero. From here, all we need to
do is identify everything in the equation, plug in the relating
equations, and simplify." This student does not discuss any
physics principles to any degree and focuses on their mathe-
matical steps, which is in agreement with our classification of
Topic 8 consisting of essays focusing on procedure.
Second, we looked at Spring 2023 in Figure 2b. We found
the topics to be fairly evenly distributed with slight valleys
at Topics 4, 5, 6, and 9. Our overall takeaway from these
representative words is that there was some focus on explicit
physics principles (i.e. Topics 0, 3, 4, and 6), shown from
emergent representative words such as "energy", "force",
"particle", and "work". An exemplar essay from a student
belonging to Topic 3 is Friction force is reliant on the nor-
mal force. Because the weight doesn’t change and an addi-
tional force is not applied, the normal force does not change..
Though the student is not focusing on energy, they are clearly
thinking about other physics involved in solving the problem,
such as friction. The other topics there was much more fo-
cus on mathematical steps (i.e. Topics 2, 5, 7, and 9), which
we see from the representative words such as "used", "equa-
tion", and "solve", and surface features (i.e. Topic 1), which
we see from the representative words such as "cylinder" and
"incline".
Third, we looked at Fall 2023, shown in Figure 2c. We
found the topics to be not as evenly distributed with a large
peak emerging at Topic 1. Our overall takeaway from these
representative words is that there was some focus on the en-
ergy physics principle (i.e. Topics 0, 1, and 4), as words such
as "energy", "kinetic", and "extended" are present amongst
the top words of these topics. Note that the topic that has the
most student membership is Topic 1 which focused primarily
on energy. The student essay most representative of Topic 1 is
"the total work of the system is equal to translational kinetic
evergy plus rotational kinetic energy. This is beacause no
other types of energy were gained or lost during this phase.
This means we can equal net work to the sum of the ener-
gies." This is an exemplar student essay as the student con-
structs an argument centered around energy principles, such
as relating total work to the relevant energy, and conservation
of energy. Other topics within this semester that focused on
other physics concepts were Topics 2, 3, and 5 where words
such as "momentum", "friction", and "force" appear. In ad-
dition, the other topics focused on mathematical/procedural
steps (i.e. Topic 9), evident from words such as "used" and
"find", and surface features (i.e. Topics 6, 7, and 8) concluded
from words such as "cylinder", "disk", and "object".
Finally, we looked at Spring 2024 in Figure 2d. We found
the topics to be not as evenly distributed with a large peak
emerging at Topic 2. Our overall takeaway from the repre-
sentative words is that there was some focus on the correct
physics principle (i.e. Topics 0 and 2) where words such as
"particle" and "energy" emerged. Note that the topic that hand
the most student membership is Topic 2 which we tagged as
focusing primarily on energy due to the representative words.
The student essay that was most representative of Topic 2 was
"We used the energy principle to in which the change in en-
ergy is equal to the work done by the surroundings, work,
which is equal to the net force times d. We are informed by
the problem that there will be a change in translational kinetic
energy and no change in rotational kinetic energy. Since we
are informed of that there is a change in translational kinetic
energy and no change in rotational kinetic energy we can set
change in Ktrans equal to the work done. After identifying
the forces acting on the system and summing them, we get the
net force times the displacement on the right side of the equa-
tion and the change in translational kinetic energy on the left
side. We plug in our representative variables and then solve
(a) Fall 2022
(b) Spring 2023
(c) Fall 2023
(d) Spring 2024
FIG. 2: Representative words and distribution of essays in NMF topics across scaffolded semesters
for the Vcm.". Similar to the Fall 2023 student response, this
student focused on energy principles as well, shown by their
discussion of the relationship between work and energy. This
response also contained elements (though significantly less)
of Topic 9 which focused in part on mathematical steps and
energy. Other topics that focused on other physics concepts
were Topics 3, 5 and 6 illustrated by the representative words,
such as "momentum", "velocity", and "force". There were
still topics that focused on mathematical steps (i.e. Topic 9),
with words like "solve" and "part" emerging, surface features
(i.e. Topics 1 and 4), shown by words such as "cylinder" and
"ramp" , and a mixture of these surface features, mathemati-
cal steps, and physics principles (i.e. Topics 5, 6, 7, and 8).
To establish statistical significance of the peaks, we cal-
culated Bao and Redish’s concentration factor [71] for each
semester, shown in Figure 3. From this calculation, we see
that the Fall 2022 and Spring 2023 semesters have a much
lower concentration than that of semesters Fall 2023 and
Spring 2024 (4× larger). Interestingly, we also see a small dip
in concentration between fall and spring semesters. From Fall
2022 to Spring 2023 the concentration factor decreases, and
the same happens from Fall 2023 to Spring 2024. Overall,
this analysis supports what we see from the distribution. The
Fall 2022 and Spring 2023 semesters have less of a concen-
tration in a particular topic than that of Fall 2023 and Spring
2024.
5.
DISCUSSION
After investigating the top words and topic distribution, we
observed that in Fall 2022 and Spring 2023, during which
minimal argumentation scaffolding was provided, the topics
seemed to be evenly distributed. These results suggest that
FIG. 3: Concentration Factors over Four Semesters
in general students focused equally on relevant concepts as
much as on trivial concepts, such as mathematical steps.
In Fall 2023 and Spring 2024, in which students re-
ceived more extensive scaffolding, we saw unequal distribu-
tions, with peaks in topics that emphasized physics concepts
(e.g. energy). This trend indicates that students in the later
semesters tended to focus more on physics-oriented ideas.
Ideally, students should focus on the underlying physical
principles while constructing arguments, as this reflects con-
ceptual reasoning. Conversely, focusing primarily on math-
ematical steps reflects an emphasis on procedural aspects of
problem-solving.
To further investigate the distribution across topics, we
conducted a concentration analysis and report on the con-
centration factor in each semester in Figure 3. Overall, we
found an increase in concentration from Fall 2022 to Spring
2024. The Fall 2023 and Spring 2024 semesters, in which
students received the most training in argumentation, have
higher concentrations of essays than Fall 2022 and Spring
2023 semesters. According to Sadler et al. [72], when stu-
FIG. 4: EMCS Average Scores at Start of the Semester
dents achieve a more consistent understanding of the under-
lying concepts, their responses tend to exhibit less variability.
Therefore, the observed increase in concentration may reflect
more conceptually coherent and consistent reasoning among
students in the later semesters.
Taken together, these findings support two key outcomes.
First, the increase in concentration indicates that students’ ar-
guments focus more on the topical physics principles rather
than procedural details. Second, since these concentration
factors were calculated based upon essay membership across
topics, this result also demonstrates that topic modeling suc-
cessfully captured broad shifts in students’ argumentation
patterns across semesters.
It is also interesting to note an emergent pattern between
fall and spring semesters. The concentration of Spring 2023
is less than that of Fall 2022, and the concentration of Spring
2024 is less than that of Fall 2023. This recurring pattern
suggests a potential difference between students enrolled in
fall versus spring semesters. Specifically, students in the fall
semesters may demonstrate a stronger ability to construct ar-
guments grounded in physics principles.
One possible explanation lies in the known differences of
student populations in fall and spring semesters. Students
enrolled in the fall tend to enter the course with a stronger
physics and calculus background from high school course-
work. In contrast, students in the spring generally have less
prior physics experience and are more likely to be required to
take a prerequisite calculus course.
To investigate if this pattern extends beyond the topic mod-
eling results, we examined scores from the Energy and Mo-
mentum Conceptual Survey (EMCS) [73] administered at the
beginning of each semester in the laboratory section of the
course. We calculated the average scores for each group of
students, shown in Figure 4. The same pattern emerged: stu-
dents in the spring semesters scored lower on average on the
EMCS pre-test than those in the fall semesters. This indi-
cates that students in the Spring semesters had lower prior
knowledge than those in the Fall semesters, which is consis-
tent with a greater variability in argumentation quality in the
spring semester as shown by the lower concentration factor in
the spring semester argumentation data.
This convergence between topic modeling results and in-
dependent conceptual measures lends further validity to the
concentration factor as an indicator of conceptual focus.
Moreover, it suggests that the observed differences between
semesters are not merely artifacts of the topic modeling pro-
cess, but may instead reflect genuine differences in students’
prior preparation and conceptual understanding.
6.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, using ML, we analyzed the top words, dis-
tribution of topics, and the concentration factor of the topics
obtained from NMF. Through this analysis and across all stu-
dent responses, we were able to identify topics that reflected
on energy concepts, mathematical steps, surface features, etc.
that all matched the context of the given problem. To ad-
dress our research question: How does the quality of students’
scientific argumentation in the context of physics problem-
solving evolve in response to scaffolding and fading over mul-
tiple weeks of instruction? we examined the top words and
distribution of topics over four semesters of varying argu-
mentation scaffolds to detect any changes. In semesters with
minimal scaffolding (Fall 2022 and Spring 2023), students’
arguments were distributed more evenly across topics, indi-
cating an equal emphasis on both conceptual and procedural
elements. In contrast, in semesters with greater scaffolding
(Fall 2023 and Spring 2024), topics were more concentrated
around conceptually rich ideas, particularly those emphasiz-
ing energy principles.These results suggest that explicit argu-
mentation scaffolds can help students shift from procedural
reasoning toward more conceptually grounded argumentation
in physics.
By investigating both the top words and topic distribution
across semesters, we observed a clear change in student focus
as instructional scaffolds were implemented. In the earlier
semesters, student focus was distributed equally across
conceptual and procedural topics. In the later semesters, we
observed their focus to concentrate around physics principles,
such as conservation of energy, associated with the problem
statement.
Overall, these findings indicate that structured
scaffolding in scientific argumentation instruction supports
students in constructing more conceptually meaningful
explanations over time.
These findings demonstrate that
unsupervised ML methods, such as topic modeling, can
capture large-scale trends in student argumentation, offering
a scalable and reproducible approach for characterizing con-
ceptual versus procedural focus in written physics responses.
A.
Limitations, Implications, and Future Work
The results of this study highlight the potential of unsuper-
vised machine learning methods as tools for evaluating stu-
dent written argumentation at scale. While promising, this ap-
proach is limited by the interpretive nature of topic modeling
and the need for human validation to ensure meaningful topic
labeling. Nevertheless, these methods can serve as efficient
diagnostic tools for instructors seeking to track changes in
student reasoning across semesters. There were also inherent
limitations related to the implementation of scaffolds within
the course.
First, scientific argumentation was taught and
scaffolded only within the recitation section of the course;
students did not receive any formal instruction on scientific
argumentation from lecture or lab.
This restricted the ex-
tent of student exposure and may have limited opportunities
for reinforcement. Second, since scaffolds occurred exclu-
sively in recitation, the quality and depth of instruction was
partly reliant upon GTA discretion. Although GTAs received
weekly training and were provided with standardized slides
introducing scientific argumentation, the extent to which they
discussed these concepts varied. Nevertheless, all students re-
ceived identical written scaffolds through the recitation work-
sheets, which helped maintain a baseline level of consistency
in the instructional material.
Future work will expand this analysis to track individual
students’ scientific arguments longitudinally within a single
semester to explore whether similar trends in conceptual fo-
cus can be detected over shorter timescales. We also plan to
extend the dataset to include additional semesters to examine
whether the observed differences between fall and spring co-
horts persist. More broadly, this line of work points toward
the development of machine learning–based frameworks that
can provide instructors with scalable, evidence-based feed-
back on student scientific argumentation in physics and be-
yond.
7.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported in part by U.S. National Science
Foundation grants 2111138. Any opinions, results, and find-
ings expressed here are those of the authors and not of the
Foundation.
[1] J. L. Docktor and J. P. Mestre, Synthesis of discipline-based
education research in physics, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res.
10, 020119 (2014).
[2] J. Tuminaro and E. F. Redish, Elements of a cognitive model
of physics problem solving: Epistemic games, Phys. Rev. ST
Phys. Educ. Res. 3, 020101 (2007).
[3] A. Van Heuvelen, Learning to think like a physicist: A review
of research-based instructional strategies, American Journal of
physics 59, 891 (1991).
[4] R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, and W. J. Leonard, Solv-
ing physics problems with multiple representations, Physics
Teacher 35, 270 (1997).
[5] E. Nussbaum and G. M. Sinatra, Argument and conceptual
engagement, Contemporary Educational Psychology 28, 384
(2003).
[6] S. E. Toulmin, The uses of argument, Philosophy 34, 244
(1958).
[7] K. L. McNeill and D. S. Pimentel, Scientific discourse in three
urban classrooms: The role of the teacher in engaging high
school students in argumentation, Science Education 94, 203
(2010).
[8] C. S. Asterhan and B. B. Schwarz, The effects of monological
and dialogical argumentation on concept learning in evolution-
ary theory., Journal of educational psychology 99, 626 (2007).
[9] C. V. McDonald, The influence of explicit nature of science
and argumentation instruction on preservice primary teachers’
views of nature of science, Journal of research in science teach-
ing 47, 1137 (2010).
[10] E. M. Nussbaum and G. M. Sinatra, Argument and conceptual
engagement, Contemporary Educational Psychology 28, 384
(2003).
[11] K.-L. Cho and D. H. Jonassen, The effects of argumentation
scaffolds on argumentation and problem solving, Educational
Technology Research and Development 50, 5 (2002).
[12] C. M. Rebello, Using a hybrid of argumentation and problem
solving prompts to facilitate undergraduates’ problem solving
performance and confidence, in The 13th Conference of the
European Science Education Research Association (ESERA)
(2019).
[13] L. K. Berland and B. J. Reiser, Classroom communities’ adap-
tations of the practice of scientific argumentation, Science Ed-
ucation 95, 191 (2011).
[14] H. Hakyolu and F. Ogan-Bekiroglu, Interplay between content
knowledge and scientific argumentation, EURASIA JOUR-
NAL OF MATHEMATICS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
EDUCATION 12 (2016).
[15] W. Allen, A. Shanker, and N. S. Rebello, Students’ perceptions
to a large language model’s generated feedback and scores of
argumentation essays (2025), arXiv:2508.14759 [physics.ed-
ph].
[16] A. Bralin, J. W. Morphew, C. M. Rebello, and N. S. Rebello,
Analysis of student essays in an introductory physics course
using natural language processing, in Physics Education Re-
search Conference proceedings (2023).
[17] A. Sirnoorkar and N. S. Rebello, Feedback that clicks: In-
troductory physics students’ valued features in ai feedback
generated from self-crafted and engineered prompts (2025),
arXiv:2509.08516 [physics.ed-ph].
[18] S. Savage and N. S. Rebello, Using an llm to investigate stu-
dents’ explanations on conceptual physics questions, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.14823 (2025).
[19] A. Anand, A. Goel, M. Hira, S. Buldeo, J. Kumar, A. Verma,
R. Gupta, and R. R. Shah, Sciphyrag-retrieval augmentation to
improve llms on physics q &a, in International Conference on
Big Data Analytics (Springer, 2023) pp. 50–63.
[20] P. Wulff, Physics language and language use in physics—what
do we know and how ai might enhance language-related re-
search and instruction, European Journal of Physics 45, 023001
(2024).
[21] G. Polverini and B. Gregorcic, How understanding large lan-
guage models can inform their use in physics education, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.12074 (2023).
[22] F. Kieser and P. Wulff, Using large language models to probe
cognitive constructs, augment data, and design instructional
materials, in Machine Learning in Educational Sciences: Ap-
proaches, Applications and Advances (Springer, 2024) pp.
293–313.
[23] P. Tschisgale, P. Wulff, and M. Kubsch, Integrating artificial
intelligence-based methods into qualitative research in physics
education research: A case for computational grounded the-
ory, Physical Review Physics Education Research 19, 020123
(2023).
[24] J. Munsell, N. S. Rebello, and C. M. Rebello, Using natural
language processing to predict student problem solving perfor-
mance, in 2021 Physics Education Research Conference Pro-
ceedings (2021).
[25] P. Bell and M. C. Linn, Scientific arguments as learning arti-
facts: Designing for learning from the web with kie, Interna-
tional journal of science education 22, 797 (2000).
[26] L. K. Berland and B. J. Reiser, Making sense of argumentation
and explanation, Science education 93, 26 (2009).
[27] D. Kuhn, Science as argument: Implications for teaching and
learning scientific thinking, Science education 77, 319 (1993).
[28] L. K. Berland and K. L. McNeill, A learning progression for
scientific argumentation: Understanding student work and de-
signing supportive instructional contexts, Science Education
94, 765 (2010).
[29] D. Kuhn, Teaching and learning science as argument, Science
Education 94, 810 (2010).
[30] E. A. Forman, J. Larreamendy-Joerns, M. K. Stein, and C. A.
Brown, “you’re going to want to find out which and prove it”:
Collective argumentation in a mathematics classroom, Learn-
ing and instruction 8, 527 (1998).
[31] M. P. Jiménez-Aleixandre, A. Bugallo Rodríguez, and R. A.
Duschl, “doing the lesson” or “doing science”: Argument in
high school genetics, Science education 84, 757 (2000).
[32] A. Zohar and F. Nemet, Fostering students’ knowledge and ar-
gumentation skills through dilemmas in human genetics, Jour-
nal of Research in Science Teaching: The Official Journal of
the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 39,
35 (2002).
[33] D. H. Jonassen and B. Kim, Arguing to learn and learning to
argue: Design justifications and guidelines, Educational Tech-
nology Research and Development 58, 439 (2010).
[34] G. Xun and S. M. Land, A conceptual framework for scaf-
folding iii-structured problem-solving processes using ques-
tion prompts and peer interactions, Educational technology re-
search and development 52, 5 (2004).
[35] A. Christodoulou and J. Osborne, The science classroom as a
site of epistemic talk: A case study of a teacher’s attempts to
teach science based on argument, Journal of Research in Sci-
ence Teaching 51, 1275 (2014).
[36] S. Schworm and A. Renkl, Learning argumentation skills
through the use of prompts for self-explaining examples., Jour-
nal of Educational Psychology 99, 285 (2007).
[37] W. N. Wampler, The relationship between students’ problem
solving frames and epistemological beliefs, Ph.D. thesis, Pur-
due University (2013).
[38] C. M. Rebello, Scaffolding evidence-based reasoning in a tech-
nology supported engineering design activity, in The 13th Con-
ference of the European Science Education Research Associa-
tion (ESERA) (2019).
[39] Y. Anwar, R. Susanti, et al., Analyzing scientific argumentation
skills of biology education students in general biology courses,
in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, Vol. 1166 (IOP Pub-
lishing, 2019) p. 012001.
[40] T. Dorfner, C. Förtsch, M. Germ, and B. J. Neuhaus, Biology
instruction using a generic framework of scientific reasoning
and argumentation, Teaching and Teacher Education 75, 232
(2018).
[41] S. Erduran, Argumentation in chemistry education:
An
overview, in Argumentation in Chemistry Education:
Re-
search, Policy and Practice (The Royal Society of Chemistry,
2019).
[42] F.-J. Yang, C.-Y. Su, W.-W. Xu, and Y. Hu, Effects of devel-
oping prompt scaffolding to support collaborative scientific ar-
gumentation in simulation-based physics learning, Interactive
Learning Environments 31, 6526 (2023).
[43] I. Abi-El-Mona and F. Abd-El-Khalick, Perceptions of the na-
ture and ‘goodness’ of argument among college students, sci-
ence teachers, and scientists, International Journal of Science
Education 33, 573 (2011).
[44] V. Sampson and D. B. Clark, Assessment of the ways students
generate arguments in science education: Current perspectives
and recommendations for future directions, Science education
92, 447 (2008).
[45] B. Crujeiras-Pérez and M. Jiménez-Aleixandre, High school
students’ engagement in planning investigations: findings from
a longitudinal study in spain, Chemistry Education Research
and Practice 18, 99 (2017).
[46] S. E. Toulmin, The uses of argument (Cambridge university
press, 2003).
[47] L. K. Berland, C. V. Schwarz, C. Krist, L. Kenyon, A. S. Lo,
and B. J. Reiser, Epistemologies in practice: Making scientific
practices meaningful for students, Journal of Research in Sci-
ence Teaching 53, 1082 (2016).
[48] J. Karbach, Using toulmin’s model of argumentation, Journal
of Teaching Writing 6, 81 (1987).
[49] K. L. McNeill and J. S. Krajcik, Supporting grade 5-8 students
in constructing explanations in science: The claim, evidence,
and reasoning framework for talk and writing., Pearson (2011).
[50] K. L. McNeill and J. Krajcik, Inquiry and scientific explana-
tions: Helping students use evidence and reasoning, Science as
inquiry in the secondary setting 121, 34 (2008).
[51] J. Wang, Scrutinising the positions of students and teacher en-
gaged in argumentation in a high school physics classroom,
International Journal of Science Education 42, 25 (2020).
[52] S. Erduran and W. Park, Argumentation in physics education
research: Recent trends and key themes, The international
handbook of physics education research: Learning physics ,
16 (2023).
[53] A. Cikmaz, G. Fulmer, F. Yaman, and B. Hand, Examining the
interdependence in the growth of students’ language and argu-
ment competencies in replicative and generative learning envi-
ronments, Journal of Research in Science Teaching 58, 1457
(2021).
[54] A. Jönsson, Student performance on argumentation task in the
swedish national assessment in science, International Journal
of Science Education 38, 1825 (2016).
[55] S. Van den Eynde, P. Van Kampen, W. Van Dooren, and
M. De Cock, Translating between graphs and equations: The
influence of context, direction of translation, and function
type, Physical Review Physics Education Research 15, 020113
(2019).
[56] I. H. Sarker, Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world appli-
cations and research directions, SN computer science 2, 160
(2021).
[57] J. MacQueen, Multivariate observations, in Proceedings ofthe
5th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statisticsand Prob-
ability, Vol. 1 (1967) pp. 281–297.
[58] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, et al., A density-
based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial
databases with noise, in kdd, Vol. 96 (1996) pp. 226–231.
[59] R. J. Campello, D. Moulavi, and J. Sander, Density-based clus-
tering based on hierarchical density estimates, in Pacific-Asia
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (Springer,
2013) pp. 160–172.
[60] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, Latent dirichlet alloca-
tion, Journal of machine Learning research 3, 993 (2003).
[61] T. K. Landauer and S. T. Dumais, A solution to plato’s prob-
lem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induc-
tion, and representation of knowledge., Psychological review
104, 211 (1997).
[62] D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung, Learning the parts of objects by
non-negative matrix factorization, nature 401, 788 (1999).
[63] Y. B. Uruena, C. M. Rebello, C. Dasgupta, A. J. Magana, and
N. S. Rebello, Impact of argumentation scaffolds in contrast-
ing designs tasks on elementary pre-service teachers’ use of
science ideas in engineering design, in Physics Education Re-
search Conference proceedings (2017).
[64] C. M. Rebello and N. S. Rebello, Transfer of argumentation
skills in conceptual physics problem solving, in AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings, Vol. 1513 (American Institute of Physics,
2013) pp. 322–325.
[65] C. Rebello and L. Barrow, Exploring the effects of scaffold-
ing on college students’ solutions and argumentation quality
on conceptual physics problems, in National Association for
Research in Science Teaching, Vol. 43 (2013) pp. 615–641.
[66] D. M. Blei, Probabilistic topic models, Communications of the
ACM 55, 77 (2012).
[67] R. Chabay and B. Sherwood, Matter and Interactions, Matter
& Interactions (Wiley, 2011).
[68] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural language processing
with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit
(" O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2009).
[69] T. Barrus, pyspellchecker: Pure python spell checking.
[70] M. Röder, A. Both, and A. Hinneburg, Exploring the space
of topic coherence measures, in Proceedings of the Eighth
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Min-
ing, WSDM ’15 (Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 2015) p. 399–408.
[71] L. Bao and E. F. Redish, Concentration analysis: A quantitative
assessment of student states, American Journal of Physics 69,
S45 (2001).
[72] P. M. Sadler and G. Sonnert, Understanding misconceptions:
Teaching and learning in middle school physical science.,
American Educator 40, 26 (2016).
[73] C. Singh and D. Rosengrant, Multiple-choice test of energy and
momentum concepts, Am. J. Phys. 71, 607 (2003).
