Title: Context-Sensitive Visualization of Deep Learning Natural Language Processing Models
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.12202v1
--------------------------------------------------

CONTEXT-SENSITIVE VISUALIZATION OF DEEP LEARNING
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING MODELS
Andrew Dunn
Central Washington University
Ellensburg, WA, USA
andrew.dunn@cwu.edu
Diana Inkpen
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Canada
dinkpen@uOttawa.ca
R˘azvan Andonie
Central Washington University
Ellensburg, WA, USA
and
Transilvania University, Bra¸sov, Romania
razvan.andonie@cwu.edu
May 27, 2021
ABSTRACT
The introduction of Transformer neural networks has changed the landscape of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) during the last years. So far, none of the visualization systems has yet managed
to examine all the facets of the Transformers. This gave us the motivation of the current work. We
propose a new NLP Transformer context-sensitive visualization method that leverages existing NLP
tools to ﬁnd the most signiﬁcant groups of tokens (words) that have the greatest effect on the output,
thus preserving some context from the original text. First, we use a sentence-level dependency parser
to highlight promising word groups. The dependency parser creates a tree of relationships between
the words in the sentence. Next, we systematically remove adjacent and non-adjacent tuples of n
tokens from the input text, producing several new texts with those tokens missing. The resulting texts
are then passed to a pre-trained BERT model. The classiﬁcation output is compared with that of the
full text, and the difference in the activation strength is recorded. The modiﬁed texts that produce
the largest difference in the target classiﬁcation output neuron are selected, and the combination of
removed words are then considered to be the most inﬂuential on the model’s output. Finally, the most
inﬂuential word combinations are visualized in a heatmap.
1
Introduction
The latest deep learning models are extremely complex, and can contain hundreds of millions of different trainable
parameters. This high level of complexity makes it very difﬁcult for humans to understand their inner workings.
Visualization methods give us a window into these black box models, and can be beneﬁcial for a number of reasons.
For example, visualizations may provide a mechanism for debugging complex models by showing which parts of the
input data the model is focusing on. This can be especially useful in classiﬁcation models, because it may show that a
model is focusing on parts of the data that are irrelevant to the predicted class.
Saliency maps are a popular tool for gaining insight into deep learning. In this case, saliency maps are typically depicted
as heatmaps of neural layers, where "hotness" corresponds to regions that have a big impact on the model’s ﬁnal
decision. Grad-CAM is a state-of-the art technique for saliency map visualization [1] using the gradient information
obtained from backpropagating the error signal from the loss function with respect to a speciﬁc feature map, at any
layer of the network.
While the idea of using visualization methods on image processing models makes intuitive sense, in recent years there
has been a growing interest in visualizing NLP models. However, with NLP models visualization is not as straight
forward due to working with text. Current solutions to visualizing NLP models involve heatmaps similar to Grad-CAM,
and visualizing connections between tokens in models that utilize attention mechanisms. These solutions typically look
at the importance of individual tokens on the model output. Before being passed to an NLP model, the text must be
broken up into a series of tokens that are then transformed into numerical vectors. Each token typically represents
arXiv:2105.12202v1  [cs.CL]  25 May 2021
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
a single word or character in the input text. The goal of these NLP visualization methods is to highlight the most
signiﬁcant parts of the text that have the greatest impact on the model output. While effective, current methods look at
each separate token independently, thus lacking context from the entire text. We believe the combination and order in
which the words appear is signiﬁcant and that they inﬂuence an NLP model’s interpretation of the text.
Typically, for tasks such as machine translation, the output is in textual form, and an encoder-decoder mechanism is
used. The weakness of this approach is that the encoder produces a ﬁnite-length vector, without regards to weather or
not any of the inputs are more important (or less important). A solution to this problem is the attention mechanism.
Several variants of this mechanism have been introduced: convolutional, intra-temporal, gated, and self-attention [2].
Self-attention has recently become very popular in the state-of-the art model called Transformer, and provides attention
to words in the same sentence.
Visualization is considered a preliminary step for interpreting or explaining a trained machine learning model. The
terms interpretability and explainability are often used interchangeably. However, it is generally accepted that there is a
difference between them. Interpretability in a machine learning model means that the model behaves in a consistent and
predictable manner, so that changes to model parameters result in expected changes in the model’s output. Explainability
refers to the process of providing post hoc explanations for the behavior of black box models [3]. In this paper, we are
primarily concerned with the explainability of Deep Neural Network (DNN) models.
We propose a new NLP Transformer context-sensitive visualization method that leverages existing NLP tools to ﬁnd the
most signiﬁcant groups of tokens (words) that have the greatest effect on the output, thus preserving some context from
the original text. First, we use a sentence-level dependency parser to highlight promising word groups. The dependency
parser creates a tree of relationships between the words in the sentence. Next, we apply a leave-n-out (LNO) process:
we systematically remove adjacent and non-adjacent tuples of n tokens from the input text, producing several new texts
with those tokens missing. The resulting texts are then passed to a BERT-based model. The classiﬁcation output is
compared with that of the full text, and the difference in the activation strength is recorded. The modiﬁed texts that
produce the largest difference in the target classiﬁcation output neuron are selected, and the combination of removed
words are then considered to be the most inﬂuential on the model’s output. In the visualization stage, these most
inﬂuential word combinations are highlighted by a heatmap.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces basic concepts and describes related work. Section 3
describes our novel method. Experimental results are detailed and discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 presents
conclusions and open problems.
2
Related Work: Visualization of Transformer-Based Deep Networks
One of the ﬁrst papers introducing visualizations of neural NLP models is [4]. Four strategies for visualizing neural
models for NLP were described, all inspired from similar work in computer vision. However, NLP visualization is
more complex than visualization in image recognition models. Recently, more specialized techniques were developed
for NLP visualization, the most popular one being Transformers-based deep networks [5].
The introduction of Transformer neural networks has changed the landscape of NLP during the last years. The
Transformer combines an encoder, decoder, and a self-attention mechanism to create a very effective model that is
able to infer connections between inputs in sequential data, similar to recurrent neural networks like the popular long
short-term memory (LSTM) models [6]. This allows the Transformer model to extract complex features from the input
data, and has proven to be very effective in solving NLP problems.
BERT [7] is a state-of-the-art NLP model developed by Google in 2018 that has seen many successes in common NLP
tasks such as classiﬁcation, sentence prediction, named entity recognition, and more. BERT stands for Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers, and is built using a stack of Transformer encoders. BERT is a very large
and deep network containing 110 million trainable parameters (BERT-base) or 345 million parameters (BERT-large),
which makes training BERT from scratch very time consuming. Due to the large number of parameters, explaining the
individual components or behavior of the model is very difﬁcult.
The success of BERT has lead to researchers to create several similar language models based on Transformers, such
as RoBERTa [8], DistilBERT [9], and XLNet [10] that are aimed at either improving the accuracy of the model, or
reducing the training time and the complexity of the model.
GPT-2 is another very large language model developed by OpenAI in 2019 [11]. Like BERT, GPT-2 is based on
Transformers and was designed to come in multiple sizes. GPT-2 Large contains 762 million trainable parameters,
making it considerably larger than BERT-large. Where BERT is built using a stack of Transformer encoders, GPT-2 is
made up from a stack of Transformer decoders. In addition, GPT-2 uses masked self-attention, which limits attention
2
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
weights between the current and previous tokens in the sequence. In contrast, BERT uses unmasked self-attention,
which allows attention weights to be generated between all tokens in the text, regardless of their position. In 2020,
OpenAI released GPT-3 [12], a massive language model composed of 175 billion trainable parameters. At the time of
completion, GPT-3 was the largest DNN language model ever created. In certain applications, GPT-3 has been able
to generate text that indistinguishable from human written text. As of the writing of this paper, GPT-3 is not publicly
available for download.
Explaining the information processing ﬂow and results in a Transformer is difﬁcult because of its complexity. A
convenient and very actual approach is visualization. Visualization enables some degree of explainability. A ﬁrst survey
on visualization techniques for Transformers is [5].
Visualizing complex models like those built with Transformers, can sometimes be accomplished by using model-
agnostic tools speciﬁcally built for benchmarking or hyperparameter scoring, such as Weights and Biases1 - which
provides the largest sets of visualization and customization capabilities. Perhaps more interesting are the visualizations
speciﬁcally built around Transformers, either for the purpose of explaining the models (like ExBERT [13]), or for
explaining certain model-speciﬁc attributes (like embeddings or attention maps [14]). Details are provided in [5],
including a list of recent articles focused on explaining Transformer topics through visualizations.
In addition to Transformer visualizations, there are several speciﬁc BERT visualization approaches [5] focused on the
role of embeddings and relational dependencies within the Transformer learning phase [15], the role of attention during
pre-training or training [16, 14], and the importance of various linguistic phenomena encoded in its language model
[17].
A general goal would be to visualize the entire lifecycle of a Transformer models. However, none of the current
visualization systems (considered in [5]) has yet managed to examine all the facets of the Transformers. This is due to
the fact that this area is relatively new and there is no consensus on what needs to be visualized. The visualization of
NLP neural models is still rather young, and we believe that our proposed method brings a new and interesting insight.
Recently, Han et al. [18] mapped saliency over NLP inputs to explain predictions via inﬂuential training examples
using a BERT-based model. They found that in a lexicon-driven sentiment analysis task, saliency maps and inﬂuence
functions are largely consistent with each other.
However, Han et al.’s [18] results were not consistent for the more complex task of Natural Language Inference,
a classiﬁcation problem that concerns the relationship between a premise sentence and a hypothesis sentence. An
explanation could be that saliency maps focus on the input, and may neglect to explain how the model makes decisions.
Some saliency methods are incapable of supporting tasks that require explanations that are faithful to the model or the
data generating process [19].
Very recently, Yann LeCun’s team from Facebook AI Research, UC Berkeley and New York University applied
dictionary learning techniques to provide detailed visualizations of transformer representations and insights into the
semantic structures [20]. Their hypothesis was that contextualized word embedding can serve as a sparse linear
superposition of Transformer factors. They demonstrated that the hierarchical semantic structures captured by the
Transformer factors, e.g., word-level polysemy disambiguation, sentence-level pattern formation, and long-range
dependency. They have created an interactive website2 where users can gain additional insights into transformer models
by visualizing their latent space. They used a pretrained BERT model for their evaluation experiments. Transformer
factors were divided into three different levels: low level (word-level), mid level (sentence-level) and high level (long
range patterns).
To the extend of our knowledge, the closest existent result to our contribution is [20]. Our hypothesis is also that
contextualized word embedding can be valuable for visualization in transformer models. Our work was performed
independent of [20], and we had no time to experimentally compare the two methods.
3
Proposed Method: Context-sensitive visualization
The success of very large language models, such as BERT and GPT-2, has created an interest in visualizing these
complex models so that we can better understand how they work and explain their behavior. With these goals in mind,
we propose a new method for visualizing NLP classiﬁcation models.
Previous visualization solutions, like leave-one-out (LOO) and saliency maps, look at each input token individually.
Since new language models such as BERT are capable of understanding complex phrases and relationships between
1https://www.wandb.com/
2https://transformervis.github.io/transformervis/
3
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
Figure 1: Dependency parser example output [21] [22]
words, we believe new visualization methods that preserve some context from the original text will improve the
explainability of these models.
The LOO process is a feature erasure technique that systematically identiﬁes and removes a single feature from the
input data. In an NLP model, a feature is the vector representing a single token in the input text, typically a word or
character, although character n-grams and subwords may also be selected as tokens. The modiﬁed data is then passed
through the model and the difference in output strength is recorded. This process is repeated for every feature. The
token inﬂuence is calculated by subtracting the output strength of the modiﬁed inputs from the output strength of the
original unmodiﬁed input. The output strength of the removed features are then ranked in order of their inﬂuence score,
and all tokens that had a positive difference in output value when removed are considered as the set of most inﬂuential
features on the model’s output.
Based on LOO, the LNO process systematically removes adjacent and non-adjacent tuples of n tokens from the input
text, producing several new texts with those tokens missing. Where LOO removes a single token at a time, LNO
removes multiple tokens at each step. The resulting texts are then passed to the model and their classiﬁcation output is
compared with that of the full text, and the difference in the activation strength is recorded. The modiﬁed texts that
produce the largest difference in the target classiﬁcation output neuron are selected, and the combination of removed
words are then considered to be the most inﬂuential on the model’s output. In our experiments, we elected to use word
pairs, and thus use tuples of size two. Tuples of more than two tokens could be also used, and may provide different
results. However, the computational overhead may increase in this case exponentially and the beneﬁts are questionable.
Our approach looks at combinations of words and phrases to discover their effect on the model’s output, producing a
visualization that is more context sensitive to the original text. Our method leverages existing NLP tools for dependency
parsing combined with a model-agnostic LNO token pre-processing approach to identify and highlight contextual
groups of tokens that have the largest perceived effect on the model’s classiﬁcation output.
Since the LNO processing step is computationally expensive and the number of possible word combinations explodes
exponentially, we use a sentence-level dependency parser to highlight promising word groups. This step greatly reduces
the complexity of processing a sentence. The dependency parser creates a tree of relationships between the words in the
sentence. By only selecting groups of words that are connected via a branch in the dependency tree, we are able to
greatly reduce the search space for the algorithm. Figure 1 shows a visual example of a dependency tree generated
by the Stanford Dependencies library, created at the Stanford University3. The original sentence that was given to the
dependency parser as follows: Bills on ports and immigration were submitted by Senator Brownback, Republican of
Kansas.
Using the previously described processes, the steps required to visualize a text using our method are as follows. First,
an input text is passed through the classiﬁcation model and the class prediction and output strength is recorded as
the baseline. Next, each sentence in the text is passed through a dependency parser which produces a tree structure
highlighting dependency relations between the various words in each sentence. Using these dependency trees, new
3https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/nndep.html
4
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
Figure 2: LNO process ﬂowchart
texts are generated with word pairs removed. Word pairs are limited to those that are connected via a branch in the
dependency tree. Each generated text has only one word pair removed at a time, and words are unique to their position
in the sentence. After all new texts are generated, we proceed to the LNO process. All generated texts are passed
through the model and their class prediction and output strengths are recorded. Once all texts have been processed, the
output strength of the predicted class neuron for each generated text is then compared to output strength of the original
baseline text. The heatmap is then generated by ﬁrst sorting all word pairs by their output strength difference to that of
the original text. Word pairs that did not contribute to the class prediction are culled. If an individual word appears in
more than one pair, the maximum output strength for that word out of all pairs is selected. Finally, the output strengths
for all remaining words is normalized using a linear scale. Figure 2 contains a simpliﬁed ﬂowchart detailing the order
of operations for our method.
4
Experiments
For our experiments, we used the IMDB Large Movie Review sentiment analysis dataset4 from Stanford University,
which contains 25,000 training and 25,000 testing reviews labelled with two categories: positive reviews and negative
reviews. We used 20% of the training set as a separate validation dataset. As mentioned, the test set is separate from the
training and validation sets.
All code is written in Python 3.8, and utilizes the Tensorﬂow version of the Transformers library5. A dropout layer and
a fully connected layer are appended to the pretrained BERT-base model to create our sentiment analysis classiﬁcation
model. Text tokenization and dependency parsing is executed using the spaCy NLP library6. The visualization images
are generated using the Matplotlib library7.
In the following, we will present some experimental results and heatmap visualizations for both the LOO and LNO
methods.
4https://ai.stanford.edu/ amaas/data/sentiment/
5https://huggingface.co/transformers/
6https://spacy.io/
7https://matplotlib.org/
5
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
Figure 3: Example LOO heatmap output - positive review
Figure 4: Example LNO heatmap output - positive review
Figures 3 and 4 show a short example text that represents a positively-classiﬁed review. In Figure 3, the LOO process
identiﬁed the word "best" as the most inﬂuential to the classiﬁcation. We can see in Figure 4 that more of the sentence
context is highlighted, with the word pair "best movies" most prominently highlighted.
Figure 5: Example LOO heatmap output - negative review
Figure 6: Example LNO heatmap output - negative review
Figures 5 and 6 show another short example text, this time a negatively-classiﬁed review. Figure 5 shows the visualization
result from the LOO process, and the word "acting" is most prominently highlighted, with "ﬁlm" and "bad" also showing
a stronger inﬂuence. In Figure 6, we can see the results from the LNO process, and overall the inﬂuence strength of
individual words is increased across the board, with the word pair "bad acting" highlighted as the most inﬂuential. Also
note that the word "boring" is not considered in the LOO process, but it is highlighted in the LNO process.
6
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
Figure 7: Example LOO heatmap output - mixed positive review
Figure 8: Example LNO heatmap output - mixed positive review
Figures 7 and 8 show a mixed positively-classiﬁed review. Again, Figure 7 shows the resulting visualization from the
LOO process. Note that the word "mindless" is not highlighted, but the word "but" is. Interestingly, Figure 8 shows
that heatmap result from LNO has reversed for these two words, with "mindless" highlighted with a stronger inﬂuence
on the classiﬁcation and "but" being not highlighted. Also note that the LOO result gives the word "with" a stronger
inﬂuence than the words "cool effects", which is contrary to what we might expect. In contrast, the LNO heatmap gives
more importance to the "cool effects", which is more inline with our expectations.
Figure 9: Example LOO heatmap output - mixed negative review
Figure 10: Example LNO heatmap output - mixed negative review
Figures 9 and 10 show another mixed review, but this time negatively-classiﬁed. In both the LOO and LNO heatmaps
we can observe that the word pair "terrible acting" has the strongest inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation. Since this was a
7
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
negative sentiment prediction, the word "beautiful" appears to have no inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation shown in both
heatmaps. As hoped, although the results between the two approaches is similar, the LNO process picks up on more of
the review context than LOO, with more of the relevant text highlighted.
5
Conclusion
Given that NLP tasks require some special considerations due to the nature of how languages are represented and
understood, visualization tools that are tailored speciﬁcally for NLP models may be preferred over more traditional
methods, such as saliency maps based on gradients. The knowledge contained within a text goes beyond the meaning of
the its individual words. The relationships between words and their positions within the sentence are necessary for a
full understanding of the text. Thus, we believe a visualization method that retains some of the contextual meaning
between the different words in the input text will produce improved results that are more inline with our expectations.
Improved visualizations increase our understanding of the model, and help us design better models that perform closer
to the human level of understanding for these problems. With the method presented in this paper, we have attempted
to create a context-sensitive visualization method for deep NLP classiﬁcation models. This more context sensitive
approach leads to heatmaps that include more of the relevant information pertaining to the classiﬁcation, as well as
more accurately highlighting the most important words from the text.
The terms attention and explanation are used frequently in the context of visualization of deep networks, for instance
when using saliency (or heatmaps) as visualization tools. While attention modules may yield improved performance on
NLP tasks, their ability to provide meaningful explanations for model predictions is questionable. However, according
to [23], attention weights over non-recurrent encoders exhibit relatively strong correlations, on average, with LOO
feature importance scores and gradient-based measures. Since we use LNO and gradient-based techniques, we may
expect to have some correlation between attention weights and feature importance scores for the top features. We leave
this aspect as a direction of investigation in future work.
References
[1] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: visual explanations
from deep networks via gradient-based localization,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 128, no. 2, p.
336–359, Oct 2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11263-019-01228-7
[2] D. W. Otter, J. R. Medina, and J. K. Kalita, “A survey of the usages of deep learning for natural language
processing,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 604–624, 2021.
[3] R. Marcinkeviˇcs and J. E. Vogt, “Interpretability and explainability: A machine learning zoo mini-tour,” 2020.
[4] J. Li, X. Chen, E. Hovy, and D. Jurafsky, “Visualizing and understanding neural models in NLP,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.01066, 2015.
[5] A. M. P. Bra¸soveanu and R. Andonie, “Visualizing transformers for NLP: A brief survey,” in 2020 24th Interna-
tional Conference Information Visualisation (IV), 2020, pp. 270–279.
[6] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention
is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [Online].
Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7181-attention-is-all-you-need
[7] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers
for language understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN,
USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), J. Burstein, C. Doran, and T. Solorio, Eds.
Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423
[8] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta:
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach,” CoRR, vol. abs/1907.11692, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692
[9] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and
lighter,” CoRR, vol. abs/1910.01108, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108
[10] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. G. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V. Le, “Xlnet:
Generalized
autoregressive pretraining for language understanding,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
8
A PREPRINT - MAY 27, 2021
Systems 32:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019,
8-14 December 2019,
Vancouver,
BC, Canada,
H. M. Wallach,
H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer,
F. d’Alché-Buc,
E. B. Fox,
and R. Garnett,
Eds.,
2019,
pp. 5754–5764. [Online]. Available:
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8812-xlnet-generalized-autoregressive-pretraining-for-language-understanding
[11] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/openai/gpt-2
[12] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu,
C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish,
A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/openai/gpt-3
[13] B. Hoover, H. Strobelt, and S. Gehrmann, “exbert: A visual analysis tool to explore learned representations in
transformers models,” CoRR, vol. abs/1910.05276, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.05276
[14] J. Vig, “A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model,” in Proceedings of the 57th Conference
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019, Volume 3:
System Demonstrations, M. R. Costa-jussà and E. Alfonseca, Eds.
Association for Computational Linguistics,
2019, pp. 37–42. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p19-3007
[15] E. Reif, A. Yuan, M. Wattenberg, F. B. Viégas, A. Coenen, A. Pearce, and B. Kim, “Visualizing and measuring the
geometry of BERT,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, 8-14 December 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, H. M.
Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché-Buc, E. B. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019, pp. 8592–8600.
[Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/9065-visualizing-and-measuring-the-geometry-of-bert
[16] W. Su, X. Zhu, Y. Cao, B. Li, L. Lu, F. Wei, and J. Dai, “VL-BERT: pre-training of generic visual-linguistic
representations,” in 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
April 26-30, 2020.
OpenReview.net, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SygXPaEYvH
[17] K. Clark, U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, and C. D. Manning, “What does BERT look at? an analysis of bert’s attention,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1906.04341, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04341
[18] X. Han, B. C. Wallace, and Y. Tsvetkov, “Explaining black box predictions and unveiling data artifacts through
inﬂuence functions,” 2020.
[19] J. Adebayo, J. Gilmer, M. Muelly, I. Goodfellow, M. Hardt, and B. Kim, “Sanity checks for saliency maps,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 9505–9515.
[20] Z. Yun, Y. Chen, B. A. Olshausen, and Y. LeCun, “Transformer visualization via dictionary learning: contextualized
embedding as a linear superposition of transformer factors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15949, 2021.
[21] D. Chen and C. Manning,
“A fast and accurate dependency parser using neural networks,”
in
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Doha, Qatar:
Association for Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2014, pp. 740–750. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1082
[22] Https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/stanford-dependencies.shtml. [Online]. Available: https://nlp.stanford.edu/
software/stanford-dependencies.shtml
[23] S. Jain and B. C. Wallace, “Attention is not explanation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1902.10186, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10186
[24] H. M. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché-Buc, E. B. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 32:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, 8-14 December 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://papers.nips.cc/book/advances-in-neural-information-processing-systems-32-2019
9
