Title: Tri-Attention: Explicit Context-Aware Attention Mechanism for Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.02899v1
--------------------------------------------------

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
1
Tri-Attention: Explicit Context-Aware Attention
Mechanism for Natural Language Processing
Rui Yu, Yifeng Li, Member, IEEE, Wenpeng Lu, Member, IEEE, and Longbing Cao, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In natural language processing (NLP), the context of
a word or sentence plays an essential role. Contextual information
such as the semantic representation of a passage or historical
dialogue forms an essential part of a conversation and a precise
understanding of the present phrase or sentence. However,
the standard attention mechanisms typically generate weights
using query and key but ignore context, forming a Bi-Attention
framework, despite their great success in modeling sequence
alignment. This Bi-Attention mechanism does not explicitly model
the interactions between the contexts, queries and keys of
target sequences, missing important contextual information and
resulting in poor attention performance. Accordingly, a novel and
general triple-attention (Tri-Attention) framework expands the
standard Bi-Attention mechanism and explicitly interacts query,
key, and context by incorporating context as the third dimension
in calculating relevance scores. Four variants of Tri-Attention
are generated by expanding the two-dimensional vector-based
additive, dot-product, scaled dot-product, and bilinear opera-
tions in Bi-Attention to the tensor operations for Tri-Attention.
Extensive experiments on three NLP tasks demonstrate that Tri-
Attention outperforms about 30 state-of-the-art non-attention,
standard Bi-Attention, contextual Bi-Attention approaches and
pretrained neural language models1.
Index Terms—Attention mechanism, Context, Interaction,
Triple attention, Natural language understanding
I. INTRODUCTION
A
TTENTION is the cognitive process of selectively con-
centrating on one task while ignoring others. It efﬁciently
allocates the ﬁnite brain processing resources to more impor-
tant tasks and distributes the resources to prioritized tasks [1].
In neural networks, an attention mechanism is an adaptive
sparse method for encoding and modelling sequence inter-
actions by the association scores between different elements
[2]. It has been widely applied in various tasks of natural
language processing (NLP), including machine translation [3],
The research work is partly supported by National Key R&D Program
of China under Grant No.2018YFC0831700, Australian Research Council
Discovery under Grant No.DP190101079 and Future Fellowship under Grant
No.FT190100734, Natural Science Foundation of Shandong under Grant
No.ZR2022MF243 and Key Program of Science and Technology of Shan-
dong Province under Grant No.2020CXGC010901. (Corresponding author:
Wenpeng Lu.)
Rui Yu and Wenpeng Lu are with the Department of Computer Sci-
ence and Technology, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China (e-mail: rui.yu1996@foxmail.com; wen-
peng.lu@qlu.edu.cn).
Yifeng Li is with Department of Computer Science, Brock University,
Niagara Region, ON L2S 3A1, Canada (e-mail: yli2@brocku.ca).
Longbing Cao is with the Data Science Institute, University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia (e-mail: longbing.cao@uts.edu.au).
Manuscript received October 15, 2022.
1The
source
codes
and
data
are
available
at
https://github.com/yurui12138/Tri-Attention.
a. Bi-Attention
b. Tri-Attention
a1
a2
a4
a3
b2
b3
b1
c3
c2
c1
c4
attention score 
of a3, b2 and c2
a1
a2
a4
a3
b1
b2
b3
attention score 
of a3 and b2
sequence b
sequence a
sequence b
sequence a
context c
Fig. 1: Comparison of the standard Bi-Attention mechanism
with our proposed Tri-Attention mechanism. ai and bj rep-
resent two words from two sequences respectively, and ck
denotes a contextual feature to them.
text matching [4], automatic question answering [5], and
reading comprehension [6].
The attention mechanism learns an inner-representation of a
sequence and the relationships between sequences, achieving
great success in various tasks [7], [8], [9]. However, it does not
explicitly involve context as human cognition works, where
context plays a critical role in human visual and language
comprehension. Human brain has neural networks dedicated
to reading and providing context from the environment in
order to improve perceptual learning and visual interpretation
[10]. In natural language understanding, context is the key
to derive and predict the meaning of a sentence [11]. It can
improve language comprehensibility and how efﬁciently the
comprehension is cognitively processed [12]. Different from
this human attention mechanism, the existing attention mech-
anisms in deep neural networks usually concentrate on word-
level feature interactions but fail to fully account for the overall
context of the word or sentence [13]. Accordingly, the attention
matrix is calculated just by two individual tokens query and
key extracted from sequences without a full consideration
of their context, forming a standard query-key-based two-
dimensional attention (we call it Bi-Attention for simplicity)
framework to capture sequence interactions, as shown in Fig.
1(a). This standard Bi-Attention framework requires a deeper
understanding of the data to obtain the inner representation
of sequences and capture the intrinsic relationships between
sequences [14]. Consequently, without involving context, the
existing attention models may not effectively capture really
important context-aware information [13] and may produce
unsatisﬁed to inaccurate attention. Some existing work has
identiﬁed this design ﬂaw in the Bi-Attention mechanism and
arXiv:2211.02899v1  [cs.CL]  5 Nov 2022
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
2
incorporated a contextual feature into the attention matrix. For
example, the COIN and RE2 models align contextual features
with attention to improve sentence representation learning,
yielding better results than those without context [13], [15].
Although the importance of context has been recognized in
the existing work, context has only been employed as extra
supporting information to sequence representation learning.
No general frameworks are available to simulate human at-
tention with context and explicitly capture the interactions
between target and contextual sequences or information. To
manage this framework gap, we propose a triple-attention
(Tri-Attention) framework to simulate human attention and
explicitly capture interactions between sequences and between
sequences and context. Different from existing Bi-Attention
and contextual attention like COIN and RE2 models by
integrating contextual features into queries and keys, our Tri-
Attention mechanism directly involves context as the third
dimension in quantifying sequence interactions. A query-key-
context three-dimensional attention framework is formed for
Tri-Attention, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The standard Bi-Attention
mechanism adopts query and key to calculate two-dimensional
relevance (e.g., dot product), forming an attention matrix. Then
matrix operations are applied to the attention matrix and value
to obtain the attention embedding. Differently, the attention
matrix in Tri-Attention captures three-dimensional interactions
between query, key, and context. To make value consistent
with the semantic space of the triple attention matrix, the rel-
evance between context and value is also calculated, producing
contextual value. Finally, the attention embedding is obtained
as a weighted linear combination of contextual value vectors.
We test Tri-Attention-enabled networks for three independent
NLP tasks, including retrieval-based English dialogue, Chinese
sentence matching, and English reading comprehension. The
results show that Tri-Attention outperforms most state-of-the-
art approaches without attention, with Bi-Attention, contextual
Bi-Attention, and pretrained language models with context.
Furthermore, we evaluate the different performance of Bi-
Attention, contextual Bi-Attention versus Tri-Attention and the
effectiveness of Tri-Attention through a case study.
The main contributions of this work include:
• The proposed Tri-Attention mechanism expands the stan-
dard two-dimensional attention framework to explicitly
involve and couple contextual information with query and
key, hence the attention weights more sufﬁciently capture
context-aware sequence interactions. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on explicitly involving
context (contextual features) and learning query-key-
context interaction-based attention between sequences.
• Tri-attention takes a general three-dimensional tensor
framework, which can be instantiated into different imple-
mentations and applied to various tasks. We illustrate four
variants by expanding the additive, dot-product, scaled
dot-product and trilinear operations on query, key and
context using tensor algebra for calculating Tri-Attention.
• Extensive experiments on three different NLP tasks
and their real-world public datasets demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of Tri-Attention. The Tri-Attention-enabled
networks produce substantially better performance than
about 30 state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the related work. Section III discusses the back-
ground and preliminaries. Section IV proposes Tri-Attention
mechanism and its variant implementations. Section V intro-
duces the multi-task-shared Tri-Attention network. Section VI
demonstrates the performance of Tri-Attention by comparing
it with state-of-the-art methods in terms of a variety of aspects.
Lastly, Section VII concludes this work.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we brieﬂy review the related work on
attention mechanisms and involving contextual information in
attention, respectively.
Human perception and visual processing may selective cer-
tain relevant parts of an image while ignoring other irrelevant
information [1]. This human attention mechanism has inspired
the neural attention models widely applied in computer vision
[16]. Attention has also shown success in neural NLP tasks,
such as machine translation, automatic question answering,
sentence matching, and word sense disambiguation, where
attention usually captures the interactions between sequences.
For example, in machine translation, a recurrent attention
measures the weights of all heads in each Transformer layer
to build more efﬁcient neural machine translation models
[17]. In [18], syntax-enhanced attention mechanisms SEAs
improve syntactic-enhanced machine translation by involving
a dependency mask bias and a relative local-phrasal position
bias. In [19], a source-target bilingual syntactic alignment
SyntAligner aligns the syntactic structures of source and
target sentences with border-sensitive span attention and then
maximizes their mutual dependency for machine translation. In
automatic question answering, a Block-Skim attention mech-
anism measures the importance of tokens and blocks to skim
unnecessary context, improving the Transformer performance
[20]. In sentence semantic matching (SSM), A 3D CNN-based
SSM model ﬁrst constructs multi-dimensional representations
for each sentence, then utilizes a 3D CNN and an attention
mechanism to learn the interactive matching features [21].
In word sense disambiguation (WSD), an extractive sense
comprehension mechanism employs local self-attention to
constraint attentions to be local, which allows to handle longer
context without heavy computing burdens [22].
In NLP tasks, the existing Bi-Attention mechanisms calcu-
late attention scores by focusing on local relevance matching
at the token level without explicitly taking their overall context
into account. Each element of the attention matrix is only
computed based on two individual tokens query and key.
This two-dimensional Bi-Attention mechanism ignores the
interactions with and inﬂuence of their context, e.g., contextual
words or sentences surrounding target words. On one hand,
contextual information may involve important information and
inﬂuence on the target, as demonstrated in other areas such
as contextual and sequential recommender systems [23] and
contextual matrix factorization [24]. On the other, the inter-
actions and couplings between a target and its context form
essential constituents of the target, as shown in attribute/feature
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
3
interaction analysis [25], [26], and multi-party interaction
learning [27], [28]. These prompt the potential and need for
including context and target-context interactions into neural
attention mechanisms.
In fact, various efforts aim to involve contextual information
in Bi-Attention mechanisms for NLP [13], [29], [30]. For
example, Yang et al. [29] directly incorporate contextual
information into the representations of query and key with
addition operations. Ding et al. [30] argue that the existing
cross-attention was confused by the localness perception prob-
lem, which fails to adequately capture the whole context. A
context-aware cross-attention method models both local and
global contexts, which uses an interpolation gating mechanism
to combine the original and local cross-attention. Hu et al.
[13] propose a context-aware attention network (COIN) for
sentence matching. Its core component is a context-aware
interaction block consisting of a context-aware cross-attention
layer and a gate fusion layer, which consults contextual
information to enable better alignments and blends the original
and aligned representations with a gate connection.
In addition, contextual information or contextual attention
has also been applied in various non-NLP tasks, such as image
inpainting [31], [32], video captioning [33], recommendation
[23], [34], and decision making [35], [36]. Regarding contex-
tual attention for various vision and image-related tasks, for
instance, in [31], contextual attention in CNN synthesizes both
image structures and surrounding image features as references
for image inpainting. The selective contextual attention in
[37] further learns pixel- and patch-level attentions from back-
ground regions and selectively utilizes contextual attention to
enhance the original features. The contextual attention network
in [33] ﬁrst extracts visual and textual features at each time
step, then utilizes a contextual attention mechanism to capture
more information for captioning. In contextual attention-based
recommendation, for example, attention-based inﬂuential con-
texts are modeled by involving heterogeneous relations for
recommendation [34]. In [23], the attention of context is
measured and incorporated into sequential recommendation.
These studies show the great potential of integrating context
with attention for non-NLP tasks. Furthermore, in contextual
reinforcement learning (cRL), a contextual MDP (cMDP) ex-
tended the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) to learn
context-conditioned policies, which increases the robustness
and generalization of RL models [35], [36].
Although the above-mentioned work strives to implement
contextual attention to model the inﬂuence from context, they
do not directly capture target-context interactions, i.e., the
interactions between context, query and key in calculating
attention scores. They still rely on the framework of standard
query-key-based Bi-Attention mechanism, merely integrate
contextual information and the original representation using
addition operations or gating mechanisms, there are no-to-
weak interactions between contextual information and the
representations of query and key.
To address the shortage of two-dimensional query-key at-
tention and the limitation of existing studies, we propose a
query-key-context triple attention (Tri-Attention) framework.
Tri-Attention uses tensor algebra techniques to explicitly in-
volve contextual information and capture query-key-context
interactions. In calculating the attention matrix, Tri-Attention
incorporates contextual information and treats it equally with
the Bi-Attention factors query, key, and value. In this way,
Tri-Attention expands Bi-Attention mechanisms by allowing
contextual information to explicitly participate in calculating
attention weights.
Consequently, the contextual information in Tri-Attention
plays an essential role in capturing the interactions between
sequences under their contexts. This also expands the con-
textual Bi-Attention mechanisms where context only plays a
complementary role.
III. BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES
Here, we introduce tensor algebra and the design of the
standard Bi-Attention mechanism. These lay the foundation
of our proposed Tri-Attention.
A. Tensor Algebra
Our Tri-Attention builds on tensor algebra to incorporate
and interact context with query, key, and value and calculate
attention weights on the query-key-context tensor. Therefore,
here, we introduce the essential algebraic notations and con-
cepts. We use a bold uppercase symbol to represent a matrix,
e.g., X; a bold lowercase for a vector (column), e.g., x;
and a lowercase or uppercase for a scalar, e.g., x or X. A
tensor is denoted by a bold calligraphic symbol, e.g., a three-
dimensional real-valued tensor: X ∈RI×J×K.
The tensor or vector matrix multiplication [38] is applied
to calculate Tri-Attention weights. Given a tensor X
∈
RI1×I2×···×IN , and a matrix Y
∈
RJ×In, the n-mode
product of X and Y
is deﬁned as X ×n Y
= Z
∈
RI1×I2×···×In−1×J×In+1×···×IN , where
Zi1i2···in−1jin+1···iN =
In
X
in=1
xi1i2···in−1inin+1···iN yjin.
(1)
Similarly, the n-mode product between X
and column
vector y
∈
RIn
is written as X ×n y⊺
=
Z
∈
RI1×I2×···×In−1×1×In+1×···×IN with element-wise entry as:
Zi1i2···in−11in+1···iN =
In
X
in=1
xi1i2···in···iN yin.
(2)
Oftentimes, the trivial n-th dimension in Z is squeezed out
such that Z ∈RI1×I2×···×In−1×In+1×···×IN is (n −1)-way.
In this work, we keep this dimension for the convenience in
formulating the Trilinear attention in Section IV.
To formulate our idea, we use C=[c1, c2, · · · , cJ] ∈RD×J
to represent the contextual matrix which contains J context
vectors. Each contextual vector is a column vector of length D,
that is cj ∈RD, j = 1, 2, · · · , J. In this paper, a vector refers
to a column vector by default. The key information is repre-
sented by matrix K=[k1, k2, · · · , kI] ∈RD×I which includes
I key vectors of D dimensions. Similarly, the corresponding
value information is represented by V =[v1, v2, · · · , vI] ∈
RD×I. In general, a query vector is denoted by q ∈RD.
For N query vectors, we use Q ∈RD×N.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
4
B. Standard Bi-Attention Mechanism
The standard Bi-Attention mechanism customarily obtains
interactive features by calculating the relevance score between
sequences. It consists of three major steps.
First, the relevance F(q, ki) between query q and key ki
is calculated:
F(q, ki) = Similarity(q, ki),
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(3)
Second, F(q, ki) is normalized by the softmax function:
αi =
exp
 F(q, ki)

IP
i′=1
exp
 F(q, ki′)
,
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(4)
where αi is the normalized attention weight.
Lastly, the attention embedding is obtained by a weighted
linear combination with value vi:
qnew =
I
X
i=1
αivi = V α.
(5)
In practice, the similarity measure is not unique, resulting
in different attention mechanisms and designs. The four most
commonly used similarity measure methods are additive (Add)
similarity, dot-product (DP) similarity, scaled dot-product
(SDP) similarity, and bilinear (Bili) similarity.
Additive (Add) similarity [39]:
F(q, ki) = p⊺tanh(W q + Uki),
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(6)
Dot-product (DP) similarity [40]:
F(q, ki) = q⊺ki,
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(7)
Scaled dot-product (SDP) similarity [41]:
F(q, ki) = q⊺ki
√
D
,
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(8)
Bilinear (Bili) similarity [40]:
F(q, ki) = q⊺W ki,
i = 1, 2, · · · , I,
(9)
W , U and p are learnable parameters.
The main drawback of the standard Bi-Attention mecha-
nisms lies in that the relevance scores between sequences only
build on the token representations of q and ki. No contextual
information and the interaction between context and query and
key are involved, which may miss important environmental
information and cause inaccurate relevance.
IV. TRI-ATTENTION MECHANISM
In this section, we introduce the proposed Tri-Attention
mechanism. It extends the Bi-Attention mechanisms and builds
on tensor operations for variant implementations of the query-
key-context similarity.
Context
Key
Query
Value
Value
Con_Value
F(Query,Key)
SoftMax
MatMul
a. Bi-Attention
b. Tri-Attention
Relevance Score
Attention Weight
Attention Value
F(Query,Key,Context)
SoftMax
MatMul
Query
Key
Relevance Score
Attention Weight
Attention Value
Merge
Fig. 2: Comparison of the standard Bi-Attention versus Tri-
Attention mechanisms. The elements in red refer to the new
modules introduced by Tri-Attention, which adjust standard
query-key-value to be context dependent. As a result, the
calculation of contextual relevance scores is semantically
consistent with the computation of contextual values.
A. Framework of Tri-Attention Mechanism
The Tri-Attention mechanism expands the standard query-
key similarity-based Bi-Attention mechanism in Section III-B
to query-key-context tensor similarity, which thus explicitly
involves contextual information and captures the interactions
between target sequences and their contexts. Tri-Attention
engages contextual features in calculating the relevance scores
between sequences and then adjusts values to be context
dependent. Bi-Attention can be viewed as a special case
of Tri-Attention without the explicit dimension of context.
Once context is removed, Tri-Attention is degraded to Bi-
Attention. Fig. 2 illustrates the main ideas and processes of
Bi-Attention versus Tri-Attention mechanism. The extension
of Bi-Attention to Tri-Attention is marked in red for differen-
tiating the two mechanisms.
In contrast to the standard three-step attention learning in
Bi-Attention, Tri-Attention generalizes their ﬁrst and third
steps. In the ﬁrst step, Tri-Attention ﬁrst expands the similar-
ity calculation by involving contextual information to obtain
context-dependent query-key relevance scores, forming con-
textual relevance score. In the third step, Tri-Attention explic-
itly integrates context and value to produce context-dependent
value, resulting in contextual value. The resultant contextual
value resides in the same semantic space as contextual rele-
vance scores. Both capture extra contextual information and
query-key-value-context interactions for a more informative
but semantically consistent attention representation.
B. Contextual Relevance Score
To obtain relevance scores informative to the context of
target sequences, we expand the relevance calculation meth-
ods including additive, dot-product, scaled dot-product, and
bilinear similarity in Section III-B by explicitly incorporating
contextual information as a third dimension. This results in
four contextual relevance similarity calculators: T-additive
(TAdd), T-dot-product (TDP), T-scaled-dot-product (TSDP),
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
5
and Trilinear (Trili) operations on the query-key-context tensor
by applying the tensor-matrix or vector product operations
deﬁned in Eqs. (1) and (2). Here, preﬁx “T-” indicates its roles
for Tri-Attention by involving the third dimension context into
attention mechanisms.
T-additive (TAdd) similarity: The T-additive similarity ex-
pands the additive similarity in Eq. (6) by adding a context
dimension cj to the usual terms q and ki, formulated below:
F(q, ki, cj) = p⊺tanh(W q + Uki + Hcj),
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
(10)
where W , U, H, and p are learnable parameters.
T-dot-product (TDP) similarity: The T-dot-product similar-
ity expands the standard query-key dot-product attention in
Eq. (7) for Bi-Attention to the query-value-context T-dot-
product attention. T-dot-product attention replaces the inner
product of query and value vectors by the contextual inner
product between the query, value, and context vectors, which
is formulated below:
F(q, ki, cj) =
D
X
d=1
qdkidcjd = ⟨q, ki, cj⟩
= I ×1 q⊺×2 k⊺
i ×3 c⊺
j
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
,
(11)
where ⟨q, ki, cj⟩is the contextual inner product of three
vectors; q⊺, k⊺
i , and c⊺
j , which are treated as row vectors,
i.e. of size 1 × D. ×1, ×2, and ×3 are 1-mode, 2-mode,
and 3-mode tensor-matrix or vector multiplication operators,
respectively. I is a 3-way identity tensor of size D × D × D,
where only the (d, d, d)-th element is 1 (d = 1, 2, · · · , D), and
others are 0. The resultant F(q, ki, cj) is a scalar (i.e., of size
1 × 1 × 1).
T-scaled-dot-product
(TSDP)
similarity:
Similarly,
the
scaled-dot-product attention in Eq. (8) for Bi-Attention is gen-
eralized to T-scaled-dot-product. T-scaled-dot-product divides
the contextual inner product by the squared root of the number
of dimensions:
F(q, ki, cj) =
PD
d=1 qdkidcjd
√
D
= ⟨q, ki, cj⟩
√
D
=
I ×1 q⊺×2 k⊺
i ×3 c⊺
j
√
D
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
.
(12)
Trilinear (Trili) similarity: With context involved, the bi-
linear form in Eq. (9) is naturally extended to a multilinear,
precisely trilinear, form using tensor-vector products, labeled
as Trilinear:
F(q, ki, cj) =
D
X
d=1
D
X
d′=1
D
X
d′′=1
wdd′d′′qdkid′cjd′′
= W ×1 q⊺×2 k⊺
i ×3 c⊺
j
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
,
(13)
The learnable weight tensor W ∈RD×D×D governs the
interactions between any dimensions of the three vectors. T-
dot-product and T-scaled-dot-product are special cases of this
general form. A nice property of this contextual generalization
is that the contextual relevance scores can be computed and
stored in a tensor using query, key, and context matrices:
F(Q, K, C) = W ×1 Q⊺×2 K⊺×3 C⊺∈RN×I×J where
N, I, and J are the number of query vectors, key vectors, and
context vectors, respectively. However, the size of W grows
in a cubic way. Hence, F(Q, K, C) may not scale well. In
practice, we can use an economic version as follows:
F(q, ki, cj) = ⟨W q, Uki, Hcj⟩
= I ×1 (W q)⊺×2 (Uki)⊺×3 (Hcj)⊺
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
,
(14)
where W , U, and H are learnable matrices. Concisely, for
matrix inputs, we have F(Q, K, C) = I ×1 (W Q)⊺×2
(UK)⊺×3 (HC)⊺∈RN×I×J.
C. Normalized Contextual Relevance Score
Consistent with the Bi-Attention mechanism, the contextual
relevance score F(q, ki, cj) calculated by Eq. (14) for Tri-
Attention is also normalized by the softmax function:
αc
ij =
exp
 F(q, ki, cj)

IP
i′=1
JP
j′=1
exp
 F(q, ki′, cj′)

i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
.
(15)
Consequently, the attention weights for query q is represented
by matrix Ac ∈RI×J.
D. Contextual Value
The above contextual relevance scores contain contextual
information and interactions between context, query, and key.
To semantically match value to this contextual relevance score,
we further integrate value with context using one of the
following methods to obtain contextual value.
Additive context-value integration:
vc
(i,j) = vi + cj
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J.
(16)
Multiplicative context-value integration:
vc
(i,j) = vi ∗cj
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J
(17)
where ∗is the Hadamard product operator.
Bilinear context-value integration:
vc
(i,j) = (U ′vi) ∗(H′cj)
i = 1, 2, · · · , I; j = 1, 2, · · · , J.
(18)
In Eqs. (16)-(18), vc
(i,j) ∈RD. These methods generate the
contextual value tensor Vc ∈RI×J×D.
E. Contextual Attention Embedding
Since there are different approaches to obtain contextual
attention weight matrix Ac by Eq. (15) and value tensor
Vc per Eqs. (16)-(18), for the semantic consistency, their
operation may be consistent. For example, if T-additive in
Eq. (10) is applied to obtain αc
ij, then additive context-value
integration in Eq. (16) should be correspondingly applied to
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
6
BERTt
BERTt
BERTn
Avg_Pool
Avg_Pool
Avg_Pool
Tri-Attention
Tri-Attention
Dense
Interaction 
Module
Encoding 
Module
...
X N
Filtering 
Module
Tri-Attention
Tri-Attention
Avg_Pool
Avg_Pool
BERTn 
Pooled output
Concat
Aggregation 
Module
-
Softmax
Classifier
Prediction 
Module
Question
Response
Context
S4
S3
S6
S5
R
S1
S2
Dialogue History
Response
Question
Answer
Passage
Input Module
S2
Concat
S1
[S1;S2]
i. Retrieval-based Dialogue
ii. Sentence Semantic Matching
iii. Machine Reading Comprehension
a. Input Modules of Different Tasks
b. Model Architecture
Fig. 3: Shared architecture of Tri-Attention network (TAN) for three NLP tasks: left panel - input modules, right panel - model
architecture.
obtain contextual value vc
(i,j). Further, the new contextual
attention embedding qc
new corresponding to query q is:
qc
new =
I
X
i=1
J
X
j=1
αc
ijvc
(i,j) = V cαc,
(19)
where qc
new
∈RD, V c is mode-3 matricized from Vc:
V c=[vc
1, vc
2, · · · , vc
I∗J] ∈RD×(I∗J), and αc is vectorized
from Ac. For m=(i−1)I +j, vc
m in V c corresponds to vc
(i,j)
in Vc and αc
m in αc is the same as αc
ij in Ac.
F. Choice of Contexts
Since contextual information varies over tasks and deﬁni-
tions, the acquisition of context is task-speciﬁc [13], [15], [30],
[36], [42]. As an example by following the practice in [42] for
NLP tasks, we ﬁrst choose the encoding results of BERT for
different sequences as the preliminary contextual information.
Then an average pooling operation is applied to obtain the
ﬁnal contextual features.
More speciﬁcally, assume a task consists of several input
sequences S1, S2, · · · , and SK. First, we segment each se-
quence according to the minimum granularity of the language
underlying the inputs. For example, if the sequences are in
Chinese, Chinese can be segmented in terms of Chinese char-
acters. In contrast, if English is involved, the inputs should be
segmented on the granularity of words. Then, we concatenate
the segmented sequences with segments {SEP} to a new
sequence as follows:
S = {[CLS], S1, [SEP], · · · , [SEP], SK, [SEP]}
= {[CLS], w1
1, · · · , w
lS1
1 , [SEP], · · · , [SEP],
w1
K, · · · , w
lSK
K , [SEP]},
(20)
where wl
k is the l-th token in the k-th sequence. Finally, we
feed this new sequence S into BERT to obtain the contextual
information, which consists of a list of vectors corresponding
to all tokens respectively. It is worth noting that the output of
BERT consists of two parts, and we use the ﬁrst part as the
contextual feature.
V. A MULTI-TASK-SHARED TRI-ATTENTION NETWORK
Here, we apply Tri-Attention in diverse NLP tasks by con-
structing a multi-task-shared Tri-Attention-enabled network
(TAN). We test Tri-Attention for retrieval-based dialogue,
sentence semantic matching, and machine reading comprehen-
sion. Accordingly, the shared architecture of our Tri-Attention
network for these tasks is shown in Fig. 3.
TAN consists of two main panels. The left consists of three
input modules corresponding to three NLP tasks, respectively.
For each task, its input sequences and contexts speciﬁed ac-
cording to the task-speciﬁc requirement, which are marked by
different colors. The right panel implements the corresponding
attention mechanism and learning tasks. It consists of ﬁve
core modules: encoding module, ﬁltering module, interaction
module, aggregation module, and prediction module. First, the
encoding module employs BERTt to encode the two input
sequences to obtain their feature representations, and utilizes
BERTn to encode the context to obtain the contextual feature
representation. Second, the ﬁltering module trims the sequence
length of the above representations to facilitate the following
processing. Third, the interaction module applies Tri-Attention
to engage three representations of input and context sequences
and then couple them by the Tri-Attention mechanism. The
stack number (i.e., N in Fig. 3) of interaction modules is
adjustable per learning task requirements and based on the
relevance score calculation methods, as shown in Table IV.
Furthermore, the feature aggregation module performs the
average-pooling of the representations of two input sequences
to ﬁlter them and then concatenates their representations with
the pooling representation of the output of BERTn, and the
difference between representations of two input sequences.
Lastly, a prediction module feeds the above four represen-
tations to a softmax function to predict the ﬁnal response
matching score. Below, in discussing the experimental settings
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
7
for each task, we will further explain the task-speciﬁc settings
to customize TAN for each task.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
To verify the effectiveness of Tri-Attention mechanism in
comparison with Bi-Attention, we conduct extensive exper-
iments on three NLP tasks: retrieval-based dialogue, sen-
tence semantic matching, and machine reading comprehen-
sion. Three public datasets are used to evaluate the results by
comparing with different baseline methods for each task. In
addition, we report the results of ablation study and case study.
A. Evaluation Tasks and Their Datasets
We evaluate Tri-Attention in three diverse NLP tasks:
retrieval-based dialogue, sentence semantic matching, and
machine reading comprehension. These tasks and their cor-
responding datasets are introduced below.
• Retrieval-based dialogue. Given historical dialogue utter-
ances, this task selects the correct response from multiple
candidate responses. A commonly used data Ubuntu
Corpus V1 [43] is tested here. It is a public dialogue
dataset containing some 1 million multi-turn dialogues,
with a total of over 7 million utterances and 100 million
words. The ratio of positive versus negative instances
in the training set is 1:1. The ratio of positive versus
negative instances in the validation and test sets is 1:9.
Table I illustrates the samples from the Ubuntu Corpus
V1 corpus. S1-S6 are historical dialogue utterances, and
the candidate response utterances consist of a positive
case and a negative case.
S1
hey guys i am trying to compile an
application
path
went well and
it created a
path
which takes
some arguments but i dont know
how to use this ﬁle ... can somebody
give me a hint
Historical
S2
did n’t
path
created a makeﬁle
dialogue
S3
ikonia take a look at this
url
utterances
S4
it did but is does nothing
S5
it just mentions make *** no targets
speciﬁed and no makeﬁle found stop .”
S6
seems like
path
uses this .. you
do n’t have to run this manually
Positive
look at the install ﬁle i think i just
Candidate
(label:1)
have to pass the right arguments
response
thanks a lot i think i have more to go
utterances
Negative
on for my little project the syntax there
(label:0)
there is pretty easy to parse and all you
need is to make wget download that url
TABLE I: Instances of retrieval-based dialogues [43].
• Sentence semantic matching. This task decides whether
two sentences share similar meaning. We use a large-
scale Chinese corpus LCQMC [44] for sentence semantic
matching. It consists of 260,068 question pairs collected
by Baidu Knows. There are three subsets: 238,766 ques-
tion pairs for training, 8,802 question pairs for validation,
and 12,500 question pairs for test. Table II illustrates two
of its instances in LCQMC.
S1
哪首歌里有这句歌词
Positive
(En: Which song has this lyrics)
(label:1)
S2
这句歌词是哪首歌的？
(En: Which song does this lyric come from?)
S3
哪些浏览器可以看电影
Negative
(En: Which browser can play movies)
(label:0)
S4
什么浏览器可以下电影
(En: Which browser can download movies)
TABLE II: Instances of sentence semantic matching data [44].
• Machine reading comprehension. Given a passage and
its corresponding question, this task identiﬁes the correct
answer from multiple candidate choices. RACE [45]
is recognized as one of the largest and most difﬁcult
English datasets for multi-choice reading comprehension.
It consists of two subsets: RACE-M and RACE-H, cor-
responding to the difﬁculty level for middle school and
high school, respectively. Table III illustrates this data.
Are you carrying too much on your back at
school? You’re not alone. Back experts in
the USA are worried about that young students
are having back and neck problems because
they are carrying too much in their backpacks
Passage
...
(3) The heaviest things should be packed
closest to the back.
(4) Bend both knees when you pick up the
pack, don’t just bend over the waist
Question
The main idea of the passage is about
.
A. the problems made by rolling backpacks
Candidate
B. the advantage of backpacks
choices
C. the best backpacks for students
D. how to lighten students’ backpacks
Correct answer
D
TABLE III: Instances of machine reading comprehension data
[45]
B. TAN Settings
As shown in Fig. 3, the contextual information in Tri-
Attention the concatenation of the outputs of BERT applied on
input sequences, consistent with [42]. It is shown in [46] that
the outputs of different layers of BERT can capture different
sentence features. Inspired by this, our experiment shows that
better performance can be achieved using the output of layer 1
as the representation of a single sequence. When the ﬁnal rep-
resentations of different sequences are obtained, we ﬁlter the
representations by average pooling. Finally, inspired by [47],
we concatenate the representations of different sequences, the
differential representations between sequences, and the pooled
representation of BERT. The concatenate results are fed to
softmax for classiﬁcation. We also add the dropout strategy
with dropout rate 0.1 following [48]. The above settings are
applied to all three tasks: retrieval-based dialogue, sentence
semantic matching, and machine reading comprehension.
In addition, some hyperparameters are set for different tasks.
The learning rate 1e-5 is used for retrieval-based dialogue, and
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
8
Task
Dataset
Tri-AttentionTAdd
Tri-AttentionTDP
Tri-AttentionTSDP
Tri-AttentionTrili
Retrieval-based dialogue
Ubuntu Corpus V1
3
2
3
4
Sentence semantic matching
LCQMC
2
3
3
1
Machine reading comprehension
RACE
4
3
4
1
TABLE IV: Number of Tri-Attention layers with different similarity operations in TAN for different NLP tasks and datasets.
2e-5 for both sentence semantic matching and machine reading
comprehension. The batch size for retrieval-based dialogue
is 32, with 64 for sentence semantic matching and 16 for
machine reading comprehension. The cross-entropy loss is
used for the objective function of all tasks. AdamW [49]
is used for the optimization of retrieval-based dialogue and
sentence semantic matching, and BertAdam [50] for machine
reading comprehension. In TAN, Tri-Attention is stackable,
thus the number of its layers is adjusted for different tasks.
Table IV describes the number of layers for different tasks and
datasets under different Tri-Attention similarity operations.
C. Task 1: Retrieval-based Dialogue
Here, we evaluate TAN with Tri-Attention mechanism
against three categories of baselines for retrieval-based dia-
logue. The baselines consist of non-attention classic models,
standard Bi-Attention-based neural networks with context or
interaction, and pretrained neural language networks.
1) Baseline Methods: First, several non-attention classic
methods are compared with TAN:
• TF-IDF: A statistical method obtains the relevance fea-
tures of sentences per the frequency of characters [43].
• RNN: A simple RNN encodes utterances to obtain a
feature representation and calculates the relevance score
based on the representation [43].
• CNN: A CNN extracts utterance features and calculates
the relevance representation of the features [51].
• LSTM: LSTM serves as the context encoder to extract
utterance features and then calculates the relevance rep-
resentation [51].
Second, several advanced neural networks with standard Bi-
Attention mechanisms with context or interaction are com-
pared with TAN:
• SMN: A sequential matching network selects responses
to multi-turn conversations, which matches a response to
each utterance in the context at multi-level granularities
and utilizes RNN to accumulate the matching vectors to
model the relations between utterances [52].
• DUA: A self-matching attention routes the vital informa-
tion in each utterance then matches a response to each
reﬁned utterance, followed by attention mechanism to
aggregate matching vectors to obtain the ﬁnal matching
score [53].
• DAM: It constructs the representations of utterances at
different granularities solely with stacked self-attention
then calculates the matching score between the context
and response by cross-attention [54].
• IoI: An interaction-over-interaction network performs
matching by stacking multiple interaction blocks to
achieve deep interaction between responses and utter-
ances [55].
• ESIM: A sequential matching model based only on
chain sequence to select multi-turn responses, which
involves an enhanced sequential inference model and
soft-alignment attention [56].
• MSN: A multi-hop selector network selects the relevant
utterances as the context then calculates the matching
score between the context and response [57].
Lastly, we compare TAN with several pretrained neural
language models:
• BERT: A classical pretrained language model, which is
ﬁne-tuned for retrieval-based dialogue [50].
• RoBERTa-SS-DA: A RoBERTa-based approach, where a
speaker segmentation scheme and dialogue augmentation
improve the performance [58].
• BERT-DPT: It enhances the BERT ability by post-training
on domain-speciﬁc corpus to train contextualized repre-
sentations that are missing in general corpus [59].
• BERT-VFT: A ﬁne-tuned model based on BERT, which
involves parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning for various
tasks [60].
• SA-BERT: A speaker-aware BERT-based model, which
perceives the change of speaker information and incor-
porates domain knowledge into pretrained BERT [61].
• UMSBERT+: Utterance manipulation strategies are used to
select multi-turn responses, including utterance insertion,
deletion, and search strategies, to address some deﬁcien-
cies in existing BERT models [62].
• BERT-SL: A context-response matching model based on
pretrained language models, which introduces four self-
supervised tasks to jointly train the response selection
model in a multi-task manner [63].
• BERT-UMS+FGC: A ﬁne-grained contrastive learning
method for response selection, which generates better
matching representation at ﬁner granularity to select
positive responses [64].
2) TAN Settings: The TAN with Tri-Attention in Fig. 3 is
speciﬁed as follows for retrieval-based dialogue. The inputs
shown on the left panel consist of question, response, and
context. A question is the last sentence in the dialogue history
and a response is the original response in the dataset. The
context is the concatenation of dialogue and response [42]. The
model on the right panel has ﬁve core modules, as described
in Section V. The performance is evaluated by Rn@k, which
denotes whether the top-k retrieved responses from the n
candidate responses contain the right responses.
3) Performance Evaluation:
The performance of TAN
against all baseline models is shown in Table V. We obtain
the following observations.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
9
First, compared with the non-attention classic methods, the
advantage of TAN is very signiﬁcant. The classic methods
model sentences only using observable word features and
simple interaction patterns to evaluate each candidate response.
They are unable to effectively utilize latent semantic infor-
mation and learn complex interaction patterns. Thanks to the
powerful pretrained language model and the Tri-Attention
mechanism, TAN learns more sophisticated semantic features
than these baselines. The learned contextual features are bene-
ﬁcial for representing utterances and responses, thus measuring
their relevance more accurately.
Second, compared with Bi-Attention and interaction-based
networks, TAN also performs much better. This is probably
because TAN employs the pretrained BERTbase model trained
on large corpus, which enhances our model with great prior
knowledge. In contrast, the benchmarks do not involve the vast
amount of prior knowledge.
Third, TAN also outperforms the pretrained BERT, which is
the state-of-the-art language model with self-attention mecha-
nism. Although BERT gains rich prior knowledge pretrained
on a vast amount of textual data, it may not capture interactions
and contexts between utterances and responses for this task.
In addition, BERT pretrained on a general corpus may not be
adaptive to this domain-speciﬁc dialogue dataset. In contrast,
TAN applies Tri-Attention to explicitly capture contexts and
adopts the post-training strategy in [59] on the task dataset to
optimize its speciﬁcity and adaptability.
Lastly, TAN with Tri-Attention consistently outperforms
all pretrained BERT variants. Although most baselines also
perform post-training, they may fail to incorporate contextual
information and accurately capture interactive features be-
tween utterances and responses. In contrast, Tri-Attention fully
considers the context in its attention mechanism to determine
the relevance between utterances and responses, contributing
to the improved performance of TAN over the BERT variants.
D. Task 2: Sentence Semantic Matching
We further test TAN with Tri-Attention mechanism against
three categories of baselines for sentence semantic matching.
The baselines consist of non-attention classic networks, more
advanced networks with relations or standard Bi-Attention-
based context, and pretrained neural language networks.
1) Baseline Methods: First, several non-attention classic
networks are compared to TAN with Tri-Attention:
• WMDchar and
WMDword: They apply the Wasserstein
distance to the matching degree between two sentences
in terms of character and word, respectively [44].
• CNNchar and
CNNword: They utilize a CNN to encode
two sentences for their corresponding sentence repre-
sentations, which are then concatenated to predict the
matching degree with a softmax classiﬁer [44].
• BiLSTMchar and BiLSTMword: They are similar with the
former CNN method replacing CNN by a BiLSTM
component [44].
Second, more advanced networks with relations or standard
Bi-Attention-based context are compared with TAN embedded
with Tri-Attention mechanism:
Methods
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
TF-IDF
41.0
54.5
70.8
RNN
40.3
54.7
81.9
CNN
54.9
68.4
89.6
LSTM
63.8
78.4
94.9
SMN
72.6
84.7
96.1
DUA
75.2
86.8
96.2
DAM
76.7
87.4
96.9
IoI
79.6
89.4
97.4
ESIM
79.6
89.4
97.5
MSN
80.0
89.9
97.8
BERT
80.8
89.7
97.5
RoBERTa-SS-DA
82.6
90.9
97.8
BERT-DPT
85.1
92.4
98.4
BERT-VFT
85.5
92.8
98.5
SA-BERT
85.5
92.8
98.3
UMSBERT+
87.5
94.2
98.8
BERT-SL
88.4
94.6
99.0
BERT-UMS+FGC
88.6
94.8
99.0
TANTAdd
90.5
95.8
99.2
(±0.3)
(±0.06)
(±0.05)
TANTDP
90.3
95.9
99.3
(±0.1)
(±0.3)
(±0.06)
TANTSDP
90.6
95.7
99.2
(±0.3)
(±0.05)
(±0.04)
TANTrili
90.1
95.7
99.3
(±0.08)
(±0.09)
(±0.04)
TABLE V: Retrieval-based dialogue: Experimental results on
the Ubuntu Corpus V1 corpus. The values associated with ± in
brackets are standard deviation. Mean and standard deviation
results are averaged over ﬁve runs of each model. Four
TAN variants of different tensor operation-based Tri-Attention
mechanisms: TAdd - T-Additive, TDP - T-Dot-Product, TSDP
- T-Scaled-Dot-Product, and Trili - Trilinear.
• BiMPMchar and BiMPMword: They employ bilateral multi-
perspective matching to determine the semantic consis-
tency between sentences; BiLSTM learns sentence repre-
sentation, matches two sentences from multi-perspectives,
aggregates the matching results, and makes prediction by
a dense layer [65].
• MSEM: A connected graph describes the relations be-
tween sentences and realizes a neural architecture for
multi-task learning including both sentence matching and
classiﬁcation [66].
• GMN: A neural graph matching network is fed with all
possible segmentation paths to form word lattice graphs
and learns graph-based representations of sentences [42].
• COIN: A cross-attention mechanism combines contextual
information aligning sequences, with aligned representa-
tions interpolated by a gate fusion layer [13].
• 3DSSM: A 3D CNN captures temporal and multi-granular
features of sentences and generates matching representa-
tion [21].
Lastly, we compare TAN to several pretrained neural lan-
guage networks:
• BERT-Chinese: A Chinese BERT model [50].
• BERT-wwm: A Chinese BERT with an entire word mask-
ing mechanism during pretraining [67].
• BERT-wwm-ext: A variant of BERT-wwm with more
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
10
training data and steps [67].
• ERNIE: It learns language representation enhanced by
knowledge masking strategies and entity- and phrase-
level masking [68].
• K-BERT: A model enhances BERT with HowNet by
introducing soft position and visible matrix during ﬁne-
tuning and inference phases [69].
• GMN-BERT: A neural graph matching network with
multi-granular input information [42].
2) TAN Settings: The TAN with Tri-Attention mechanism
is customized for sentence semantic matching. Its architecture
is composed of four core modules as shown in Fig. 3.
Compared to the TAN variant for retrieval-based dialogue, the
ﬁltering module is not necessary. This is because the ﬁltering
module trims too long sequences, while the sequence length
in this task is acceptable. Since the input of sentence semantic
matching consists of only two sentences, the contextual feature
representation is learned by feeding connected results of
question and answer into BERTn [42].
3) Performance Evaluation: The results of TAN for sen-
tence semantic matching compared with all baseline models
are shown in Table VI. We obtain the following observations.
First, TAN signiﬁcantly outperforms all non-attention clas-
sic methods, similar to that for retrieval-based dialogue. The
classic networks are unable to effectively capture latent seman-
tic information and complex interaction patterns. In contrast,
our Tri-Attention-based TAN combines the advantages of
pretrained language model with contextual attention.
Second, TAN also beats advanced networks with interac-
tion or Bi-Attention mechanism. Similar to retrieval-based
dialogue, TAN gains advantages from the prior knowledge
learned by the pretrained model on large-scale corpus and
contextual attention captured by Tri-Attention.
Further, TAN performs better than pretrained BERT vari-
ants. The BERT variants including BERT-wwm, BERT-wwm-
ext and ERNIE were trained on large data with more subtle
training techniques. In contrast, TAN outperforms these base-
lines without the involvement of large data or speciﬁc training
techniques. This means that TAN not only outperforms these
powerful BERT variants in terms of accuracy and F1-score but
also involves less training costs. Additionally, both K-BERT
and GMN-BERT are the latest BERT variants for sentence
semantic matching. Their performance is still inferior to the
best results of TANTAdd and TANTSDP.
Lastly, TANTAdd, TANTDP, and TANTSDP outperform all
baselines in terms of accuracy, and TANTAdd and TANTSDP
achieve better performance than baselines in terms of F1-score.
These results verify the effectiveness of our model. TAN builds
on BERT by replacing its self-attention mechanism with Tri-
Attention mechanism, whose four similarity implementations
make 1-2% improvement in terms of accuracy compared to
the original BERT. This indicates the Tri-Attention mechanism
plays a core role in making TAN better than BERT, i.e., beating
the standard Bi-Attention mechanism.
E. Task 3: Machine Reading Comprehension
The last NLP task for evaluating TAN with Tri-Attention
against the baselines is machine reading comprehension. We
Methods
Accuracy
F1-score
WMDchar
70.6
73.4
WMDword
60.0
70.8
CNNchar
71.8
75.2
CNNword
72.8
75.7
BiLSTMchar
73.5
77.5
BiLSTMword
76.1
78.9
BiMPMchar
83.4
85.0
BiMPMword
83.3
84.9
MSEM
85.7
-
GMN
84.6
86.0
COIN
85.6
86.5
3DSSM
85.7
86.4
BERT
85.73
86.86
BERT-wwm
86.80
87.78
BERT-wwm-ext
86.68
87.71
ERNIE
87.04
88.06
K-BERT
87.10
-
GMN-BERT
87.30
88.0
TANTAdd
87.49 (±0.47)
87.95 (±0.27)
TANTDP
87.25 (±0.11)
87.83 (±0.06)
TANTSDP
87.23 (±0.58)
87.80 (±0.29)
TANTrili
86.72 (±0.05)
87.38 (±0.02)
TABLE VI: Sentence semantic matching: Experimental results
on the LCQMC data. Mean and standard deviation results are
averaged over ﬁve runs of each model.
evaluate this in terms of three sets of baselines: single models,
ensemble models, and pretrained lanaguage neural networks.
1) Baseline Methods: First, we compare TAN with single
model-based methods:
• Stanford AR: The standard Bi-Attention mechanism ob-
tains the question-related passage representation, which
is then coupled with a candidate option to obtain the
relevance score [45].
• GA Reader: A gated attention mechanism captures the
passage information related to a problem, which is cou-
pled with candidate options [45].
• ElimiNet: An elimination gate discards irrelevant options,
reﬁnes passage representations, and selects the most
suitable option by a selection module [70].
• HAF: A hierarchical attention mechanism captures the
interactions between passages, questions and candidate
options [71].
• MUSIC: It dynamically applies different matching strate-
gies to different questions and applies a multi-hop rea-
soning method to reach the right answer [72].
• Hier-Co-Matching: A co-matching strategy matches a
passage to a question and a passage to a candidate answer,
and then leverages a hierarchical LSTM to encode co-
matching states for the relevance representation [73].
Second, we compare TAN with ensemble models:
• GA Reader (6-ensemble): An ensemble method based on
multi-hop gated attention mechanism between passages
and questions [45].
• ElimiNet (6-ensemble): An ensemble method with a
multi-hop mechanism eliminates candidate answers [70].
• GA + ElimiNet (12-ensemble): It integrates GA Reader
(6-ensemble) and ElimiNet (6-ensemble) [74].
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
11
• Dynamic Fusion Network (9-ensemble): An ensemble
model based on multi-strategy inference for a compre-
hension architecture [72].
• CSA Model + ELMo (9-ensemble): It integrates spatial
convolution attention mechanism with pretrained lan-
guage model ELMo [74].
Lastly, we compare TAN with pretrained language models:
• BERTbase: It is the most commonly used pretrained lan-
guage model structure [50].
• BERTbase + DCMN: A reading comprehension model
based on BERTbase and a dual co-matching network
mechanism [6].
2) TAN Settings:
We here customize TAN with Tri-
Attention for machine reading comprehension. As shown in
Fig. 3, its model architecture is similar to that of retrieval-
based dialogue. However, this task involves three input se-
quences. Similar to sentence semantic matching, contextual
feature representation is obtained by feeding the concatenation
of question, answer, and passage representations into BERTn.
3) Performance Evaluation: The results of TAN with Tri-
Attention for machine reading comprehension in comparison
with all baselines are reported in Table VII. Again, TAN
with Tri-Attention outperforms most baselines, verifying their
effectiveness.
First, TAN signiﬁcantly outperforms all single-model-based
methods. This is probably because these single models have a
single structure which cannot model the semantic information
within a text and the semantic relations between texts. TAN
embedded with a pretrained language model and contextual
attention shows their empower.
Second, our approach is clearly superior to all ensem-
ble ones. The ﬁrst four ensemble models: GA Reader (6-
ensemble), ElimiNet (6-ensemble), GA + ElimiNet (12-
ensemble), and Dynamic Fusion Network (9-ensemble), do
not apply pre-training, which may be the main reason for
their low performance. The last ensemble model CSA Model
+ ELMo (9-ensemble) utilizes the pretrained language model
ELMo [75] to enhance its performance. Although this model
has been greatly improved compared with the previous four
models, its performance is still much lower than TAN. This
may be due to two reasons: the advantage of pretrained BERT
in our model and the contextual enhancement by Tri-Attention.
Lastly, similar to the above conclusions in other tasks,
TAN with pretrained BERT beats the original BERT with
self-attention by explicitly capturing contextual interactions
with queries and keys. Speciﬁcally, the TAN with additive
Tri-Attention similarity slightly outperform BERTbase+DCMN,
which is speciﬁc for machine reading comprehension and
relies on strategies and skills used by humans to complete
reading comprehension tasks. In contrast, as a general attention
mechanism, TAN and Tri-Attention are applicable to machine
reading comprehension and other NLP tasks.
F. Bi-Attention vs Tri-Attention Comparison
Here, we further evaluate the effectiveness of Tri-Attention.
Two sets of comparisons are undertaken. The ﬁrst compares
Bi-Attention with Tri-Attention to show the effectiveness
Methods
Accuracy
Stanford AR
43.3
GA Reader
44.1
ElimiNet
44.7
HAF
47.2
MUSIC
47.4
Hier-Co-Matching
50.4
GA Reader (6-ensemble)
45.9
ElimiNet (6-ensemble)
46.5
GA + ElimiNet (12-ensemble)
47.2
Dynamic Fusion Network (9-ensemble)
51.2
CSA Model + ELMo (9-ensemble)
55.0
BERTbase
65.0
BERTbase+DCMN
67.0
TANTAdd
67.5 (±0.04)
TANTDP
66.9 (±0.13)
TANTSDP
66.7 (±0.07)
TANTrili
66.1 (±0.14)
TABLE VII: Machine reading comprehension: Experimental
results on RACE. Means and standard deviations are averaged
over ﬁve runs of each model.
of Tri-Attention. The second compares Tri-Attention with a
commonly used contextual attention enhancement method in
the literature to show the need for capturing explicit query-
key-context interactions. As the RACE data costs too much
time on running a full set of experiments, we here report the
results on LCQMC and the Ubuntu Corpus V1 corpus.
1) Effectiveness: Bi-Attention vs Tri-Attention Mechanisms:
We evaluate the different effect of the Bi-Attention without
contextual information versus the Tri-Attention with context
in the same network structure. The experimental results are
shown in Table VIII. Bi-Attention mechanism does not involve
contextual information in measuring the interactions. Its other
parts are the same as Tri-Attention. We report the results of
these two attention mechanisms under four relevance scoring
operations: TAdd, TDP, TSDP, and Trili, respectively.
Overall, the results show that the Tri-Attention variants
consistently outperform the counterparts without context. This
corroborates the contribution of Tri-Attention with context,
even though the performance varies over different relevance
scoring functions.
Speciﬁcally, on LCQMC, the difference between Bi-
Attention and Tri-Attention mechanisms shows the greatest
under trilinear operation. Tri-Attention gains extra 1.03%
accuracy and 0.76% F1-score over Bi-Attention, respectively.
For the Ubuntu Corpus V1 corpus, the greatest difference is
associated with SDP, where Tri-Attention makes 0.8%, 0.2%,
and 0.1% improvement in terms of evaluation metrics R10@1,
R10@2, and R10@5, respectively.
2) Necessity: Contextual Query-Key Interactions vs Query-
Key-Context Interactions: As discussed in Section II, some
existing methods also involve contextual information, typically
by simple addition or concatenation to target representations.
Here, we evaluate the difference of this way from our ap-
proaches in Tri-Attention which involves context equivalently
to other query and key entities in the attention learning.
We generate a Bi-Attention variant to realize a contextual
attention enhancement method commonly used in the existing
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
12
Methods
LCQMC
Ubuntu Corpus V1 Corpus
Accuracy
F1-score
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
Tri-AttentionTAdd
87.49 (±0.47)
87.95 (±0.27)
90.5 (±0.3)
95.8 (±0.06)
99.2 (±0.05)
Bi-AttentionAdd
86.77 (±0.28)
87.37 (±0.16)
89.9 (±0.4)
95.5 (±0.2)
99.2 (±0.09)
Tri-AttentionTDP
87.25 (±0.11)
87.83 (±0.06)
90.3 (±0.1)
95.9 (±0.3)
99.3 (±0.06)
Bi-AttentionDP
86.52 (±0.09)
87.20 (±0.06)
89.8 (±0.2)
95.5 (±0.1)
99.2 (±0.04)
Tri-AttentionTSDP
87.23 (±0.58)
87.80 (±0.29)
90.6 (±0.3)
95.7 (±0.05)
99.2 (±0.04)
Bi-AttentionSDP
86.61 (±0.09)
87.29 (±0.04)
89.8 (±0.3)
95.5 (±0.2)
99.1 (±0.05)
Tri-AttentionTrili
86.72 (±0.05)
87.38 (±0.02)
90.1 (±0.08)
95.7 (±0.09)
99.3 (±0.04)
Bi-AttentionBili
85.84 (±0.11)
86.72 (±0.06)
89.7 (±0.09)
95.5 (±0.1)
99.2 (±0.03)
TABLE VIII:
Results of effectiveness of Bi-Attention vs Tri-Attention mechanisms on LCQMC and Ubuntu Corpus V1
Corpus. Means and standard deviations are averaged over ﬁve runs.
Methods
LCQMC
Ubuntu Corpus V1 Corpus
Accuracy
F1-score
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
Tri-AttentionTAdd
87.49 (±0.47)
87.95 (±0.27)
90.5 (±0.3)
95.8 (±0.06)
99.2 (±0.05)
C-BiAttentionAdd
86.57 (±0.15)
87.23 (±0.07)
90.1 (±0.4)
95.7 (±0.3)
99.2 (±0.06)
Tri-AttentionTDP
87.25 (±0.11)
87.83 (±0.06)
90.3 (±0.1)
95.9 (±0.3)
99.3 (±0.06)
C-BiAttentionDP
85.94 (±0.21)
86.81 (±0.12)
90.1 (±0.3)
95.6 (±0.2)
99.2 (±0.06)
Tri-AttentionTSDP
87.23 (±0.58)
87.80 (±0.29)
90.6 (±0.3)
95.7 (±0.05)
99.2 (±0.04)
C-BiAttentionSDP
86.64 (±0.11)
87.32 (±0.06)
90.2 (±0.1)
95.7 (±0.2)
99.3 (±0.04)
Tri-AttentionTrili
86.72 (±0.05)
87.38 (±0.02)
90.1 (±0.08)
95.7 (±0.09)
99.3 (±0.04)
C-BiAttentionBili
85.94 (±0.10)
86.82 (±0.06)
90.2 (±0.4)
95.7 (±0.2)
99.2 (±0.05)
TABLE IX: Results of contextual query-key interactions vs query-key-context interactions on LCQMC and Ubuntu Corpus
V1 Corpus. Means and standard deviations are averaged over ﬁve runs.
work. The contextual information is added (with addition)
to each sequence separately to obtain a contextual sequence
representation. Then, the context-enhanced sequence repre-
sentations interact using the standard query-key Bi-Attention
mechanism, whose other network settings are consistent with
Tri-Attention. This forms the commonly used contextual at-
tention in the literature, abbreviated C-BiAttention.
The experimental results are shown in Table IX. It shows
that the performance of C-BiAttention consistently under-
performs than Tri-Attention with all four relevance calcu-
lators. C-BiAttention with the dot-product-based relevance
calculator achieves the lowest performance. On LCQMC, C-
BiAttention reduces 1.52% accuracy and 1.17% F1-score over
Tri-Attention, respectively. Similarly, on the Ubuntu Corpus
V1 corpus, the highest performance degradation is with the
Additive-based approach. In comparison with Tri-Attention,
C-BiAttention decreases 0.4% R10@1, 0.1% R10@2, respec-
tively. This experiment veriﬁes that the explicit query-key-
context interactions in Tri-Attention outperforms the simple
contextual attention by adding or concatenating contextual
information to underlying sequences. It also conﬁrms the
necessity of learning query-key-context interactions in Tri-
Attention.
G. Hyperparameter Analysis: Tri-Attention Layers
TAN in Fig. 3 is a stackable structure, where the number
of Tri-Attention layers can be dynamically adjusted according
to learning tasks. In addition, In addition, different relevance
score calculation methods in Eqs. (10)-(13) also affect the
number of Tri-Attention layers for a learning task. We thus
test the effect of the number of Tri-Attention layers.
Fig. 4 - 6 show the experimental results of retrieval-based
dialogue, sentence semantic matching, and machine reading
comprehension tasks on Ubuntu Corpus V1, LCQMC, and
RACE, respectively. The best performance of Tri-Attention
corresponds to different relevance score calculation methods
for different tasks. This indicates that, when applying Tri-
Attention to a special task, all four relevance calculation
methods should be tried before achieving the best result. In
addition, the number of Tri-Attention layers depends on the
relevance calculation methods and learning tasks. Thus, when
applied to a speciﬁc task, the best number of Tri-Attention
layers needs to be tuned for each relevance calculation method.
H. TAN Case Study
Lastly, we illustrate the prediction results of TAN with Tri-
Attention on the LCQMC data for sentence semantic matching.
We only illustrate the additive-based relevance calculation for
Tri-Attention as the previous experiments show its better sta-
bility. We reapply the three variants used in Section VI-F: Tri-
AttentionAdd, Bi-AttentionAdd and C-BiAttentionAdd, respec-
tively. To verify the advantages of Tri-Attention, the prediction
results of all three models were statistically analyzed.
Speciﬁcally, we conduct a statistical analysis when only
Tri-Attention makes correct prediction while the other two
models predict incorrectly. In the test set of LCQMC, there are
151 pieces of data conforming to the above situation, among
which 49 pieces are positive and 102 pieces are negative. This
suggests that Tri-Attention is better at identifying negative
data. The instance in Table X illustrates the result.
For both S1 and S2, the gold label is 0, which means that
their meanings are different. Our Tri-attention can make a
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
13
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
10@1
R
10@2
R
10@5
R
(a) Tri-AttentionTAdd
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
10@1
R
10@2
R
10@5
R
(b) Tri-AttentionTDP
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
10@1
R
10@2
R
10@5
R
(c) Tri-AttentionTSDP
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
R10@1
R10@2
R10@5
10@1
R
10@2
R
10@5
R
(d) Tri-AttentionTrili
Fig. 4: Performance comparison on the Ubuntu Corpus V1 corpus with different number of Tri-Attention layers.
86
86.5
87
87.5
88
88.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
F1-score
Accuracy
score
-
F1
(a) Tri-AttentionTAdd
86
86.5
87
87.5
88
1
2
3
4
5
6
F1-score
Accuracy
score
-
F1
(b) Tri-AttentionTDP
86
86.5
87
87.5
88
1
2
3
4
5
6
F1-score
Accuracy
score
-
F1
(c) Tri-AttentionTSDP
86
86.5
87
87.5
88
1
2
3
4
5
6
F1-score
Accuracy
score
-
F1
(d) Tri-AttentionTrili
Fig. 5: Performance comparison on LCQMC with different number of Tri-Attention layers.
65.5
66
66.5
67
67.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Accuracy
(a) Tri-AttentionTAdd
65.5
66
66.5
67
67.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Accuracy
(b) Tri-AttentionTDP
65.5
66
66.5
67
67.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
Accuracy
(c) Tri-AttentionTSDP
65
65.5
66
66.5
67
1
2
3
4
5
6
Accuracy
(d) Tri-AttentionTrili
Fig. 6: Performance comparison on RACE with different number of Tri-Attention layers.
Data
Label
S1
哪些浏览器可以看电影
0
(En: Which browsers can play movies)
S2
什么浏览器可以下电影
(En: Which browsers can download movies)
TABLE X: Case study examples from LCQMC.
correct judgement, while the others cannot. Since there are
many overlap words in S1 and S2, if a model judges the
relations between these two sentences only on the basis of
word-level relevance without the contextual information, it
is easy to be misled and draw a wrong conclusion. This
probably explains why the Bi-AttentionAdd method fails to
correctly predict the relation between S1 and S2. As for C-
BiAttentionAdd, although it also involves context, its contextual
information does not participate in the interaction with queries
and keys, thus making no direct impact on the relevance
score between sentences. While Tri-Attention directly involves
context in the interactions between sentences, contributing to
better prediction.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Contextual information has shown essential in many learn-
ing tasks. The great success of attention mechanisms does
not necessarily involves contextual information. In neural
NLP, increasing work on contextual attention learning typi-
cally concatenates contextual features into underlying targets
such as sequences, then the standard query-key-based Bi-
Attention mechanisms calculate relevance scores on the to-
kenized contextual sequence representations. In this paper, a
novel query-key-context-interactive Tri-Attention mechanism
explicitly captures the interactions between query, key and
context. We derive four query-key-context relevance calcu-
lation methods for Tri-Attention using tensor algebraic tech-
niques. Intensive experiments on different NLP tasks show
that Tri-Attention-based networks can serve as a general
attention framework, which outperforms most state-of-the-art
non-attention, standard Bi-Attention, contextual Bi-Attention,
and pretrained language models with attention. Our future
work includes evaluating Tri-Attention in other NLP tasks and
Tri-Attention without pretrained BERT, and exploring more
effective tensor algebraic implementations for for interactions
with n > 3 factors.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Oberauer, “Working memory and attention - A conceptual analysis
and review,” Journal of Cognition, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 36, 2019.
[2] D. Hu, “An introductory survey on attention mechanisms in NLP
problems,” in Proceedings of SAI Intelligent Systems Conference, 2019,
pp. 432–448.
[3] A. Raganato, Y. Scherrer, and J. Tiedemann, “Fixed encoder self-
attention patterns in transformer-based machine translation,” in EMNLP,
2020, pp. 556–568.
[4] B. Lyu, L. Chen, S. Zhu, and K. Yu, “LET: Linguistic knowledge
enhanced graph transformer for Chinese short text matching,” in AAAI,
2021, pp. 13 498–13 506.
[5] Z. Ye, Y. Qin, and W. Xu, “Financial risk prediction with multi-round
Q&A attention network,” in IJCAI, 2020, pp. 4576–4582.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
14
[6] S. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhou, and X. Zhou, “DCMN+:
Dual co-matching network for multi-choice reading comprehension,” in
AAAI, 2020, pp. 9563–9570.
[7] T. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Jin, C. Luo, X. Chen, Y. Wu, Q. Wang, and M. Cai,
“Decoupled attention network for text recognition,” in AAAI, 2020, pp.
12 216–12 224.
[8] M. E. Basiri, S. Nemati, M. Abdar, E. Cambria, and U. R. Acharya,
“Abcdm: An attention-based bidirectional CNN-RNN deep model for
sentiment analysis,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 115, no.
115, pp. 279–294, 2021.
[9] L. Ding, L. Wang, and D. Tao, “Self-attention with cross-lingual position
representation,” in ACL, 2020, pp. 1679–1685.
[10] C. Gilbert, M. Ito, M. Kapadia, and G. Westheimer, “Interactions
between attention, context and learning in primary visual cortex,” Vision
Research, vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 1217–1226, 2000.
[11] P. Knoeferle, “How context inﬂuences language processing and compre-
hension,” Research Outreach, 2020.
[12] R. Willems and M. Peelen, “How context changes the neural basis of
perception and language,” iScience, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 102392, 2021.
[13] Z. Hu, Z. Fu, Y. Yin, and G. de Melo, “Context-aware interaction
network for question matching,” in EMNLP, 2021, pp. 3846–3853.
[14] S. Storks, Q. Gao, and J. Y. Chai, “Recent advances in natural language
inference: A survey of benchmarks, resources, and approaches,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.01172, 2019.
[15] R. Yang, J. Zhang, X. Gao, F. Ji, and H. Chen, “Simple and effective text
matching with richer alignment features,” in ACL, 2019, pp. 4699–4709.
[16] V. Mnih, N. Heess, A. Graves, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Recurrent models
of visual attention,” in NIPS, 2014, pp. 2204–2212.
[17] J. Zeng, S. Wu, Y. Yin, Y. Jiang, and M. Li, “Recurrent attention for
neural machine translation,” in EMNLP, 2021, pp. 3216–3225.
[18] T. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Feng, and L. Cao, “Enlivening redundant heads
in multi-head self-attention for machine translation,” in EMNLP, 2021,
pp. 3238–3248.
[19] T. Zhang, H. Huang, L. Cao, and C. Feng, “Self-supervised bilingual
syntactic alignment for neural machine translation,” in AAAI, 2021, pp.
14 454–14 462.
[20] Y. Guan, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Zhu, J. Leng, and M. Guo, “Block-Skim:
Efﬁcient question answering for Transformer,” in AAAI, 2022, pp.
10 710–10 719.
[21] W. Lu, R. Yu, S. Wang, C. Wang, P. Jian, and H. Huang, “Sentence
semantic matching based on 3D CNN for human-robot language inter-
action,” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.
98:1–98:24, 2021.
[22] G. Zhang, W. Lu, X. Peng, S. Wang, B. Kan, and R. Yu, “Word sense
disambiguation with knowledge-enhanced and local self-attention-based
extractive sense comprehension,” in COLING, 2022.
[23] A. Rashed, S. Elsayed, and L. Schmidt-Thieme, “Context and attribute-
aware sequential recommendation via cross-attention,” in RecSys, 2022,
pp. 71–80.
[24] Y. Zheng and G. Florez Arias, “A family of neural contextual matrix
factorization models for context-aware recommendations,” in UMAP,
2022, pp. 1–6.
[25] Q. Zhang, L. Cao, C. Shi, and Z. Niu, “Neural time-aware sequential
recommendation by jointly modeling preference dynamics and explicit
feature couplings,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 2021.
[26] L. Cao, “Beyond IID: Non-IID thinking, informatics, and learning,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5–17, 2022.
[27] L. Cao and C. Zhu, “Personalized next-best action recommendation with
multi-party interaction learning for automated decision-making,” Plos
one, vol. 17, no. 1, p. e0263010, 2022.
[28] C. Zhu, L. Cao, and J. Yin, “Unsupervised heterogeneous coupling
learning for categorical representation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 533–549, 2020.
[29] B. Yang, J. Li, D. F. Wong, L. S. Chao, X. Wang, and Z. Tu, “Context-
aware self-attention networks,” in AAAI, 2019, pp. 387–394.
[30] L. Ding, L. Wang, D. Wu, D. Tao, and Z. Tu, “Context-aware cross-
attention for non-autoregressive translation,” in COLING, 2020, pp.
4396–4402.
[31] Y. Zeng, Z. Lin, H. Lu, and V. M. Patel, “CR-Fill: Generative image
inpainting with auxiliary contextual reconstruction,” in ICCV, 2021, pp.
14 164–14 173.
[32] H. Xiang, Q. Zou, M. A. Nawaz, X. Huang, F. Zhang, and H. Yu,
“Deep learning for image inpainting: A survey,” Pattern Recognition, p.
109046, 2022.
[33] P. Song, D. Guo, J. Cheng, and M. Wang, “Contextual attention network
for emotional video captioning,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia,
2022.
[34] Y. Pang, L. Wu, Q. Shen, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei, F. Xu, E. Chang,
B. Long, and J. Pei, “Heterogeneous global graph neural networks for
personalized session-based recommendation,” in WSDM, 2022, pp. 775–
783.
[35] A. Hallak, D. D. Castro, and S. Mannor, “Contextual Markov decision
processes,” ArXiv Preprint, p. arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
[36] C. Benjamins, T. Eimer, F. Schubert, A. Mohan, A. Biedenkapp,
B. Rosenhahn, F. Hutter, and M. Lindauer, “Contextualize me -
The case for context in reinforcement learning,” ArXiv Preprint, p.
arXiv:2202.04500, 2022.
[37] J. Liu, M. Gong, Z. Tang, A. Qin, H. Li, and F. Jiang, “Deep image
inpainting with enhanced normalization and contextual attention,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 2022.
[38] T. Kolda and B. Bader, “Tensor decompositions and applications,” SIAM
Review, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455–500, 2009.
[39] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” in ICLR, 2015, pp. 1–15.
[40] T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning, “Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation,” in EMNLP, 2015, pp. 1412–
1421.
[41] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in NIPS, 2017,
pp. 5998–6008.
[42] L. Chen, Y. Zhao, B. Lyu, L. Jin, Z. Chen, S. Zhu, and K. Yu, “Neural
graph matching networks for Chinese short text matching,” in ACL,
2020, pp. 6152–6158.
[43] R. Lowe, N. Pow, I. Serban, and J. Pineau, “The Ubuntu dialogue corpus:
A large dataset for research in unstructured multi-turn dialogue systems,”
in SIGDIAL, 2015, pp. 285–294.
[44] X. Liu, Q. Chen, C. Deng, H. Zeng, J. Chen, D. Li, and B. Tang,
“LCQMC: A large-scale Chinese question matching corpus,” in COL-
ING, 2018, pp. 1952–1962.
[45] G. Lai, Q. Xie, H. Liu, Y. Yang, and E. H. Hovy, “RACE: Large-scale
reading comprehension dataset from examinations,” in EMNLP, 2017,
pp. 785–794.
[46] G. Jawahar, B. Sagot, and D. Seddah, “What does BERT learn about
the structure of language?” in ACL, 2019, pp. 3651–3657.
[47] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
Siamese bert-networks,” in EMNLP, 2019, pp. 3980–3990.
[48] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever,
and
R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overﬁtting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
[49] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
in ICLR, 2019, pp. 1–18.
[50] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in NAACL,
2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[51] R. Kadlec, M. Schmid, and J. Kleindienst, “Improved deep learning
baselines for Ubuntu corpus dialogs,” CoRR, vol. abs/1510.03753, 2015.
[52] Y. Wu, W. Wu, C. Xing, M. Zhou, and Z. Li, “Sequential matching net-
work: A new architecture for multi-turn response selection in retrieval-
based chatbots,” in ACL, 2017, pp. 496–505.
[53] Z. Zhang, J. Li, P. Zhu, H. Zhao, and G. Liu, “Modeling multi-turn
conversation with deep utterance aggregation,” in COLING, 2018, pp.
3740–3752.
[54] X. Zhou, L. Li, D. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, W. X. Zhao, D. Yu, and
H. Wu, “Multi-turn response selection for chatbots with deep attention
matching network,” in ACL, 2018, pp. 1118–1127.
[55] C. Tao, W. Wu, C. Xu, W. Hu, D. Zhao, and R. Yan, “One time
of interaction may not be enough: Go deep with an interaction-over-
interaction network for response selection in dialogues,” in ACL, 2019,
pp. 1–11.
[56] Q. Chen and W. Wang, “Sequential attention-based network for noetic
end-to-end response selection,” CoRR, vol. abs/1901.02609, 2019.
[57] C. Yuan, W. Zhou, M. Li, S. Lv, F. Zhu, J. Han, and S. Hu, “Multi-
hop selector network for multi-turn response selection in retrieval-based
chatbots,” in EMNLP, 2019, pp. 111–120.
[58] J. Lu, X. Ren, Y. Ren, A. Liu, and Z. Xu, “Improving contextual
language models for response retrieval in multi-turn conversation,” in
SIGIR, 2020, pp. 1805–1808.
[59] T. Whang, D. Lee, C. Lee, K. Yang, D. Oh, and H. Lim, “An effective
domain adaptive post-training method for BERT in response selection,”
in INTERSPEECH, 2020, pp. 1585–1589.
15
[60] N. Houlsby, A. Giurgiu, S. Jastrzebski, B. Morrone, Q. de Laroussilhe,
A. Gesmundo, M. Attariyan, and S. Gelly, “Parameter-efﬁcient transfer
learning for NLP,” in ICML, 2019, pp. 2790–2799.
[61] J. Gu, T. Li, Q. Liu, Z. Ling, Z. Su, S. Wei, and X. Zhu, “Speaker-aware
BERT for multi-turn response selection in retrieval-based chatbots,” in
CIKM, 2020, pp. 2041–2044.
[62] T. Whang, D. Lee, D. Oh, C. Lee, K. Han, D. Lee, and S. Lee,
“Do response selection models really know what’s next? utterance
manipulation strategies for multi-turn response selection,” in AAAI,
2021, pp. 14 041–14 049.
[63] R. Xu, C. Tao, D. Jiang, X. Zhao, D. Zhao, and R. Yan, “Learning an
effective context-response matching model with self-supervised tasks for
retrieval-based dialogues,” in AAAI, 2021, pp. 14 158–14 166.
[64] Y. Li, C. Xu, H. Hu, L. Sha, Y. Zhang, and D. Jiang, “Small changes
make big differences: Improving multi-turn response selection in dia-
logue systems via ﬁne-grained contrastive learning,” CoRR, 2021.
[65] Z. Wang, W. Hamza, and R. Florian, “Bilateral multi-perspective match-
ing for natural language sentences,” in IJCAI, 2017, pp. 4144–4150.
[66] Q. Huang, J. Bu, W. Xie, S. Yang, W. Wu, and L. Liu, “Multi-task
sentence encoding model for semantic retrieval in question answering
systems,” in IJCNN, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[67] Y. Cui, W. Che, T. Liu, B. Qin, and Z. Yang, “Pre-training with whole
word masking for chinese BERT,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 29, pp. 3504–3514, 2021.
[68] Y. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Li, S. Feng, X. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Tian,
D. Zhu, H. Tian, and H. Wu, “ERNIE: Enhanced representation through
knowledge integration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09223, 2019.
[69] W. Liu, P. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, Q. Ju, H. Deng, and P. Wang,
“K-BERT: Enabling language representation with knowledge graph,” in
AAAI, 2020, pp. 2901–2908.
[70] S. Parikh, A. Sai, P. Nema, and M. M. Khapra, “ElimiNet: A model
for eliminating options for reading comprehension with multiple choice
questions,” in IJCAI, 2018, pp. 4272–4278.
[71] H. Zhu, F. Wei, B. Qin, and T. Liu, “Hierarchical attention ﬂow for
multiple-choice reading comprehension,” in AAAI, 2018, pp. 6077–6085.
[72] Y. Xu, J. Liu, J. Gao, Y. Shen, and X. Liu, “Towards human-level
machine reading comprehension: Reasoning and inference with multiple
strategies,” CoRR, 2017.
[73] S. Wang, M. Yu, J. Jiang, and S. Chang, “A co-matching model for
multi-choice reading comprehension,” in ACL, 2018, pp. 746–751.
[74] Z. Chen, Y. Cui, W. Ma, S. Wang, and G. Hu, “Convolutional spatial
attention model for reading comprehension with multiple-choice ques-
tions,” in AAAI, 2019, pp. 6276–6283.
[75] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and
L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep contextualized word representations,” in NAACL,
2018, pp. 2227–2237.
Rui Yu received the master’s degree in computer
application technology from the Qilu University
of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences),
Jinan, China. He is pursuing the Ph.D. degree at
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. His research interests include text
semantic matching and question answering system.
He may be contacted at rui.yu1996@foxmail.com.
Yifeng Li received the Ph.D. in Computer Science
from the University of Windsor, Canada. He is an
assistant professor and Canada Research Chair (Tier
2) in Machine Learning for Biomedical Data Science
at the Department of Computer Science, Department
of Biological Sciences, and Centre for Biotechnol-
ogy, Brock University. His research interests include
neural networks, machine learning, data science,
optimization, bioinformatics, and chemoinformatics.
He may be contacted at yli2@brocku.ca.
Wenpeng Lu received the Ph.D. degree in computer
applications from the Beijing Institute of Technol-
ogy, Beijing, China. He is a professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
of Sciences), Jinan, China. His research interests in-
clude natural language processing, machine learning,
and their enterprise applications. He is a member
of IEEE, CCF and CIPS. He may be contacted at
wenpeng.lu@qlu.edu.cu.
Longbing Cao received a Ph.D. degree in pat-
tern recognition and intelligent systems and another
Ph.D. in computing sciences. He is a professor and
an ARC Future Fellow (level 3) at the University of
Technology Sydney. His research interests include
AI, data science, machine learning, behavior infor-
matics, and enterprise innovation. He is the EICs of
IEEE Intelligent Systems and Springer’s JDSA. He
may be contacted at longbing.cao@uts.edu.au.
