Title: Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing: A critical survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05042v3
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2204.05042v3  [cs.CL]  25 Feb 2023
Language Resources and Evaluation manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
A critical survey
Çağrı Çöltekin · A. Seza Doğruöz · Özlem Çetinoğlu
Received: date / Accepted: date
The
ﬁnal
version
of
this
paper
is
published
at
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-022-09605-4.
Please
cite
the published version.
Abstract This paper presents a comprehensive survey of corpora and lexical
resources available for Turkish. We review a broad range of resources, focusing
on the ones that are publicly available. In addition to providing information
about the available linguistic resources, we present a set of recommendations,
and identify gaps in the data available for conducting research and building
applications in Turkish Linguistics and Natural Language Processing.
Keywords Turkish · corpora · lexical resources · NLP · linguistics
1 Introduction
As in many other ﬁelds of science and engineering, the data-driven methods
have been the dominant approach to natural language processing (NLP) and
computational linguistics (CL) for the last few decades. The recent (re)pop-
ularization of deep learning methods increased the importance and need for
the data even further. Similarly, the other subﬁelds of theoretical and applied
linguistics have also seen a shift towards more data-driven methods. As a
result, availability of large and high-quality language data is essential for both
linguistic research and practical NLP applications. In this paper, we present
a comprehensive and critical survey of linguistic resources for Turkish.
Turkish is a language spoken by over 80 million people, mainly in Turkey,
also having a signiﬁcant number of speakers in Cyprus, Europe, and Central
Çağrı Çöltekin
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. E-mail: ccoltekin@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de
A. Seza Doğruöz
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. E-mail: as.dogruoz@ugent.be
Özlem Çetinoğlu
University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. E-mail: ozlem@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
2
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Asia (Eberhard et al., 2020).1 It exhibits a number of interesting linguistic
characteristics that are often challenging to handle in NLP applications in
comparison to the well-studied languages.
As a result, the linguistic resources for Turkish are important for building
practical NLP applications for a large speaker community as well as for quanti-
tative and computational approaches to linguistics, including multilingual and
cross-linguistic research. Furthermore, since Turkish is one of the largest and
most well-studied languages in the Turkic language family, the resources we
review below are potentially useful for language transfer in NLP applications,
and as examples for resource and tool creation eﬀorts for the other Turkic
languages.
Our survey mainly focuses on currently available resources (see Aksan and
Aksan, 2018, for a more historical account of Turkish corpora). We also in-
troduce a companion webpage which we update as new linguistic resources
become available.2 Our survey provides an overview of the available resources,
giving details for the major ones, and aims to identify the areas where more
eﬀort is needed. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst survey of its kind on Turkish
resources. The most similar work is an edited volume of papers on various NLP
tasks for Turkish (Oﬂazer and Saraçlar, 2018). Unlike our work, however, the
focus is not the linguistic resources but NLP techniques and tools, and most of
the contributions are updated descriptions of the research published earlier. A
similar initiative to our companion website is the recently announced Turkish
Data Depository (TDD) project (Safaya et al., 2022),3 which aims to build a
repository of data and models for Turkish NLP. Our aim is collecting a more
comprehensive list of pointers which can be useful for both NLP and linguistic
research, while the TDD intends to store the actual data and the models for
NLP with a more practical purpose.
Our focus in this survey is linguistic data, in particular, corpora and lexical
resources. We do not aim to describe the research questions, methods and/or
the results of these studies but focus on describing the resources in detail.
We include resources that are potentially useful for NLP applications, as well
as for linguistic research. We also do not focus on NLP tools explicitly, such
as data-driven part-of-speech (POS) taggers or parsers and higher level tools
or services that target non-technical audience such as the web-based NLP
pipelines (e.g., Eryiğit, 2014; Çöltekin, 2015b).
The main contribution of the current paper is a broad, comprehensive
overview of the linguistic data available for Turkish to enable linguists and
NLP researchers/practitioners to locate these resources easily. We also identify
missing or incomplete resources, suggesting potential areas for future resource
1 Throughout this paper, we use Turkish only for referring to the language variety spoken
in modern Turkey and use of this variety in other countries/regions. Hence, this count does
not include other Turkic languages, including ones mutually intelligible with Turkish.
2 The web page is publicly available at https://turkishnlp.github.io. The current list
was compiled mostly by our own eﬀorts. However, we also welcome suggestions through a
simple web-based form, and also through the GitHub repository associated with this URL.
3 https://tdd.ai/.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
3
creation eﬀorts. We do not only oﬀer a static survey, but we intend to maintain
a ‘living list’ of resources and a repository of publicly available linguistic data.
2 Corpora
This section surveys corpora available for Turkish. We start with general-
purpose, linguistically motivated corpora, followed by corpora used for more
speciﬁc purposes.
2.1 Balanced corpora
Since corpora collected from a single source (genre, domain) contain many
idiosyncratic aspects of its source, the creation of balanced or representative
corpora has been a major activity in computational/corpus linguistics since the
earliest examples of linguistic corpora (e.g., Francis and Kučera, 1979). There
are two well-known balanced corpora for Turkish, the Middle East Technical
University (METU) corpus (Say et al., 2002) and Turkish National Corpus
(TNC, Aksan et al., 2012).
The METU corpus is the ﬁrst balanced corpus released for Turkish. The cor-
pus consists only of written modality sampled from 14 diﬀerent text types in-
cluding novels, essays, research articles, travel articles, interviews, news, news-
paper columns, biographies and memoirs. The corpus contains approximately
1 000 documents and 1.7M tokens.4 The original release does not contain any
linguistic annotations. However, a number of annotation projects were carried
out on parts of this corpus (e.g., Oﬂazer et al., 2003; Zeyrek et al., 2013, both
discussed in Section 2.2). It is available free-of-charge for research purposes
after signing a license agreement.
The second balanced corpus is the Turkish National Corpus (TNC, Aksan
et al., 2012). The TNC follows the design principles of the British National
Corpus (BNC, Burnard, 2000). The corpus consists of 50M words from texts
collected from books, periodicals, and various published and unpublished ma-
terial. It also includes a small ‘spoken text’ portion that consists of political
speeches and news broadcasts. The TNC contains texts from nine diﬀerent do-
mains (e.g. ﬁction, scientiﬁc articles, art, opinions and editorials) and includes
morphological annotations. The corpus is not available for download but it is
accessible through a web interface.5 A small part of the TNC is also used in
constructing the BOUN Treebank (Türk et al., 2022, described below).
4 The numbers are based on a version obtained in 2015, which includes minor ﬁxes to the
ﬁrst original release.
5 Further information and the query interface is available from https://www.tnc.org.tr/.
4
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 1 A summary of currently available Turkish treebanks. The numbers in the table are
based on our own counts on the most recent versions of the datasets. Not all information
is reported in the respective papers, and there may be mismatches between the numbers
reported in the papers and the released datasets.
Treebank
Type
Sentences
Tokens
METU-Sabancı
Oﬂazer et al. (2003)
dep
5 635
56 396
ITU Web
Pamay et al. (2015)
dep
5 009
43 191
UD-GB
Çöltekin (2015a)
dep
2 880
16 803
UD-PUD
Zeman et al. (2017)
dep
1 000
16 536
UD-BOUN
Türk et al. (2022)
dep
9 761
121 214
TWT
Kayadelen et al. (2020)
dep
4 851
66 466
Turkish-Penn-CS
Yıldız et al. (2014)
con
9 560
81 419
UD-Turkish-Penn
dep
9 560
87 367
UD-Tourism
dep
19 750
92 200
UD-Kenet
dep
18 700
178 700
UD-FrameNet
dep
2 700
19 221
2.2 Treebanks and corpora with morphosyntactic annotation
This section reviews primarily manually-annotated Turkish corpora with ge-
neral-purpose linguistic annotations, as opposed to corpora annotated for a
particular NLP task. The majority of the corpora discussed below are tree-
banks, however we also include a few other corpora with morphosyntactic
annotations.
Treebanks are important resources for linguistic research and applications.
Although they have been primarily used for training parsers in CL, multiple
levels of linguistic annotations available in treebanks have also been beneﬁcial
for other NLP applications and linguistic research. There has been a surge of
interest in creating new treebanks for Turkish in recent years. Table 1 presents
the currently-available treebanks, along with basic statistics.6 Below, we pro-
vide a brief historical account of treebanks for Turkish.
The ﬁrst Turkish treebank is the METU-Sabancı treebank (Atalay et al.,
2003; Oﬂazer et al., 2003). The METU-Sabancı treebank is a dependency tree-
bank including a selection of sentences from the METU corpus discussed in
Section 2.1, and includes diﬀerent text types of the original resource. As an
early eﬀort with relatively low funding, the treebank had various issues with
formatting and data quality (Say, 2011). Despite these issues, the METU-
Sabancı treebank was the only Turkish treebank over a decade. There has
been a large number of reports of ﬁxes over the years, but most ﬁxes remained
unpublished, or even introduced other errors or unclear modiﬁcations to the
annotation scheme. The most up-to-date version of this treebank is made avail-
able through Universal Dependencies (UD, Nivre et al., 2016; de Marneﬀe et
6 We only include manually annotated treebanks. All treebanks listed in the table are
directly available for download, with the exception of ITU Web treebank, which requires a
signed license agreement to be sent to the maintainers. All UD treebanks can be obtained
through the project’s webpage at https://universaldependencies.org/. Automatic con-
version eﬀorts or parsed corpora are not listed in the table.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
5
al., 2021) repositories based on a semi-automatic conversion (Sulubacak et
al., 2016) of a version from Istanbul Technical University (ITU) and hence,
named UD-IMST (ITU-METU-Sabancı Treebank). Even the latest version is
reported to have a large number of errors, carried over from earlier versions
or introduced along the way by many automated conversion processes (see,
e.g., Türk et al., 2019). Burga et al. (2017) present a conversion of the same
treebank into another related framework, namely Surface-Syntactic Universal
Dependencies (SUD, Gerdes et al., 2018). The paper states the intention to
publish the resulting treebank, but it is not available at time of this writing.
After a long time gap, a growing number of new dependency treebanks have
recently been released. One of the new treebanks, ITU-Web treebank (Pamay
et al., 2015), contains user-generated text from the web. It was annotated fol-
lowing the METU-Sabancı treebank annotation scheme, and later converted
to the UD annotation scheme automatically. The ﬁrst treebank annotated di-
rectly using the UD framework is by Çöltekin (2015a). This treebank contains
linguistic examples from a grammar book to increase the coverage of diﬀerent
morphosyntactic constructions while minimizing the annotation eﬀort. Two
relatively larger and more recent dependency treebanks are the Boğaziçi Uni-
versity (BOUN) treebank (Türk et al., 2022) and the Turkish web treebank
(TWT, Kayadelen et al., 2020). The BOUN treebank annotates a selection
of sentences from the TNC (Aksan et al., 2012, see Section 2.1) covering a
number of diﬀerent text types. The BOUN treebank is directly annotated ac-
cording to the UD annotation scheme. The TWT includes sentences from the
web and Wikipedia. The annotations in TwT deviate from the UD and the
majority of the existing Turkish dependency treebanks.
Besides the monolingual treebanks above, there have also been a few paral-
lel treebanking eﬀorts. Megyesi et al. (2008) and Megyesi et al. (2010) report
automatically annotated parallel dependency treebanks of Turkish, Swedish
and English, containing texts published in the forms of popular literature
books. However, they have not been released publicly. Another early attempt
of parallel treebanking is the constituency treebank described by Yıldız et al.
(2014) and Kara et al. (2020b). This treebank includes translations of short
sentences (less than 15 words) from Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993).
The UD-PUD (Zeman et al., 2017) is part of a parallel dependency treebank
eﬀort including 20 languages so far, built on sentences translated predomi-
nantly from English. The dependency annotations were performed by Google
with their own annotation scheme and automatically translated to UD for the
CoNLL multilingual parsing shared task (Zeman et al., 2017). A diﬀerent type
of multilingual treebanking eﬀort is the UD-SAGT treebank, which annotates
2 184 spoken language utterances containing Turkish–German code-switching
treebank (Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin, 2019; Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin, 2022). The
treebank follows the UD framework. Section 2.9 provides further details about
the underlying dataset.
Version 2.8 of the UD treebanks, released in May 2021, introduced four
new Turkish treebanks from the same group. One of these treebanks is the
dependency version of the Penn treebank translations (Yıldız et al., 2014).
6
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Others include a domain-speciﬁc tourism treebank, and two treebanks anno-
tating example sentences from two lexical resources discussed in Section 3
below. The descriptions of the treebanks in the UD repositories indicate that
all four treebanks are manually annotated. However, no formal descriptions of
these treebanks have been published at the time of writing.
As described above, Turkish is relatively rich with respect to the quantity of
available treebanks. However, the need for improvement in terms of the quality
of annotations, establishing standards and resolving inconsistencies within and
across treebanks has been emphasized by multiple researchers (see, for example
Say, 2011; Çöltekin, 2016; Türk et al., 2022, for earlier discussions).
An unusual, yet potentially useful freely-available dataset with morphosyn-
tactic annotation is ODIN (Lewis, 2006), a multilingual collection of examples
from linguistics literature with interlinear glosses. Although ODIN does not
include full or uniform morphosyntactic annotations, the glossed example sen-
tences can be useful for linguistic research; they may serve as test instances
with interesting or diﬃcult linguistic constructions; and they can be converted
to a treebank with less eﬀort than that is required for annotating unanalyzed
text.
There are also a few corpora that include only morphological annotations.
The most popular corpus with morphological annotations is a 1M token corpus
disambiguated semi-automatically. The exact procedure used for the disam-
biguation is unclear. The corpus was introduced by Hakkani-Tür et al. (2002),
and made publicly available by later studies on morphological disambigua-
tion (Yüret and Türe, 2006; Sak et al., 2011; Dayanık et al., 2018). Another
fully manually disambiguated dataset consisting of 25 098 words is reported in
Kutlu and Çiçekli (2013), which can be obtained from the authors via email.
2.3 Large-scale (unannotated) linguistic data collections
Although well-balanced, representative corpora have been at the focus of build-
ing corpora in corpus linguistics, opportunistic large collections of linguistic
data have also been useful in CL/NLP tasks that require large datasets. Fur-
thermore, the size and distribution restrictions on balanced corpora often lim-
its their use both for NLP applications, and research on some linguistic ques-
tions (e.g., if the questions are concerned with rare linguistic phenomena). In
this section, we review some of the unannotated or automatically annotated
corpora that are either used in earlier literature, or publicly accessible without
major limitations.
The largest Turkish corpora available are two large multilingual web-
crawled datasets: supplementary data released as part of CoNLL-2017 UD
parsing shared task (Zeman et al., 2017; Ginter et al., 2017), and the OSCAR
corpus (Ortiz Suárez et al., 2019; Ortiz Suárez et al., 2020). Both corpora are
sentence shuﬄed to comply with the copyright laws. The Turkish part of the
CoNLL-2017 dataset contains approximately 3.5 billion words. The data is
deduplicated, and automatically annotated for morphology and dependency
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
7
relations. The data can be downloaded directly from the LINDAT/CLARIN
repository. The OSCAR corpus is available as raw, and deduplicated versions.
The Turkish section contains over 3 billion words after deduplication. The
OSCAR corpus can be obtained after creating an account automatically. The
publicly available data does not include any meta information, and the order
of the sentences is destroyed by shuﬄing. However, the webpage of the OSCAR
corpus includes a form to request original data without sentence shuﬄing.
Another popular, relatively large Turkish corpus is the BOUN corpus (Sak
et al., 2008). The corpus contains approximately 500M tokens collected from
two major online newspapers and other webpages. Although it is used in many
studies, it is not clear how to access this corpus.
A relatively large, and easily accessible data source is the multilingual
Leipzig Corpora Collection (Quasthoﬀet al., 2014). The Turkish section con-
tains over 7M sentences (approximately 100M words) of news, Wikipedia and
web crawl. The Leipzig corpora are also sentence shuﬄed. Web-crawled data
also contains smaller parts crawled from Turkish-language web sites published
in Cyprus and Bulgaria.
The Turkish parliamentary corpus released as part of the ParlaMint project
(Erjavec et al., 2021; Erjavec et al., 2022) contains the transcripts of the Turk-
ish parliament (2011–2021), including approximately 43M words from 303 505
speeches delivered at the main proceedings of the parliament. The data also
contains speaker information (name, gender, party aﬃliation) and automatic
annotations including morphology, dependency parsing and named entities.
Another relatively large (approximately 10M words), freely accessible cor-
pus is the Kaggle old news dataset.7 This is a multilingual collection from
well-known news sites. The data also includes publication date of the article
and the source URL of the document.
The TS Corpus (Sezer and Sever Sezer, 2013; Sezer, 2017) is also a large
collection of corpora with a web interface. The collection contains some corpora
released earlier (e.g., the BOUN corpus discussed in Section 2.1) as well as sub-
corpora collected by the authors. The authors report over 1.3 billion tokens
in 10 sub-corpora from various text sources and various levels of (automatic)
annotation. The corpus is served via a web-based query interface, and, to our
knowledge, the full corpus is not publicly available for download.
Another relatively small, but potentially interesting unannotated dataset
is a compilation of 6 844 essays on creative writing classes by Turkish univer-
sity students between 2014–2018. The essays (approximately 400K words) are
published on the course webpage as PDF ﬁles.
7 The corpus is not described in any earlier publication. Throughout this survey, we cite
the papers describing each resource, if one is available, otherwise provide a hyperlink to
the resource. Links to all available resources are provided in the companion webpage at
https://turkishnlp.github.io.
8
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 2 A summary of WSD resources. The ‘Additional’ column mentions additional an-
notations, namely, morph: POS tags and morphology, dep: dependency, con: constituency.
Resource
Type
Additional
Samples
Sent.
METU
Orhan et al. (2007)
lexical sample morph, dep
26
5 385
ITU
İlgen et al. (2012)
lexical sample -
35
3 616
Işık
Akçakaya and Yıldız (2018) all-words
morph, con
7 595
83 474
2.4 Corpora with discourse annotation
There are two corpora that are annotated for discourse markers in Turkish.
The ﬁrst one, Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB, Zeyrek et al., 2013), includes
roughly 400K words across various written genres in the METU corpus (Sec-
tion 2.1). The corpus is annotated based on explicit connectives and their two
arguments. The TDB is available for academic use through email. Zeyrek et al.
(2018) and Zeyrek et al. (2020), on the other hand, focus on annotating dis-
course markers in the transcripts of TED talks in six languages (i.e., English,
German, Polish, European Portuguese, Russian and Turkish). The Turkish
corpus measures 5 164 words. The annotation tasks in each language were car-
ried out according to the Penn Discourse Treebank (PTDB) guidelines. The
corpus was annotated for ﬁve discourse relation types (i.e., explicit connectives,
alternative lexicalizations, implicit connectives, no relation) and ﬁve top-level
senses (i.e., temporal, comparison, expansion, contingency, hypophora). The
annotated corpus is freely available.
2.5 Word sense disambiguation corpora
The word sense disambiguation (WSD) task has been deﬁned in two ways:
lexical sample and all-words. The lexical sample task aims to disambiguate a
restricted set of ambiguous words in their context. The all-words variant, on
the other hand, disambiguates all words of a given input. Turkish has resources
for both variants.
The ﬁrst WSD dataset for Turkish is created as part of a SemEval 2007
task and opts for the lexical sample variant (Orhan et al., 2007). 26 unique
lexical samples are tagged for their senses, and each sample is tagged in about
100 sentences. The corpus used for the annotation is the METU-Sabancı Tree-
bank, hence the WSD dataset is already accompanied with morphosyntactic
annotations. The WSD annotation adds ﬁne-grained senses from the dictionary
of Turkish Language Association (TDK), coarse-grain senses, which are a set
of semantically closest ﬁne-grained senses, and three levels of ontology. The
website link provided in the paper for obtaining the resource is not accessible.
İlgen et al. (2012) also employ the lexical samples approach but choose
their words among the most ambiguous words based on a frequency list (Göz,
2003). There are 35 lexical samples in total and each sample is annotated in
at least 100 sentences. The corpus was collected from well-known websites
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
9
on news, health, sports, and education in Turkish. The word senses come
from the TDK dictionary (though the authors eliminated some senses that are
infrequent in online resources). The availability of the resource is unclear.
The ﬁrst all-words WSD resource for Turkish annotates a set of sentences
that contains translations of Penn Treebank sentences up to 15 tokens (the
treebank is described in Section 2.2). Akçakaya and Yıldız (2018) annotates the
dependency version of the treebank as an all-words WSD resource. Therefore,
the sentences also include morphosyntactic annotations. As in other resources,
the sense information comes from the TDK dictionary.8 In total, there are 7 595
unique lexical samples to disambiguate in a corpus of 83 473 tokens. 77 % of
these unique samples are nouns, followed by verbs and adjectives. The website
link provided in the paper for obtaining the resource is not accessible. The
statistics for WSD resources are given in Table 2.
2.6 Corpora of parent-child interactions
Language acquisition has been a major interest in modern linguistics, where
Turkish also received a fair amount of attention because of a rather inter-
esting learning course observed by young learners, for example, an early and
error-free acquisition of case morphology (Xanthos et al., 2011). The CHILDES
database (MacWhinney and Snow, 1985) contains two freely-available Turkish
datasets with transcriptions of parent–caregiver interactions. The ﬁrst dataset
(Aksu-Koç and Slobin, 1985) contains transcripts of 54 sessions consisting of
interactions with 33 children between 28 to 56 months of age. The second data-
set (Altınkamış Türkay, 2005; Altınkamış, 2012) contains transcriptions of 15
recordings with the same child between ages 16 months to 28 months. Both cor-
pora mark speakers, and include some extra-linguistic information. The latter
corpus also includes morphological annotation of a subset of the child utter-
ances. A larger and more recent child-language dataset is reported in Moran
et al. (2015). However, the Turkish section of this corpus was not released as
of this writing. Rothweiler (2011) has also released a ‘Turkish-German suc-
cessive bilinguals corpus’ which contains 94 longitudinal spontaneous speech
samples by Turkish-German bilingual children (7–28 months-old) recorded be-
tween 2003–2008. Part of the data could be viewed for research purposes after
obtaining a password.
2.7 Social media text normalization corpora
Normalization of social media text is an important ﬁrst step in many NLP
applications, where ill-formed words or phrases are replaced (or associated)
with their normal forms. The deﬁnition of ‘ill-formed’ text is debatable and
text normalization in social media hinders analyzing social aspects of language
use from a computational sociolinguistic point of view (Nguyen et al., 2016;
8 Note that it is the same dictionary, yet diﬀerent versions.
10
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Eisenstein, 2013). However, normalization datasets enable the use of tools
created for formal/standard language, and non-destructive text normalization
is also helpful in analyzing interesting aspects of non-standard language use
by individuals or groups. We review corpora for normalization purposes here,
for lexical resources for the same purpose, see Section 3.5.
Eryiˇgit and Torunoˇglu-Selamet (2017) report a ‘big Twitter dataset’ (BTS)
for normalization which consists of 26 149 tweets, as well as using IWT (see
Section 2.2) as a source of normalization data. The BTS contains 57 088 man-
ually normalized tokens out of a total of 385 568. In IWT, 5 101 tokens (out
of 39 152 are normalized. The datasets are available from the group’s webpage
after signing a license agreement. Çolakoğlu et al. (2019) introduced another
normalization test set of 713 tweets (7 948 tokens, 2 856 normalized). The
dataset is available via W-NUT 2021 Shared Task on Multilingual Text Nor-
malization. A more recent Twitter normalization data consisting of 2 000 sen-
tences was introduced in Köksal et al. (2020). 6 488 out-of-vocabulary (OoV)
tokens (out of 16 878) identiﬁed using lexical resources were manually anno-
tated (below 10 % of the OoV tokens are well-formed, e.g., foreign names or
neologisms). The dataset is available through a GitHub repository. Besides
these monolingual resources, a normalization dataset for Turkish–German is
also available (van der Goot and Çetinoğlu, 2021). This dataset is a revised
version of the data from Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin (2016) for normalization by
employing token-level alignment layers and adapting existing language ID and
POS tags for these new layers.
2.8 Corpora for named entity recognition
Named entity recognition (NER) for Turkish has been studied by diverse
groups of researchers with a few publicly available datasets. Tür et al. (2003)
is one of the ﬁrst to study NER in Turkish with a dataset compiled from
newspaper articles over approximately one year (1997–1998). The dataset is
annotated for ENAMEX (person, location, organization) named entity types.
The dataset has been the standard benchmark for many subsequent studies,
with some changes along the way. Original article reports a dataset of approx-
imately 1M words. The version of the dataset as used by Yeniterzi (2011) con-
sists of approximately 500K words with 37 189 named entities (16 291 person,
11 715 location 9 183 organization). This version of the data can be obtained
through email. Çelikkaya et al. (2013) report three additional datasets cover-
ing diﬀerent text sources, namely, a computer hardware forum, orders to a
speech assistant, and Twitter. The data is also annotated for NUMEX entities
(numerical expressions). Şeker and Eryiğit (2017) report an annotation eﬀort
partially based on the datasets reported in Çelikkaya et al. (2013) and Tür et al.
(2003), but also annotating the IWT (described in Section 2.2). The datasets
are available from the group’s webpage after signing a license agreement. Eken
and Tantug (2015) also report an additional 9 358 tweets annotated similar to
Çelikkaya et al. (2013). However, availability of this dataset is unclear.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
11
Küçük et al. (2014) and Küçük and Can (2019) report two Twitter data-
sets of 2 320 and 1 065 tweets, respectively. These datasets are annotated for
person, location, organization, date, time, money and misc (e.g., names of TV
programs, music bands), and publicly available through the authors’ GitHub
repositories. Another, more recent, NER data set annotating 5 000 tweets was
released by Çarık and Yeniterzi (2022).
2.9 Code-switching corpora
Code-switching refers to mixing more than one language in written and spoken
communication and it is quite common in multilingual settings (e.g., immigra-
tion contexts, India, Africa etc.).
Nguyen and Doğruöz (2013) and Papalexakis et al. (2014) report analyzing
code-switching (e.g., Turkish-Dutch) in online fora for automatic language
identiﬁcation and a prediction task but this data set is not publicly available.
Çetinoğlu (2016) released a Turkish–German Twitter corpus which is an-
notated with language IDs. The dataset consists of 1 029 tweets that are auto-
matically collected, semi-automatically ﬁltered, and manually annotated. Each
tweet contains at least one code-switching point, the tweets are normalized and
tokenized before adding language IDs. Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin (2016) added
POS tag annotations to the same dataset following UD guidelines. A spo-
ken corpus of interviews with Turkish–German bilinguals was presented by
Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin (2019) and Çetinoğlu and Çöltekin (2022). The audio
ﬁles are annotated with sentence and code-switching boundaries. Sentences
that contain at least one code-switching point are transcribed and normal-
ized to their orthographic representation. The resulting 2 184 sentences are
annotated with language IDs following (Çetinoğlu, 2017), and with lemmas,
POS tags, morphological features, and dependency relations following the UD
framework. The treebank version of the dataset is available in the Univer-
sal Dependencies repositories, the audio ﬁles and aligned transcriptions are
available to researchers after signing a license agreement. Yirmibeşoğlu and
Eryiğit (2018) worked on detecting code-switching in Turkish–English social
media posts. The data is claimed to be available but it was not found on the
website link suggested in the paper.
The MULTILIT project (Schroeder et al., 2015) focuses on multilingual
children and adolescents of Turkish and Kurdish background living in Ger-
many and France. The corpora they collected include Turkish oral monologues
(and their transcription), and written text produced by bilingual students. A
subset of the corpus is annotated with POS tags, morphological features and
partial syntactic structures, as well as markers showing deviations from stan-
dard language use. The data is not publicly available. The RUEG project
aims at similar goals at a larger range of age groups, and investigates bilin-
gual speakers of Russian, Turkish and Greek background in Germany and the
U.S., bilingual speakers of German in the U.S., as well as monolingual speak-
ers of these languages in respective countries. As part of their collection there
12
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 3 A selection of parallel corpora available for Turkish. The third column lists the
languages in each corpus (numbers include Turkish), for massively parallel corpora Turkish
may not be aligned to all languages. The number of sentences indicates the number of
Turkish sentences in the particular corpus. The number of actual aligned sentences vary
depending on the target language. All numbers are based on the corpora as available from
OPUS parallel corpora collection http://opus.nlpl.eu/.
Corpus
Text type
Languages
Sentences
Bianet (Ataman, 2018)
News
English, Kurdish
61 472
Bible
Religious
Multiple (102)
48 500
EU book shop
EU texts
Multiple (48)
33 398
GlobalVoices
News
Multiple (92)
8 796
JW300 (Agić and Vulić, 2019)
Religious
Multiple (380)
535 353
OpenSubtitles
Subtitles
Multiple (62)
173 215 360
QED (Abdelali et al., 2014)
Educational
Multiple (225)
753 343
SETimes (Tyers and Alperen, 2010)
News
Balkan (10)
1 776 431
TED talks
Subtitles
English
746 857
Tanzil
Religious
Multiple (42)
105 597
Tatoeba
Misc
Multiple (359)
746 857
Wikipedai (Wołk and Marasek, 2014) Wikipedia
English, Polish
175 972
infopakki
Informational Multiple (12)
50 909
are Turkish corpora collected in Germany (1 197 sentences) and in Turkey
(1418 sentences), publicly available as audio ﬁles and annotated transcriptions
(Wiese et al., 2020). The lemmas, POS tags, and morphological features are
manually annotated, dependencies are automatically predicted. All layers fol-
low the UD framework except the ﬁne-grained POS tags which follow the
MULTILIT project.
2.10 Parallel corpora
Parallel, aligned corpora in multiple languages are essential for machine trans-
lation (MT) as well as multilingual or cross-lingual research. A number of
parallel corpora including Turkish have been reported in some of the earlier
works on MT between Turkish and mainly English (e.g., Durgar El-Kahlout
and Oﬂazer, 2010; Oﬂazer et al., 2018; Durgar El-Kahlout et al., 2019). Sim-
ilarly, shared tasks which included Turkish as one of the languages, such as
two IWLST shared tasks (Paul et al., 2010; Cettolo et al., 2013), and WMT
shared tasks between 2016 and 2018 (Bojar et al., 2016), also provided data
for use during the shared tasks. However, none of these resources are available,
nor are there clear procedures to obtain these datasets. In this review we only
list the resources available (for at least for non-commercial, research purposes)
in detail.
Almost all publicly available parallel corpora that include Turkish are avail-
able from the OPUS corpora collection (Tiedemann, 2012). A selection of
publicly available corpora are listed in Table 3 (except the parallel treebanks
discussed in Section 2.2). The table does not list corpora of public software lo-
calization texts and some of the other small corpora available through OPUS.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
13
The sizes, text types and the target languages vary considerably. This list of
resources, to our knowledge, are not used widely by researchers interested in
machine translation to/from Turkish.
Another active area of machine translation is translation between Tur-
kic languages (e.g., Hamzaoğlu, 1993; Altıntaş, 2001; Tantuğ et al., 2007;
Gilmullin, 2008; Gökırmak et al., 2019; see Tantuğ and Adalı, 2018 for a recent
summary). Similar to the Turkish–English translation studies, the resources
speciﬁcally built for the purpose are scarce, and even if they are reported in the
literature, to our knowledge, no speciﬁc corpora build for translation between
Turkic languages were released.9 Except for small samples in Apertium repos-
itories (Forcada et al., 2011), the corpora build with large-scale parallel text
collections (e.g., ones listed in Table 3) seem to be the only easily obtainable
resource for studies requiring parallel corpora between Turkic languages.
2.11 Corpora for sentiment and emotion
Demirtaş and Pechenizkiy (2013) introduced two Turkish datasets consisting
of movie and product reviews. The movie reviews, scraped from a popular
Turkish movie review site, contain 5 331 positive and 5 331 negative sentences.
The product reviews data, scraped from an online retailer web site, consists
of 700 positive and 700 negative reviews. The labels are assigned based on the
scores assigned to the movie or the product by the reviewer. The datasets are
available at the author’s web site.
Kaya (2013) used a balanced corpus of 400 newspapers columns from 51
journalists labeled for positive and negative sentiment. The study also reports
a Twitter corpus of 123 074 tweets (not labeled). Türkmenoğlu and Tantuğ
(2014) also report multiple datasets, consisting of 20 244 movie reviews, 4 324
tweets and 101 346 news headlines. The tweet dataset was annotated with
three-way classes (positive, negative, neutral). Similar to other studies, movie
reviews are labeled them based on the scores assigned by the reviewers. How-
ever, it is not clear how the authors labeled the headlines corpus and used
it for the presented research. Yıldırım et al. (2014) report another manually
annotated Twitter dataset of 12 790 tweets, labeled as positive (3 541) negative
(4 249) and neutral (5 000). None of these publications indicate the availability
of the corpora introduced. Hayran and Sert (2017) present another dataset of
3 200 tweets. The data is labeled (negative or positive) based on the emoticons
in the messages. The dataset is available through email.
Boynukalın (2012) has investigated emotions in Turkish through two data-
sets. The ﬁrst dataset is a translation of a multilingual emotion corpus (ISEAR,
Scherer and Wallbott, 1994) into Turkish where the participants are asked to
describe experiences associated with a given set of emotions (e.g., joy, sadness,
anger). Although the original study describes seven emotions, the authors fo-
cused on four of them in Turkish and they have identiﬁed 4 265 short texts in
9 Except Gökırmak et al. (2019), who state the intention to release their data pending
copyright clearance, most papers do not include intentions of sharing their data.
14
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
total. The second dataset consists of 25 fairy tales in Turkish collected across
various websites on the web. The emotions in this dataset were labeled based
on intensity (low, medium, high) at the sentence and paragraph levels. Demirci
(2014) analyzed the emotions in a dataset of 6 000 tweets, and labeled based
on the hashtags they contain as anger, fear, disgust, joy, sadness, surprise. The
availability of these two datasets is unclear. A more recent emotion dataset,
TREMO, based on the ISEAR corpus is presented by Toçoğlu and Alpkoçak
(2018). Instead of translating the original texts, Toçoğlu and Alpkoçak (2018)
follow the methodology used to collect the ISEAR corpus, and collect 27 350
entries from 4 709 individuals describing memories and experiences related
to six emotion categories. Toçoğlu et al. (2019) built a dataset consisting of
195 445 tweets automatically labeled with these emotion categories based on
a lexicon (see Section 3.5) extracted from the TREMO dataset. Both of these
datasets are available online for non-commercial use.
2.12 Speech and multi-modal corpora
As in other languages, speech corpora or other forms of multi-modal datasets
(e.g., video) are scarce in comparison to text corpora. The only linguistically
motivated speech corpus creation eﬀort seems to be the Spoken Turkish Cor-
pus (STC, Ruhi et al., 2010; Ruhi et al., 2012). Although an initial sample
consisting of 20 recordings, 4 514 utterances and 16 107 words was released in
2010, the full corpus is still not available.
Easily-accessible Turkish speech corpora are generally parts of multilingual
corpus creation eﬀorts. Notable examples include Common Voice (Ardila et al.,
2020), and MediaSpeech (Kolobov et al., 2021). The Common Voice dataset is
an ongoing data collection eﬀort by Mozilla Foundation. The project collects
audio recordings of a set of sentences and phrases in multiple languages. The
January 2022 release includes over 68 hours of recordings from 1 228 Turkish
speakers. The MediaSpeech dataset includes 10 hours of speech recordings
(2 513 short segments less than 15 seconds each) with transcriptions from two
news channels. MuST-C (Di Gangi et al., 2019; Cattoni et al., 2021) is a
multilingual corpus of TED talks including Turkish transcripts, but the audio
data is only in English.
The majority of the other speech datasets are collected/created within prac-
tical speech recognition/processing projects (see Arslan and Barışçı, 2020, for a
recent review of Turkish speech recognition). The speech corpus introduced in
Mengüşoğlu and Deroo (2001) consists of broadcast news and a set of sentences
from news read by multiple speakers. Another early speech corpora collection
is OrienTel-TR (Çiloğlu et al., 2004), Turkish part of the multilingual Orien-
Tel project (Draxler, 2003), collecting phone recordings of pronunciations of a
selected set of words and phrases. Arısoy et al. (2009) report a larger dataset
of broadcast news, and a dataset of 38 000 hours of call center recordings is
reported by Haznedaroğlu and Arslan (2014). A recent speech corpus, consist-
ing of movies with aligned subtitles, and read speech samples are reported by
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
15
Polat and Oyucu (2020). The availability of corpora listed in this paragraph
is unclear.
Salor et al. (2007) report a spoken corpus of 2 462 sentences, read by 193
speakers with varied ages and backgrounds. Another, similar but smaller set
of recordings are available through GlobalPhone corpus (Schultz et al., 2013),
which is a collection of parallel sentences from 20 languages including Turkish.
Another interesting dataset where native speakers were recorded while reading
parts of dialogues in the ATIS corpus (Hemphill et al., 1990) is reported in
Upadhyay et al. (2018). These corpora are available for purchase through the
LDC or the ELRA.
Topkaya and Erdoğan (2012) report a dataset of audio/video recordings
in which 141 Turkish speakers pronounce selected numbers, names, phrases
and sentences in a controlled environment. Finally, it is also worth mentioning
the Turkish–German spoken code-switching treebank described in Section 2.9
contains aligned audio recordings of Turkish–German bilinguals. Both datasets
can be obtained by contacting the authors.
2.13 Corpora for question answering
Although a highly applicable and popular area, there have been relatively few
Turkish resources available for question answering (QA) until recently. Early
QA work on Turkish include short lists of question–answer pairs without the
context including the answer. For example Amasyalı and Diri (2005) report
the use of a 524 question–answer pairs. However, to our knowledge none of
these datasets are made available. Similarly, Pala Er (2009) includes 105 fac-
toid questions and their answers as part of her thesis manuscript. Longpre
et al. (2020) present a freely-available dataset containing human translations
of 10 000 question–answer pairs sampled from the Natural Questions dataset
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) to 25 languages including Turkish. Another multilin-
gual QA set released by Artetxe et al. (2020) includes a 1 190 human-translated
question–answer pairs from Stanford Question Answering Data Set (SQuAD,
Rajpurkar et al., 2016). In a more recent study, Gemirter and Goularas (2020)
report both a new domain-speciﬁc dataset as well as an automatic translation
of SQuAD. The availability of this dataset is unclear.
2.14 Other corpora for speciﬁc applications
The subsections above survey the areas where a relatively large number of
resources are available. In this subsection, we review other areas where there
are relatively few resources, either because it is a relatively new area, or because
there has not been enough interest in the Turkish CL community.
Oﬀensive or aggressive language online has been a concern since the early
days of the Internet (Lea et al., 1992). With the increasing popularity of social
media, and because of the regulations introduced against certain forms of of-
fensive language such as hate speech online, there has been a surge of interest
16
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
in automatic detection of various types of oﬀensive language. Currently, there
are two Turkish corpora related to oﬀensive language. The cyberbullying cor-
pus by Özel et al. (2017) is a manually annotated corpus of 15 658 comments
collected from multiple social media sites. This dataset is not available. The
corpus reported in Çöltekin (2020) is a general oﬀensive language corpus hierar-
chically annotated according to OﬀensEval guidelines (Zampieri et al., 2019).
This corpus is publicly available and consists of 36 232 manually annotated
tweets. In addition, two recent hate speech date sets were released by research
groups at Aselsan (Toraman et al., 2022), at the Sabancı University (Beyhan
et al., 2022).
Natural language inference (NLI) attracted considerable interest recently.
The cross-lingual NLI dataset (XNLI, Conneau et al., 2018), includes 7 500
premise–hypothesis pairs created for English, and translated to Turkish as well
as 13 other languages. More recently, Budur et al. (2020) released a dataset con-
sisting of automatic translations of Stanford NLI (SNLI, Bowman et al., 2015)
and MuliNLI (Williams et al., 2018) datasets, consisting of approximately
570 000 and 433 000 sentence pairs, respectively. A small part of the SNLI data
(250 sentence pairs) was also translated to Turkish earlier for a SemEval-2017
task (Cer et al., 2017). The data is available from the SemEval-2017 multilin-
gual textual similarity shared task website. All NLI datasets listed above are
publicly available.
Summarization datasets for Turkish are also mostly from multilingual cor-
pora collection eﬀorts (e.g., Ladhak et al., 2020; Scialom et al., 2020). Almost
all work on summarization of Turkish texts we are aware of (e.g., Kutlu et al.,
2010; Özsoy et al., 2011) rely on automatic ways to obtain texts and their
summaries. However, the availability of these corpora is not clear.
Paraphrasing corpora have interesting applications such as machine transla-
tion and determining semantic similarity. Two paraphrasing corpora in Turkish
are introduced in Demir et al. (2012) and Eyecioğlu and Keller (2016). The
former study reports an unpublished (work-in-progress) corpus of 1 270 para-
phrase pairs but it is not publicly available yet. The latter study reports a
publicly-available corpus of 1 002 paraphrase pairs which also includes human-
rated semantic similarities of the sentence pairs. Another textual similarity
dataset created by automatic translation of the English STS benchmark (Cer
et al., 2017) is published by Beken Fikri et al. (2021).
Text categorization or topic modeling studies in Turkish often use oppor-
tunistic labeling of the topics published in newspaper sections (e.g., politics,
economics, sports). Although there are many studies reporting such datasets,
they are rarely made publicly available. We only note one publicly available
corpus by Kılınç et al. (2017) which has become a common benchmark data
for later studies. This corpus consists of 3 600 news feeds (RSS) obtained from
online newspapers in 6 categories.
Similar to text categorization, stylometry related studies also typically use
newspaper columns scraped from online newspapers, and the corpora are not
made available publicly (possibly also due to copyright restrictions). Exception
we are aware of are a few datasets available from Yıldız Technical University
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
17
NLP group (Amasyalı and Diri, 2006; Türkoğlu et al., 2007) and the pub-
licly available dataset of Twitter gender identiﬁcation corpus by Sezerer et al.
(2019), which contains 5 292 users with more than 100 tweets each manually
labeled for gender.
Coreference resolution is another task for which the quantity of resources
available is rather small. Earlier work on coreference resolution (Küçük and
Yöndem, 2007; Küçük and Yazıcı, 2008) report the use of annotated corpora
without indication of availability. In the only publicly available corpus with
coreference annotation, Schüller et al. (2018) annotate all sentences of METU-
Sabancı treebank (described in Section 2.2) for coreference.
We also note two large multilingual COVID19-related tweet collections by
Qazi et al. (2020) and Abdul-Mageed et al. (2021). The ﬁrst corpus focuses
on tweets geo-location in many languages. Although the number of tweets in
Turkish is not speciﬁed, the total number of tweets is about half a billion. The
second corpus includes 28.5M Turkish tweets with COVID-19 related keywords.
Both COVID-19 datasets are available as tweet IDs. Kartal and Kutlu (2020)
presents a dataset of Turkish 2 287 tweets labeled whether they are worth fact
checking or not. The dataset is available through a GitHub repository.
Last but not the least, we note two sign-language corpora. The ﬁrst cor-
pora of Turkish sign language was introduced by Camgöz et al. (2016), and
contains sentences and phrases from ﬁnance and health domains. Eryiğit et al.
(2020) present a Turkish sign language with morphological and dependency
annotations, as well as parallel sentences in Turkish. The availability of these
two corpora is unclear. Sincan and Keleş (2020) describe a publicly available
sign language corpus. However the link provided in the article is not active at
the time of this writing.
3 Lexical Resources
In this section we describe large lexicons and lexical networks that are built ei-
ther as standalone projects or as part of multilingual collections. The majority
of these lexicons also provide various levels of annotations and in multilingual
cases, they usually have a mapping to the other languages of the collection.
3.1 Lexicons, word lists
Inkelas et al. (2000) aim at creating a Turkish Electronic Living Lexicon
(TELL) that reﬂects actual speaker knowledge. The lexicon they built con-
sists of 30 000 lexemes from dictionaries and place names. Nouns are inﬂected
for ﬁve forms and verbs are for three, more than half also have morphologi-
cal roots. All entries have phonemic transcriptions, 17 500 of them also have
pronunciations. Moreover, 11 500 entries are annotated with their etymological
source language. It is possible to search the whole lexicon via a webpage which
also oﬀers an email address to access the database. LC-STAR (Fersøe et al.,
18
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 4 The statistics for Turkish large-scale lexicons. The ‘Additional’ column mentions
additional annotations. ‘etymo.’ stands for etymological source.
Lexicon
Lexemes
Additional
TELL
Inkelas et al. (2000)
30 000
phonemic transcriptions, roots,
inﬂected forms, etymo.
LC-STAR
Fersøe et al. (2004)
104 513
phonetic transcriptions
BabelNet
Navigli and Ponzetto (2012)
?
translations, semantic relations
Panlex
Kamholz et al. (2014)
242 635
translations
2004) is a collection of lexicons for speech translation between 13 languages
including Turkish. The Turkish lexicon consists of 59 213 common words (in
sport, news, ﬁnance, culture, consumer information, and personal communica-
tion domains) and 43 500 proper names of persons, places, and organizations.
The data has been originally released via ELRA but currently it is not available
in their catalog.
BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012) is a semantic network covering 284
languages, It is created using WordNets, Wikipedia, and machine translation.
The project’s webpage oﬀers a search interface for end users and APIs for pro-
grammers. PanLex (Kamholz et al., 2014) builds translation lexicons for over
5 700 languages by utilizing their dictionaries and other multilingual resources
such as WordNets. The project’s webpage lists collected lexicons and available
resources for each language. However, most links for Turkish seem to be broken.
While PanLex is the largest among mentioned lexicons, it should be noted that
some non-Turkish entries are marked as Turkish. The lexicons, their number
of lexemes, and additional annotations are summarized in Table 4.
Inﬂectional and derivational lexicons focus on the morphosyntactic rep-
resentations of words. The UniMorph project (Sylak-Glassman et al., 2015;
Kirov et al., 2016) aims at building a universal schema for morphological rep-
resentation of inﬂected forms. So far, over 120 languages are annotated (based
on their webpage) with their features in a combination of automatic extrac-
tions from Wiktionary and collaborative eﬀorts. For Turkish, there are 275 460
inﬂected forms of 3 579 unique entries (some are multiword expressions). The
data is publicly available.
TrLex (Aslan et al., 2018) converts the word entries of the Turkish Lan-
guage Association (TDK) dictionary into an XML format with separate ﬁelds
(e.g., lemma, POS tag, origin, meaning, example) and annotates them with
morphological segmentation for derivational suﬃxes. In addition, there is a
phonological representation that encodes how entries undergo Turkish mor-
phophonemic rules. There are 110 960 entries in total. It is possible to obtain
the version with morphological segmentation and POS tags through email
communication with the authors.
Universal Derivations (UDer, Kyjánek et al., 2019) proposes a uniﬁed
scheme for derivational morphology. The Turkish part of the project uses Et-
ymWordNet (de Melo and Weikum, 2010) as a resource. The uniﬁed resources
of 20 languages are currently available online. In the Turkish part, there are
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
19
1 937 unique entries and it adds up to 7 774 derived word forms. However, there
are also errors (e.g., most of the derivational entries are inﬂectional forms).
Oﬂazer et al. (2004) built a multiword expression extraction tool that ex-
ploits the morphological analyzer lexicon of Oﬂazer (1994) for non-lexicalized
and semi-lexicalized multiwords. The lexicalized multiwords collected in this
study are publicly available.
Zeyrek and Başıbüyük (2019) built a lexicon of discourse connectives ex-
tracted from Turkish discourse corpora (Zeyrek et al., 2013; Zeyrek and Kurfalı,
2017; Zeyrek et al., 2018). The lexical entries are annotated with a canonical
form, orthographic variants, corpus frequency and POS tags. The data is part
of a publicly available multilingual connective lexicon database.
3.2 Morphological analyzer lexicons
Since Turkish is a morphologically rich language, morphological analysis and
lexical resources related to morphological analyzers have been a central com-
ponent of Turkish NLP. Early attempts of building morphological analyzers
date back to Köksal (1975) and Hankamer (1986). The ﬁrst practical and most
inﬂuential morphological analyzer is by Oﬂazer (1994). This analyzer has been
used in a large number of studies. It is also extended by Oﬂazer and Inkelas
(2006) to produce pronunciations as well as the written forms. However, these
resources are developed using non-free Xerox tools, and their availability and
license is unclear. More recently, increased availability of free ﬁnite-state tools
(e.g., SFST (Schmid, 2005), HFST (Lindén et al., 2009) and Foma (Hulden,
2009)) resulted in a relatively large number of freely available morphological an-
alyzers during the last decade. The free/open-source morphological analyzers
written in conventional ﬁnite-state tools include Çöltekin (2010, implemented
with Xerox languages using Foma/HFST), Kayabaş et al. (2019, implemented
with SFST), and Öztürel et al. (2019, implemented with OpenFST). Another
popular tool is Zemberek (Akın and Akın, 2007) which is an open-source appli-
cation written in Java for various NLP tasks including morphological analysis.
3.3 WordNets and other lexical networks
A WordNet is a lexical database where lexical items (words and phrases) are
grouped into synonym sets (“synsets”). All synsets are organized in a tree struc-
ture with the hypernymy relation. Some synsets also bear additional semantic
relations such as antonymy. The original WordNet for English was built at
Princeton University starting in 1990 (Fellbaum, 1998) and over the years
WordNets have been developed for more than 200 languages (Global Wordnet
Association, 2020).
The ﬁrst Turkish WordNet (Bilgin et al., 2004; Çetinoğlu et al., 2018) is
developed as part of the BalkaNet project (Stamou et al., 2002), which has a
direct inﬂuence on the selection of synsets. As the main goal of the project was
20
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 5 Turkish PropBanks and their basic statistics.‘Avg. arg/prd’ stands for average
arguments per predicate.
PropBank
Sentences
Avg. arg/prd
Turkish PropBank
Şahin and Adalı (2018)
5 635
1.8
Turkish PropBank
Ak et al. (2018b)
9 560
–
TRopBank
Kara et al. (2020b)
?
1.7
to ensure parallelism among six Balkan WordNets as well as direct mapping to
Princeton WordNet and to the eight WordNets of EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998)
the majority of the synset concepts are translated from Princeton WordNet.
The remaining synsets are comprised of Balkan-speciﬁc concepts and frequent
Turkish words. Synonyms of translated synsets and their semantic relations are
populated by exploiting the TDK dictionary. The Turkish WordNet is publicly
available.
KeNet (Ehsani et al., 2018), on the contrary, follow a bottom-up approach
for creating their version of the Turkish WordNet and take the concepts
in the TDK dictionary as their starting point. These concepts are semi-
automatically grouped into synsets and veriﬁed manually. They also exploit
Turkish Wikipedia for hypernymy relations. The resulting WordNet is stan-
dalone. This is partially improved by Bakay et al. (2019) who match 4 417
of most frequent English senses from Princeton WordNet to KeNet synsets.
KeNet is also publicly available.
Another popular lexical network is a PropBank that annotates semantic
relations between predicates and their arguments. The ﬁrst example is the
English PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005) and several PropBanks followed over
the years, including Turkish ones. The ﬁrst Turkish PropBank is annotated
by Şahin and Adalı (2018) on top of the IMST dependency treebank. Later, it
was adapted to the UD version of the same treebank. The annotation scheme
includes numbered arguments (up to six), which correspond to the core argu-
ments of a verb (e.g., Buyer is Arg0 for the predicate buy), and 14 temporary
roles that represent adjunct-like arguments (e.g., DIR for direction) of a verb.
The resource is available by requesting it via a license form.
Another PropBank for Turkish is constructed by Ak et al. (2018b) on
top of the constituency treebank of Turkish (Yıldız et al., 2014). In this case,
numbered arguments are up to four and nine temporary roles are employed. Ak
et al. (2018a) compare their PropBank to that of Şahin and Adalı (2018). The
same group has continued working on PropBanks and released TRopBank
(Kara et al., 2020a) which employ numbered arguments up to four and a
diﬀerent set of semantic role labels. While the former paper has a broken link,
the latter version is publicly available online. The number of sentences that are
annotated and the average of arguments per predicate are provided in Table
5 for all PropBanks.
ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2018) is a semantic network that creates knowl-
edge graphs from several multilingual resources such as infoboxes of Wikipedia
articles, Wiktionary, and WordNets. The concepts are connected with intralin-
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
21
gual and interlingual links. 304 languages take part in the project with varying
vocabulary sizes. Turkish is in the mid-range with a vocabulary size of 65 892.
As a follow-up project, Speer and Lowry-Duda (2017) have developed mul-
tilingual embeddings based on ConceptNet. Both resources are available for
download.
FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) is a lexical database that structures predi-
cates and their arguments as frames. The ﬁrst FrameNet is developed for En-
glish and over the years other languages have built their FrameNets. A Turkish
FrameNet was recently introduced (Marşan et al., 2021). It is designed to be
compatible with KeNet (Ehsani et al., 2018; Bakay et al., 2019) and TRop-
Bank (Kara et al., 2020b) by using the same lemma IDs. In total there are 139
frames that include 2769 synsets, which corresponds to 4080 predicates. The
FrameNet is available online.
3.4 Word embeddings and pre-trained language models
Word embeddings have gained substantial ground with the rise of neural mod-
els. As a consequence, several pretrained models for Turkish were released,
as well as multilingual models. For Turkish, there are Word2vec (Şen and Er-
doğan, 2014; Güngör and Yıldız, 2017),10 GloVe (Ferreira et al., 2016), fastText
(Grave et al., 2018), ELMo (Che et al., 2018), and several BERT (Schweter,
2020) models available for download. Kuriyozov et al. (2020) created cross-
lingual fastText embeddings aligned to English embeddings for ﬁve Turkic
languages. The embeddings as well as the dictionaries they used for alignments
are publicly available. Turkish is also part of the multilingual embeddings such
as MUSE (Conneau et al., 2017), mBERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and XLM-R
(Conneau et al., 2020).
3.5 Sentiment, emotion and other application-speciﬁc lexicons
Emotion and sentiment lexicons play an important part for emotion and sen-
timent analysis approaches. Çakmak et al. (2012) has created an emotion
words lexicon for Turkish by translating EMO20Q’s list of English emotions
(Kazemzadeh et al., 2011) and adding synonyms for some translations. The
total list of 197 words is not publicly available. A more recent emotion lexicon
is introduced by Toçoğlu and Alpkoçak (2019), which contains scores for six
emotion categories across 4 966 lexical entries. The lexicon is available online
for non-commercial use.
Vural (2013) has translated SentiStrength (Thelwall et al., 2012) to obtain
a sentiment lexicon. SentiStrength assigns positive and negative scores to a set
of words as well as creating lists of booster words, negation words, idioms, and
10 Also at https://github.com/akoksal/Turkish-Word2Vec without an associated publi-
cation.
22
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Table 6 The statistics for Turkish sentiment lexicons. For SentiTurkNet, each synset mem-
ber is counted as one token.
Sentiment Lexicon
Tokens Polarity
Tr SentiStrength
Vural (2013)
1 366
Pos (1-5), Neg (1-5)
Multilingualsentiment Chen and Skiena (2014)
2 500
Pos, Neg
SentiTurkNet
Dehkharghani et al. (2016)
21 623
Pos (0-7),Neg (0-7),Neut
emoticons. All lists are created also for Turkish. The paper does not provide
information about the availability of the dataset.
Chen and Skiena (2014) have automatically generated sentiment lexicons
for 136 languages including Turkish, using English as the source language.
They used Wiktionary, Google Machine Translation API, and WordNets as
mapping resources. About 60 % of the words are negative in the Turkish lexi-
con. The dataset is accessible via the authors’ webpage.
Dehkharghani et al. (2016) utilize Turkish WordNet (Çetinoğlu et al., 2018)
to create a sentiment lexicon named SentiTurkNet. They ﬁrst manually label
each synset with positive, negative, and neutral polarity. Then they make
use of the synset mapping between Turkish and English WordNets (Fellbaum,
1998) so that by transitivity SentiTurkNet can inherit the polarity strength
scores of SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010), a sentiment lexicon which is
built on top of the English WordNet. The dataset is publicly available online.
A normalization lexicon for social media text normalization is presented in
Demir et al. (2016). The lexicon is demonstrated to provide accurate normal-
ization, but statistics of the lexicon are not speciﬁed. The paper notes that
the resource is publicly available without indicating a method for obtaining it.
4 General Discussion
The focus of our survey is exploring data sources for Turkish NLP applications,
computational/quantitative linguistics research, as well as (digital) humanities
research that may beneﬁt from linguistic data. In this section, we list some
of our observations, followed by a short list of recommendations for future
eﬀorts on creating language resources. Although we found them to be more
prevalent in comparison to eﬀorts for resource rich, well-studied languages,
most of the observations and recommendations are not speciﬁc to Turkish
language resource creation eﬀorts. We believe these recommendations could
particularly be useful for linguistic resource creation eﬀorts for languages for
which there are relatively few data-driven studies, and the conventions and
traditions in the ﬁeld are not yet well established.
Availability and maintenance of resources Although it is not unique
to Turkish resources, we have encountered diﬃculties about ﬁnding and/or
conﬁrming the availability of the data sources. The locations of published re-
sources are not always stable and/or permanent. The URLs indicating the
location of the resources in papers or on the webpages of the authors or in-
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
23
stitutions are not always maintained and the resources often disappear after
publication. Although our eﬀorts to reach out to the authors/creators of the
resources often yielded positive results, it is desirable to diminish these barriers
to keep up with the fast-paced research community.
Another diﬃculty about the availability and maintenance of the resources
is related to the publication traditions in other ﬁelds outside computational
linguistics. In particular, most papers published in general computer science
venues (e.g., in ACM conferences or journals) do not include information about
the availability of their data sources. In some ﬁelds (e.g., speech processing),
it is more common to make the resource available for a fee which reduces their
accessibility especially for early stage researchers or researchers with limited
research budgets. In addition, the majority of published resources for Turkish
do not include an explicit license or ethical statement concerning collection,
distribution and use of the data.
Awareness of earlier work Although it is not unique for the research pa-
pers in Turkish Computational Linguistics, earlier research/resources (either
for Turkish or other languages) are not cited or there is only a short list of ref-
erences ignoring other relevant research. This results in many repetitions and
inconsistencies in the newly created resources.11 For example, the inconsisten-
cies and the lack of communication during the creation of diﬀerent treebanks
for Turkish have been brought up by multiple researchers (see Section 2.2).
Another, related, observation is the tendency to create new resources rather
than improving the existing ones. This leads to substantial eﬀort put into the
same work, without clear improvements over the earlier systems. For example,
despite the fact that some of the earlier morphological analyzers reviewed in
Section 3.2 have been available with free licenses, a large number of new ones
were created without a clear statement of diﬀerence or comparison. Similar
observations can be made for other resources (e.g., WordNets) and annotation
tools as well, e.g., improving existing annotation tools could be more useful
than creating new tools which are often used in a single project.
Although most research in computational linguistics is publicly available,
there is also a need for better communication among scholars to inform each
other and collaborate on the ongoing projects, eﬀorts and plans for building
and maintaining linguistic resources. In addition, there is a need for more com-
munication and collaboration between linguists and computational linguists for
creating, annotating and analyzing language related data and resources.
Issues about multilingual resources There is a rapid increase in the
eﬀorts of building massively multilingual resources for various tasks and appli-
cations. We covered some of these eﬀorts in our survey as well. By necessity,
these eﬀorts involve either opportunistic annotations (e.g., use of already ex-
isting information for other purposes, like word lists in Wiktionary), or rely
heavily on crowd sourcing and/or automatic annotations. However, a potential
pitfall is the lack of quality checks for these resources which do not necessarily
11 This criticism does not refer to the creations of similar resources from multiple indepen-
dent groups. As the CL and NLP become more and more data driven, we deﬁnitely beneﬁt
from more data, and well-informed and yet diﬀerent approaches to the same problem.
24
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
involve linguistic expertise in each language included in the resource. For ex-
ample, there are serious issues about the inﬂectional and derivational lexicons
discussed in Section 3.1. Although these multilingual resources are useful in
many tasks, one should be aware of potential quality issues as well.
Issues about translated resources Like for other languages, automatic
or manual translations of large datasets created originally for English are also
translated to Turkish. Although this approach is interesting as it yields par-
allel resources, the resource created in this manner includes eﬀects of ‘trans-
lationese’, as well as additional errors that may be introduced during the
translation process. Translated datasets may even include correct translations
that are not appropriate for a particular task. For example, as noted by Budur
et al. (2020), the inferential relation for two English sentences may be reversed
when translated to Turkish, because Turkish pronouns are gender-neutral. In
general, the same type of inference in the original language may not be applica-
ble in the translation. Similar problems are diﬃcult to prevent with automatic
translations or non-expert human translations performed without paying at-
tention to the purpose of the dataset.
Issues about quantity and quality With respect to the quantity of
resources, Turkish may be considered close to a ‘resource-rich’ language. For
example, Turkish has the largest number of treebanks (together with English)
in the Universal Dependencies repositories (as of UD version 2.1). However,
most Turkish treebanks are smaller in size in comparison to treebanks in other
languages, and quality and inconsistency issues have been raised in multiple
earlier studies (see Section 2.2 for a short discussion and pointers to relevant
papers). The same trend can be observed in other types of resources as well.
For example, Aksan and Aksan (2018) report partial results of a question-
naire conducted in 2011, where Turkish NLP specialists were asked to rate
the quantity and quality of the available corpora on a scale of 0 to 6. The
results indicate rather low judgments, 1.9 for quantity and 2.9 for quality.12
Although the quantity issues seem less of a problem currently, the number of
linguistic resources for Turkish are still relatively low compared to well-studied
European languages.
Overall, it is diﬃcult to qualify Turkish as a ‘low-resource language’ based
on the breadth and depth of the resources available. However, the resources
are rather scattered across diﬀerent ﬁelds, and there are issues of availability
and quality. In sum, it is probably apt to classify Turkish as a ‘resource poor’
language (following the terminology used by Zaghouani (2014) for Arabic).
Descriptions of datasets A related problem in the publications intro-
ducing resources is the lack of suﬃcient descriptions. In some cases, even the
basic statistics about the data are not presented or it is diﬃcult to interpret
the statistics due to unclear units of measurements. There is also a need for
better descriptions of proper quality assurance procedures, metrics and inter-
annotator agreements (IAA). Lack of proper linguistic glosses and translations
12 The complete results of the questionnaire are not published. Hence, the wording of the
questions, and the type of corpora queried are not clear.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
25
in the provided examples also create extra barriers for readers without any
Turkish background to understand and evaluate the research article and/or
the data resource.
Gaps in the existing resources Although there are a number of sources
for (social media) text normalization, we are not aware of any publications on
datasets of spelling or grammar errors.13 Similarly, there is no known learner
corpus or resources that can help second language research and practice for
Turkish.
Another general area with no or little resources is semantics. Except for
the lexical resources listed in Section 3, we are not aware of any semantically
annotated corpora (e.g., one that would be used for semantic parsing). There
is also a lack of benchmark datasets for assessing pre-trained word or text
representations (word embeddings, or pre-trained language models). So far,
most linguistic resources available for Turkish aim to be domain independent.
If a resource is domain-speciﬁc, it is often due to practical reasons rather
than a speciﬁc interest in this particular domain. On the other hand, domain-
speciﬁc data is crucial for NLP applications. Although the uses of unpublished
datasets were reported in earlier literature (e.g., a corpus of radiology reports
by Hadımlı and Yöndem, 2011), there is a big gap in domain-speciﬁc datasets
for critical domains or sub-ﬁelds like biomedical, legal or ﬁnancial NLP.
There is also a need for more systematic data collection and analysis of
dialectal and sociolinguistic variation with easy-to-access language resources
(Doğruöz, forthcoming).
A concise list of recommendations The issues raised above in this
section have some rather obvious solutions. Nevertheless, the concise list below
may be beneﬁcial for future resource creation eﬀorts.
– Publish your corpora, and publish it on permanent (or long-lasting) venues.
Beyond the value of the published data and code for reproducibility, pub-
lished data allows others to study the data in ways creators of the data
cannot possibly foresee. Furthermore, growing evidence suggests that the
papers that publish their data get more recognition (Wieling et al., 2018;
Colavizza et al., 2020). It is also important to publish the data in locations
that would not disappear shortly after the publication. Our experience
in this survey shows that the data shared through personal and also in-
stitutional webpages often become inaccessible as authors move to other
institutions, or their research interests change. As a result, publishing the
data in general repositories like Zenodo and OSF, or CLARIN repositories
that are more specialized for language resources is a better choice than
personal and institutional webpages. Similarly, to our experience, software
development infrastructures like GitHub also provide stable locations for
publishing linguistic data.
– Describe all aspects of the corpora adequately. As we occasionally noted
above, a large number of papers we reviewed do not describe the resources
13 A new spelling dictionary with an associated tool has been announced during the ﬁnal
revisions of this paper.
26
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
introduced suﬃciently. It is important for a paper to include information
on aspects of the corpora such as, size, label distribution, source material,
sampling method, as well as indications of annotation quality (e.g., IAA)
in proper units and using proper metrics for the task at hand. Being aware
of the earlier recommendations (e.g., Ide et al., 2017; Bender and Friedman,
2018; Gebru et al., 2020) for resource creation eﬀorts and their descriptions
would be useful for any annotation or curation project.
– Be explicit about the licensing and potential ethical issues. Although major
computational linguistics venues started to require statements about legal
and ethical aspects of data collection and sharing, not all the venues require
such statements. It is important to be aware of the existing guidelines, such
as ACM code of ethics (Gotterbarn et al., 2018), or the guidelines adapted
by major CL conferences,14 as well as the recent discussion in the ﬁeld (e.g.,
Šuster et al., 2017; Rogers et al., 2021). Even though the common guidelines
may not ﬁt every task, or every legal jurisdiction, being aware of potential
issues, and being explicit about the legal and ethical considerations during
data collection and annotation is important. The lack of clarity around
these issues may also reduce the usability of the data (and hence, the
recognition the creators may receive).
– Before creating a new resource, perform a thorough literature review of the
relevant research, consider improving existing resources, and collaborating
with other scholars in the ﬁeld. As evidenced by the lack of citations in
published papers, most resources are built from scratch, not paying at-
tention to the lessons learned in the earlier work. The quality of linguistic
resources could be improved by awareness of earlier work and more collabo-
ration between diﬀerent groups. Besides individual eﬀorts from researchers
and reviewers, a regular meeting of CL/NLP researchers and practition-
ers working on Turkish (and possibly Turkic languages) may help alleviate
this problem. Although a number of ‘ﬁrst attempts’ were made for such
meetings, unlike many other CL communities, no regular/stable meeting
has been established so far.
– Contribute to multilingual resource creation eﬀorts. One of the issues we
observed above with large-scale, multilingual resources is the lack of quality
in Turkish data in these eﬀorts. Bringing the language expertise of Turkish
(computational) linguists in these projects would deﬁnitely improve the
quality of these eﬀorts, which, in turn, would be beneﬁcial to the CL/NLP
studies in Turkish.
5 Conclusion
Our goal in this survey was to present a comprehensive summary of language
resources NLP and computational/quantitative linguistic research for Turkish.
In addition to the resources listed in our survey, we also provide a companion
14 For example, NAACL guidelines at https://2021.naacl.org/ethics/faq/ which is also
adapted by some of the other major CL conferences.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
27
website (https://turkishnlp.github.io) which includes links to even more
Turkish resources, and we will update it regularly. In this way, our survey
and the companion website will serve as stable and sustainable resources for
researchers across disciplines (e.g., linguistics, NLP) who are currently working
on Turkish. In addition, researchers who are not currently working on Turkish
but who need linguistic resources outside their current expertise and/or those
who are interested in including Turkish in multi- or cross-lingual tasks could
beneﬁt from our contribution as well.
Besides the comprehensive overview of the resources, we have also sum-
marized some of the common problematic issues and gaps in the ﬁeld and
provided a set of short suggestions for future resource creation eﬀorts. We
cautiously note that not all the problematic issues could easily be resolved
by individual researchers and research groups immediately. Some of these is-
sues require long-term collaborative eﬀorts within the community as well as
substantial support from academic funding agencies for further research. The
issues we raise in this paper are based on our impression from published pa-
pers and cursory inspection of the available corpora. To understand the factors
behind these issues better and propose informed solutions, future studies with
in-depth analyses (e.g., through questionnaires directed to creators and users
of the resources, or more systematic inspection of the available data) can be
helpful. Similarly, eﬀectiveness of the guidelines (oﬀered in papers we cite in
Section 4) may also be measured in future experimental studies.
In short, we hope that our survey and its companion webpage will serve as
a useful reference for locating resources for existing fundamental and applied
research and for creating future resources and projects for Turkish and/or
other languages.
References
Abdelali, Ahmed, Francisco Guzman, Hassan Sajjad, and Stephan Vogel (2014). “The
AMARA Corpus: Building Parallel Language Resources for the Educational Domain”.
In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’14). Reykjavik, Iceland: European Language Resources Association
(ELRA), pp. 1856–1862. url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf
/877_Paper.pdf.
Abdul-Mageed, Muhammad, AbdelRahim Elmadany, El Moatez Billah Nagoudi, Dinesh
Pabbi, Kunal Verma, and Rannie Lin (2021). “Mega-COV: A Billion-Scale Dataset of
100+ Languages for COVID-19”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. Online:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3402–3420. url: https://www.aclweb.o
rg/anthology/2021.eacl-main.298.
Agić, Željko and Ivan Vulić (2019). “JW300: A Wide-Coverage Parallel Corpus for Low-
Resource Languages”. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 3204–3210. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1310. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology
/P19-1310.
Ak, Koray, Özge Bakay, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2018a). “Comparison of Turkish Proposi-
tion Banks by Frame Matching”. In: 2018 3rd International Conference on Computer
Science and Engineering (UBMK), pp. 352–356. doi: 10.1109/UBMK.2018.8566426.
28
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Ak, Koray, Cansu Toprak, Volkan Esgel, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2018b). “Construction of
a Turkish proposition bank”. In: Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer
Sciences 26.1, pp. 570–581.
Akçakaya, Sinan and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2018). “An all-words sense annotated Turkish cor-
pus”. In: 2018 2nd International Conference on Natural Language and Speech Processing
(ICNLSP), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICNLSP.2018.8374368.
Akın, Ahmet Afşın and Mehmet Dündar Akın (2007). “Zemberek, an open source NLP
framework for Turkic languages”. In: Structure 10, pp. 1–5.
Aksan, Mustafa and Yeşim Aksan (2018). “Linguistic corpora: A view from Turkish”. In:
Turkish Natural Language Processing. Springer, pp. 291–315.
Aksan, Yeşim, Mustafa Aksan, Ahmet Koltuksuz, Taner Sezer, Ümit Mersinli, Umut Ufuk
Demirhan, Hakan Yılmazer, Gülsüm Atasoy, Seda Öz, İpek Yıldız, and Özlem Kurtoğlu
(2012). “Construction of the Turkish National Corpus (TNC)”. In: Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12).
Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 3223–3227.
url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/991_Paper.pdf.
Aksu-Koç, Ayhan and Dan Isaac Slobin (1985). “The Acquisition of Turkish”. In: The
Crosslinguistic Study of Language Acquisition. Ed. by Dan Isaac Slobin. Vol. 1. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. Chap. 9, pp. 839–878.
Altınkamış, Feyza (2012). Turkish Altınkamış Corpus. doi: 10.21415/T5H89W. url: http
://childes.talkbank.org/access/Other/Turkish/Altinkamis.html.
Altınkamış Türkay, Feyza (2005). “Children’s early lexicon in terms of noun/verb domi-
nance”. PhD thesis. Çukurova University. url: https://tez.yok.gov.tr/UlusalTezMe
rkezi/TezGoster?key=vbVkXe1KChYWNElr1MuLZkSZIFvXBJpcL-G5wtalqSvAlPjIZeecxgY
eEKGMm7xZ.
Altıntaş, Kemal (2001). “Turkish to Crimean Tatar machine translation system”. MA thesis.
Bilkent University.
Amasyalı, M Fatih and Banu Diri (2005). “Bir soru cevaplama sistemi: Baybilmiş”. In:
Türkiye Bilişim Vakfı Bilgisayar Bilimleri ve Mühendisliği Dergisi 1.1.
Amasyalı, M Fatih and Banu Diri (2006). “Automatic Turkish text categorization in terms
of author, genre and gender”. In: International Conference on Application of Natural
Language to Information Systems. Springer, pp. 221–226.
Ardila, Rosana, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Michael Henretty,
Reuben Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis Tyers, and Gregor Weber (2020). “Common
Voice: A Massively-Multilingual Speech Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the 12th Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European Language Resources
Association, pp. 4218–4222. isbn: 979-10-95546-34-4. url: https://www.aclweb.org/an
thology/2020.lrec-1.520.
Arısoy, Ebru, Doğan Can, Sıddıka Parlak, Haşim Sak, and Murat Saraçlar (2009). “Turkish
broadcast news transcription and retrieval”. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing 17.5, pp. 874–883.
Arslan, Recep Sinan and Necaattin Barışçı (2020). “A detailed survey of Turkish automatic
speech recognition”. In: Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences
28.6, pp. 3253–3269.
Artetxe, Mikel, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama (2020). “On the Cross-lingual Trans-
ferability of Monolingual Representations”. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Online: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 4623–4637. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl- main.421. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.421.
Aslan, Özkan, Serkan Günal, and B Taner Dinçer (2018). “A computational morphological
lexicon for Turkish: Trlex”. In: Lingua 206, pp. 21–34.
Atalay, Nart B., Kemal Oﬂazer, and Bilge Say (2003). “The Annotation Process in the
Turkish Treebank”. In: Proceedings of 4th International Workshop on Linguistically
Interpreted Corpora (LINC-03) at EACL 2003. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthol
ogy/W03-2405.
Ataman, Duygu (2018). “Bianet: A Parallel News Corpus in Turkish, Kurdish and English”.
In: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2018). Ed. by Jinhua Du, Mihael Arcan, Qun Liu, and Hitoshi Isa-
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
29
hara. Miyazaki, Japan: European Language Resources Association (ELRA). isbn: 979-
10-95546-15-3.
Baccianella, Stefano, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebastiani (2010). “SentiWordNet 3.0: An
Enhanced Lexical Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10). Valletta, Malta: European Language Resources Association (ELRA). url:
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/769_Paper.pdf.
Bakay, Özge, Ergelen Özlem, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2019). “Integrating Turkish WordNet
KeNet to Princeton WordNet: The Case of One-to-Many Correspondences”. In: 2019
Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications Conference (ASYU), pp. 1–5. doi:
10.1109/ASYU48272.2019.8946386.
Baker, Collin F, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe (1998). “The Berkeley FrameNet
Project”. In: 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Volume 1, pp. 86–90.
Beken Fikri, Figen, Kemal Oﬂazer, and Berrin Yanikoglu (2021). “Semantic Similarity Based
Evaluation for Abstractive News Summarization”. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Natural Language Generation, Evaluation, and Metrics (GEM 2021). Online: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 24–33. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.gem-1.3. url:
https://aclanthology.org/2021.gem-1.3.
Bender, Emily M and Batya Friedman (2018). “Data statements for natural language pro-
cessing: Toward mitigating system bias and enabling better science”. In: Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 6, pp. 587–604.
Beyhan, Fatih, Buse Çarık, İnanç Arın, Ayşecan Terzioğlu, Berrin Yanikoglu, and Reyyan
Yeniterzi (2022). “A Turkish Hate Speech Dataset and Detection System”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European
Language Resources Association, pp. 4177–4185. url: https://aclanthology.org/202
2.lrec-1.443.
Bilgin, Orhan, Özlem Çetinoğlu, and Kemal Oﬂazer (2004). “Building a WordNet for Turk-
ish”. In: Romanian Journal of Information Science and Technology 7.1-2, pp. 163–172.
Bojar, Ondřej, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow,
Matthias Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof
Monz, Matteo Negri, Aurélie Névéol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael
Rubino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia Specia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos
Zampieri (2016). “Findings of the 2016 Conference on Machine Translation”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Pa-
pers. Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 131–198. doi:
10.18653/v1/W16-2301. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-2301.
Bowman, Samuel R., Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning (2015).
“A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference”. In: Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Lisbon,
Portugal: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 632–642. doi: 10.18653/v1/D
15-1075. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D15-1075.
Boynukalın, Zeynep (2012). “Emotion analysis of Turkish texts by using machine learning
methods”. MA thesis. Middle East Technical University.
Budur, Emrah, Rıza Özçelik, Tunga Güngör, and Christopher Potts (2020). “Data and
Representation for Turkish Natural Language Inference”. In: Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Online:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8253–8267. url: https://www.aclweb.o
rg/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.662.
Burga, Alicia, Alp Öktem, and Leo Wanner (2017). “Revising the METU-Sabancı Turkish
Treebank: An Exercise in Surface-Syntactic Annotation of Agglutinative Languages”. In:
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling
2017). Pisa, Italy: Linköping University Electronic Press, pp. 32–41. url: https://www
.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-6506.
Burnard, Lou, ed. (2000). The British National Corpus Users Reference Guide. url: http
://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs/userManual/.
Çakmak, Ozan, Abe Kazemzadeh, Serdar Yıldırım, and Shri Narayanan (2012). “Using in-
terval type-2 fuzzy logic to analyze Turkish emotion words”. In: Proceedings of The
30
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
2012 Asia Paciﬁc Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and
Conference. IEEE, pp. 1–4.
Camgöz, Necati Cihan, Ahmet Alp Kındıroğlu, Serpil Karabüklü, Meltem Kelepir, Ayşe
Sumru Özsoy, and Lale Akarun (2016). “BosphorusSign: A Turkish Sign Language
Recognition Corpus in Health and Finance Domains”. In: Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16). Portorož,
Slovenia: European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 1383–1388. url: htt
ps://aclanthology.org/L16-1220.
Çarık, Buse and Reyyan Yeniterzi (2022). “A Twitter Corpus for Named Entity Recogni-
tion in Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 4546–4551. url:
https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.484.
Cattoni, Roldano, Mattia Antonino Di Gangi, Luisa Bentivogli, Matteo Negri, and Marco
Turchi (2021). “MuST-C: A multilingual corpus for end-to-end speech translation”. In:
Computer Speech & Language 66, p. 101155.
Çelikkaya, Gökhan, Dilara Torunoğlu, and Gülşen Eryiğit (2013). “Named entity recognition
on real data: a preliminary investigation for Turkish”. In: 2013 7th International Con-
ference on Application of Information and Communication Technologies. IEEE, pp. 1–
5.
Cer, Daniel, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Iñigo Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia (2017).
“SemEval-2017 Task 1: Semantic Textual Similarity Multilingual and Crosslingual Fo-
cused Evaluation”. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Vancouver, Canada: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 1–14. doi: 10.18653/v1/S17-2001. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthol
ogy/S17-2001.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem (2016). “A Turkish-German Code-Switching Corpus”. In: Proceedings of
the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2016). Ed. by Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Sara Goggi, Marko Grobelnik, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Helene Mazo, Asun-
cion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis. Portorož, Slovenia: European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 23–28. isbn: 978-2-9517408-9-1.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem (2017). “A Code-Switching Corpus of Turkish-German Conversations”. In:
Proceedings of the 11th Linguistic Annotation Workshop. Valencia, Spain: Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 34–40. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-0804. url: https://a
clanthology.org/W17-0804.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem, Orhan Bilgin, and Kemal Oﬂazer (2018). “Turkish Wordnet”. In: ed. by
Kemal Oﬂazer and Murat Saraçlar. Theory and Applications of Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Springer International Publishing. Chap. 15, pp. 317–336. isbn: 9783319901657.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem and Çağrı Çöltekin (2016). “Part of Speech Annotation of a Turkish-
German Code-Switching Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the 10th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop held in conjunction with ACL 2016 (LAW-X 2016). Berlin, Germany: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 120–130. doi: 10.18653/v1/W16-1714. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-1714.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem and Çağrı Çöltekin (2019). “Challenges of Annotating a Code-Switching
Treebank”. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories (TLT, SyntaxFest 2019). Paris, France: Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 82–90. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-7809. url: https://www.aclweb.org/an
thology/W19-7809.
Çetinoğlu, Özlem and Çağrı Çöltekin (2022). “Two languages, one treebank: building a
Turkish–German code-switching treebank and its challenges”. In: Language Resources
and Evaluation, pp. 1–35. issn: 1574-020X. doi: 10.1007/s10579-021-09573-1.
Cettolo, Mauro, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa Bentivogli, and Marcello Federico
(2013). “Report on the 10th IWSLT evaluation campaign”. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation. Heidelberg, Germany.
Che, Wanxiang, Yijia Liu, Yuxuan Wang, Bo Zheng, and Ting Liu (2018). “Towards Better
UD Parsing: Deep Contextualized Word Embeddings, Ensemble, and Treebank Con-
catenation”. In: Proceedings of the CoNLL 2018 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
31
Raw Text to Universal Dependencies. Brussels, Belgium: Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 55–64. url: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K18-2005.
Chen, Yanqing and Steven Skiena (2014). “Building Sentiment Lexicons for All Major Lan-
guages”. In: Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). Baltimore, Maryland: Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 383–389. doi: 10.3115/v1/P14-2063. url: https://www
.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-2063.
Çiloğlu, Tolga, Dinç Acar, and Ahmet Tokatlı (2004). “OrienTel-Turkish: Telephone Speech
Database Description and Notes on the Experience”. In: Eighth International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing.
Yıldırım, Ezgi, Fatih Samet Çetin, Gülşen Eryiğit, and Tanel Temel (2014). “The Impact of
NLP on Turkish Sentiment Analysis”. In: Türkiye Bilişim Vakfı Bilgisayar Bilimleri ve
Mühendisliği Dergisi 7 (1), pp. 43–51.
Çolakoğlu, Talha, Umut Sulubacak, and Ahmet Cüneyd Tantuğ (2019). “Normalizing Non-
canonical Turkish Texts Using Machine Translation Approaches”. In: Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student
Research Workshop. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 267–
272. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-2037. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-2037.
Colavizza, Giovanni, Iain Hrynaszkiewicz, Isla Staden, Kirstie Whitaker, and Barbara
McGillivray (2020). “The citation advantage of linking publications to research data”.
In: PLOS ONE 15.4, pp. 1–18. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230416. url: https://do
i.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.
Çöltekin, Çağrı (2010). “A Freely Available Morphological Analyzer for Turkish”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2010), pp. 820–827. url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010
/summaries/109.html.
Çöltekin, Çağrı (2015a). “A grammar-book treebank of Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the
14th workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 14). Ed. by Markus Dickin-
son, Erhard Hinrichs, Agnieszka Patejuk, and Adam Przepiórkowski. Warsaw, Poland,
pp. 35–49.
Çöltekin, Çağrı (2015b). “Turkish NLP web services in the WebLicht environment”. In:
Proceedings of the CLARIN Annual Conference.
Çöltekin, Çağrı (2016). “(When) do we need inﬂectional groups?” In: Proceedings of The
First International Conference on Turkic Computational Linguistics.
Çöltekin, Çağrı (2020). “A Corpus of Turkish Oﬀensive Language on Social Media”. In: Pro-
ceedings of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France,
pp. 6174–6184. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.lrec-1.758.
Conneau, Alexis, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wen-
zek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoy-
anov (2020). “Unsupervised Cross-lingual Representation Learning at Scale”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8440–8451. doi: 10.18653/v1/2
020.acl-main.747. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.747.
Conneau, Alexis, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Hervé Jé-
gou (2017). “Word Translation Without Parallel Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.04087.
Conneau, Alexis, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Adina Williams, Samuel Bowman, Hol-
ger Schwenk, and Veselin Stoyanov (2018). “XNLI: Evaluating Cross-lingual Sentence
Representations”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Brussels, Belgium: Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 2475–2485. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1269. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology
/D18-1269.
Dayanık, Erenay, Ekin Akyürek, and Deniz Yüret (2018). “MorphNet: A sequence-to-
sequence model that combines morphological analysis and disambiguation”. In: CoRR
abs/1805.07946. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.07946.
Dehkharghani, Rahim, Yücel Saygın, Berrin Yanıkoğlu, and Kemal Oﬂazer (2016). “Senti-
TurkNet: a Turkish polarity lexicon for sentiment analysis”. In: Language Resources and
Evaluation, pp. 1–19.
32
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
De Marneﬀe, Marie-Catherine, Christopher D. Manning, Joakim Nivre, and Daniel Zeman
(2021). “Universal Dependencies”. In: Computational Linguistics 47.2, pp. 255–308. issn:
0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00402.
De Melo, Gerard and Gerhard Weikum (2010). “Towards Universal Multilingual Knowl-
edge Bases”. In: Principles, Construction, and Applications of Multilingual WordNets.
Proceedings of the 5th Global WordNet Conference (GWC 2010). Ed. by Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya, Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen. Mumbai, India: Narosa Publishing,
pp. 149–156. isbn: 978-81-8487-083-1. url: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/s
ummary?doi=10.1.1.194.2529.
Demir, Şeniz, İlknur Durgar El-Kahlout, Erdem Ünal, and Hamza Kaya (2012). “Turkish
Paraphrase Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12). Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA), pp. 4087–4091. url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/procee
dings/lrec2012/pdf/968_Paper.pdf.
Demir, Şeniz, Murat Tan, and Berkay Topcu (2016). “Turkish Normalization Lexicon for
Social Media”. In: Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing: 17th In-
ternational Conference, CICLing, pp. 418–429.
Demirci, Sinem (2014). “Emotion analysis on Turkish tweets”. MA thesis. Middle East Tech-
nical University.
Demirtaş, Erkin and Mykola Pechenizkiy (2013). “Cross-lingual polarity detection with ma-
chine translation”. In: Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Issues of
Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining, pp. 1–8.
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova (2019). “BERT: Pre-
training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4171–
4186. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-142
3.
Di Gangi, Mattia A., Roldano Cattoni, Luisa Bentivogli, Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi
(2019). “MuST-C: a Multilingual Speech Translation Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Min-
neapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2012–2017. doi:
10.18653/v1/N19-1202. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1202.
Doğruöz, A. Seza (forthcoming). “Documenting Sociolinguistic Variation in Turkish”. In:
Routledge Handbook of Variationist Sociolinguistics. Ed. by Yoshi Asahi, Alexandra
D’arcy, and Paul Kerswill. UK: Routledge. Forthcoming.
Draxler, Chr. (2003). “Orientel: Recording telephone speech of Turkish speakers in Ger-
many”. In: Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Speech Communication
and Technology, pp. 1557–1560.
Durgar El-Kahlout, İlknur, Emre Bektaş, Naime Şeyma Erdem, and Hamza Kaya (2019).
“Translating Between Morphologically Rich Languages: An Arabic-to-Turkish Machine
Translation System”. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Arabic Natural Language Processing
Workshop. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 158–166. doi:
10.18653/v1/W19-4617. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-4617.
Durgar El-Kahlout, İlknur and Kemal Oﬂazer (2010). “Exploiting morphology and local
word reordering in English-to-Turkish phrase-based statistical machine translation”. In:
IEEE transactions on audio, speech, and language processing 18.6, pp. 1313–1322.
Eberhard, David M., Gary F. Simons, and Charles D. Fennig, eds. (2020). Ethnologue:
Languages of the World. Online version: http://www.ethnologue.com. Dallas, Texas.
Ehsani, Razieh, Ercan Solak, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2018). “Constructing a WordNet for
Turkish using manual and automatic annotation”. In: ACM Transactions on Asian and
Low-Resource Language Information Processing (TALLIP) 17.3, pp. 1–15.
Eisenstein, Jacob (2013). “What to do about bad language on the Internet”. In: Proceedings
of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Atlanta, Georgia: Association for
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
33
Computational Linguistics, pp. 359–369. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N1
3-1037.
Eken, Beyza and Cüneyd A Tantug (2015). “Recognizing named entities in Turkish tweets”.
In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Software Engineering and
Applications. Dubai, UAE.
Erjavec, Tomaž, Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Petya Osenova, Nikola Ljubešić, Kiril Simov, Vladislava
Grigorova, Michał Rudolf, Andrej Pančur, Matyáš Kopp, Starkaður Barkarson, Steinþór
Steingrímsson, Henk van der Pol, Griet Depoorter, Jesse de Does, Bart Jongejan,
Dorte Haltrup Hansen, Costanza Navarretta, María Calzada Pérez, Luciana D. de
Macedo, Ruben van Heusden, Maarten Marx, Çağrı Çöltekin, Matthew Coole, Tom-
maso Agnoloni, Francesca Frontini, Simonetta Montemagni, Valeria Quochi, Giulia
Venturi, Manuela Ruisi, Carlo Marchetti, Roberto Battistoni, Miklós Sebők, Orsolya
Ring, Roberts Dar ‘gis, Andrius Utka, Mindaugas Petkevičius, Monika Briedien˙e, Tomas
Krilavičius, Vaidas Morkevičius, Roberto Bartolini, Andrea Cimino, Sascha Diwersy,
Giancarlo Luxardo, and Paul Rayson (2021). Linguistically annotated multilingual
comparable corpora of parliamentary debates ParlaMint.ana 2.1. Slovenian language
resource repository CLARIN.SI. url: http://hdl.handle.net/11356/1431.
Erjavec, Tomaž, Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Petya Osenova, Nikola Ljubešić, Kiril Simov, Andrej
Pančur, Michał Rudolf, Matyáš Kopp, Starkaður Barkarson, Steinþór Steingrímsson,
Çağrı Çöltekin, Jesse de Does, Katrien Depuydt, Tommaso Agnoloni, Giulia Venturi,
María Calzada Pérez, Luciana D. de Macedo, Costanza Navarretta, Giancarlo Luxardo,
Matthew Coole, Paul Rayson, Vaidas Morkevičius, Tomas Krilavičius, Roberts Dar´gis,
Orsolya Ring, Ruben van Heusden, Maarten Marx, and Darja Fišer (2022). “The Par-
laMint corpora of parliamentary proceedings”. In: Language Resources and Evaluation.
doi: 10.1007/s10579-021-09574-0.
Eryiğit, Gülşen (2014). “ITU Turkish NLP Web Service”. In: Proceedings of the Demonstra-
tions at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. Gothenburg, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 1–4. doi: 10.3115/v1/E14-2001. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E14-20
01.
Eryiğit, Gülşen, Cihat Eryiğit, Serpil Karabüklü, Meltem Kelepir, Aslı Özkul, Tuğba Pamay,
Dilara Torunoğlu-Selamet, and Hatice Köse (2020). “Building the ﬁrst comprehensive
machine-readable Turkish sign language resource: methods, challenges and solutions”.
In: Language Resources and Evaluation 54.1, pp. 97–121.
Eryiˇgit, Gülşen and Dilara Torunoˇglu-Selamet (2017). “Social media text normalization for
Turkish”. In: Natural Language Engineering 23.6, pp. 835–875. doi: 10.1017/S1351324
917000134.
Eyecioğlu, Aslı and Bill Keller (2016). “Constructing a Turkish corpus for paraphrase identi-
ﬁcation and semantic similarity”. In: International Conference on Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing and Computational Linguistics. Springer, pp. 588–599.
Fellbaum, Christiane (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Language, Speech
and Communication. MIT Press. isbn: 9780262061971.
Ferreira, Daniel C., André F. T. Martins, and Mariana S. C. Almeida (2016). “Jointly
Learning to Embed and Predict with Multiple Languages”. In: Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers). Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2019–2028.
doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1190. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P16-1190.
Fersøe, Hanne, Elviira Hartikainen, Henk van den Heuvel, Giulio Maltese, Asunción Moreno,
Shaunie Shammass, and Ute Ziegenhain (2004). “Creation and Validation of Large Lex-
ica for Speech-to-Speech Translation Purposes”. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2004, May 26-28,
2004, Lisbon, Portugal. European Language Resources Association. url: http://www.l
rec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2004/summaries/452.htm.
Forcada, Mikel L, Mireia Ginestí-Rosell, Jacob Nordfalk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas,
Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-Martínez, Gema Ramírez-Sánchez, and Fran-
cis M Tyers (2011). “Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-based machine
translation”. In: Machine translation 25.2, pp. 127–144.
34
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Francis, W. Nelson and Henry Kučera (1979). Brown corpus manual: Manual of Information
to Accompany a Standard Corpus of Present-Day Edited American English for Use with
Digital Computers. Brown University. Providence, USA.
Gebru, Timnit, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna
Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford (2020). Datasheets for Datasets. arXiv:
1803.09010 [cs.DB].
Gemirter, Cavide Balkı and Dionysis Goularas (2020). “A Turkish Question Answering Sys-
tem Based on Deep Learning Neural Networks”. In: Journal of Intelligent Systems:
Theory and Applications 4.2, pp. 65–75.
Gerdes, Kim, Bruno Guillaume, Sylvain Kahane, and Guy Perrier (2018). “SUD or Surface-
Syntactic Universal Dependencies: An annotation scheme near-isomorphic to UD”. In:
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Universal Dependencies (UDW 2018). Brussels,
Belgium: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 66–74. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18
-6008. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-6008.
Gilmullin, RA (2008). “The Tatar-Turkish machine translation based on the two-level mor-
phological analyzer”. In: Interactive Systems and Technologies: The Problems of Human-
Computer Interaction, pp. 179–186.
Ginter, Filip, Jan Hajič, Juhani Luotolahti, Milan Straka, and Daniel Zeman (2017).
CoNLL 2017 Shared Task - Automatically Annotated Raw Texts and Word Embed-
dings. LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digital library at the Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics (ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University. url:
http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-1989.
Global Wordnet Association (2020). Wordnets in the World. http://globalwordnet.org/w
ordnets-in-the-world. Accessed: November 30, 2020.
Gökırmak, Memduh, Francis Tyers, and Jonathan Washington (2019). “Machine Translation
for Crimean Tatar to Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Technologies
for MT of Low Resource Languages. Dublin, Ireland: European Association for Machine
Translation, pp. 24–31. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-6805.
Gotterbarn, Don, Bo Brinkman, Catherine Flick, Michael S Kirkpatrick, Keith Miller, Kate
Varansky, Marty J Wolf, Eve Anderson, Ron Anderson, Amy Bruckman, Karla Carter,
Michael Davis, Penny Duquenoy, Jeremy Epstein, Kai Kimppa, Lorraine Kisselburgh,
Shrawan Kumar, Andrew McGettrick, Natasa Milic-Frayling, Denise Oram, Simon
Rogerson, David Shamma, Janice Sipior, Eugene Spaﬀord, and Les Waguespack (2018).
ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. url: https://www.acm.org/code-of
-ethics.
Göz, İlyas, ed. (2003). Yazılı Türkçenin kelime sıklığı sözlüğü. Türk Dil Kurumu.
Grave, Edouard, Piotr Bojanowski, Prakhar Gupta, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov
(2018). “Learning Word Vectors for 157 Languages”. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018).
Güngör, O. and E. Yıldız (2017). “Linguistic features in Turkish word representations”. In:
2017 25th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU), pp. 1–
4. doi: 10.1109/SIU.2017.7960223.
Hadımlı, Kerem and Meltem Turhan Yöndem (2011). “Two Alternate Methods for Informa-
tion Retrieval from Turkish Radiology Reports”. In: Computer and Information Sciences
II. Springer, pp. 527–532.
Hakkani-Tür, Dilek Z., Kemal Oﬂazer, and Gökhan Tür (2002). “Statistical Morphological
Disambiguation for Agglutinative Languages”. In: Computers and the Humanities 36.4,
pp. 381–410.
Hamzaoğlu, İlker (1993). “Machine translation from Turkish to other Turkic languages and
an implementation for the Azeri language”. MA thesis. Boğazici University.
Hankamer, Jorge (1986). “Finite state morphology and left to right phonology”. In: Proceed-
ings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Vol. 5. Stanford Linguistic
Association.
Hayran, Ahmet and Mustafa Sert (2017). “Sentiment analysis on microblog data based on
word embedding and fusion techniques”. In: 2017 25th Signal Processing and Commu-
nications Applications Conference (SIU), pp. 1–4.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
35
Haznedaroğlu, Ali and Levent M Arslan (2014). “Language model adaptation for automatic
call transcription”. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, pp. 4102–4106.
Hemphill, Charles T., John J. Godfrey, and George R. Doddington (1990). “The ATIS Spo-
ken Language Systems Pilot Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech and
Natural Language. HLT ’90. Hidden Valley, Pennsylvania: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pp. 96–101. doi: 10.3115/116580.116613.
Hulden, Mans (2009). “Foma: a ﬁnite-state compiler and library”. In: Proceedings of the 12th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Demonstrations Session. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 29–32.
Ide, Nancy, Nicoletta Calzolari, Judith Eckle-Kohler, Dafydd Gibbon, Sebastian Hellmann,
Kiyong Lee, Joakim Nivre, and Laurent Romary (2017). “Community standards for
linguistically-annotated resources”. In: Handbook of Linguistic Annotation. Springer,
pp. 113–165.
İlgen, Bahar, Eşref Adalı, and A Cüneyd Tantuğ (2012). “Building up lexical sample dataset
for Turkish word sense disambiguation”. In: 2012 International Symposium on Innova-
tions in Intelligent Systems and Applications. IEEE, pp. 1–5.
Inkelas, Sharon, Aylin Küntay, C. Orhan Orgun, and Ronald Sprouse (2000). “Turkish
Electronic Living Lexicon (TELL): A Lexical Database”. In: Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’00). Athens,
Greece: European Language Resources Association (ELRA). url: http://www.lrec-co
nf.org/proceedings/lrec2000/pdf/86.pdf.
Kamholz, David, Jonathan Pool, and Susan Colowick (2014). “PanLex: Building a Resource
for Panlingual Lexical Translation”. In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14). Reykjavik, Iceland: European
Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 3145–3150. url: http://www.lrec-conf
.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/1029_Paper.pdf.
Kara, Neslihan, Deniz Baran Aslan, Büşra Marşan, Özge Bakay, Koray Ak, and Olcay
Taner Yıldız (2020a). “TRopBank: Turkish PropBank V2.0”. In: Proceedings of The 12th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European Language
Resources Association, pp. 2763–2772. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020
.lrec-1.336.
Kara, Neslihan, Büşra Marşan, Merve Özçelik, Bilge Nas Arıcan, Aslı Kuzgun, Neslihan
Cesur, Deniz Baran Aslan, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2020b). “Creating A Syntactically Fe-
licitous Constituency Treebank For Turkish”. In: 2020 Innovations in Intelligent Systems
and Applications Conference (ASYU), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ASYU50717.2020.9259873.
Kartal, Yavuz Selim and Mucahid Kutlu (2020). “TrClaim-19: The First Collection for
Turkish Check-Worthy Claim Detection with Annotator Rationales”. In: Proceedings of
the 24th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. Online: Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 386–395. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.conll-1.31. url:
https://aclanthology.org/2020.conll-1.31.
Kaya, Mesut (2013). “Sentiment analysis of Turkish political columns with transfer learning”.
MA thesis. Middle East Technical University.
Kayabaş, Ayla, Helmut Schmid, Ahmet Ercan Topcu, and Özkan Kılıç (2019). “TRMOR: a
ﬁnite-state-based morphological analyzer for Turkish”. In: Turkish Journal of Electrical
Engineering & Computer Sciences 27.5, pp. 3837–3851.
Kayadelen, Tolga, Adnan Öztürel, and Bernd Bohnet (2020). “A Gold Standard Dependency
Treebank for Turkish”. In: Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 5156–
5163. isbn: 979-10-95546-34-4. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.lrec-1
.634.
Kazemzadeh, Abe, Sungbok Lee, Panayiotis G Georgiou, and Shrikanth S Narayanan (2011).
“Emotion twenty questions: Toward a crowd-sourced theory of emotions”. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Aﬀective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Springer, pp. 1–
10.
Kirov, Christo, John Sylak-Glassman, Roger Que, and David Yarowsky (2016). “Very-large
Scale Parsing and Normalization of Wiktionary Morphological Paradigms”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
36
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
(LREC’16). Portorož, Slovenia: European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
pp. 3121–3126. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L16-1498.
Kılınç, Deniz, Akın Özçift, Fatma Bozyiğit, Pelin Yıldırım, Fatih Yücalar, and Emin Boran-
dağ (2017). “TTC-3600: A new benchmark dataset for Turkish text categorization”. In:
Journal of Information Science 43.2, pp. 174–185. doi: 10.1177/0165551515620551.
Köksal, A (1975). “A ﬁrst approach to a computerized model for the automatic morphological
analysis of Turkish”. PhD thesis. Hacettepe University, Ankara.
Köksal, Asiye Tuba, Özge Bozal, Emre Yürekli, and Gizem Gezici (2020). “#Turki$hTweets:
A Benchmark Dataset for Turkish Text Correction”. In: Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Online: Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 4190–4198. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.findings
-emnlp.374.
Kolobov, Rostislav, Olga Okhapkina, Olga Omelchishina, Andrey Platunov, Roman
Bedyakin, Vyacheslav Moshkin, Dmitry Menshikov, and Nikolay Mikhaylovskiy (2021).
“MediaSpeech: Multilanguage ASR Benchmark and Dataset”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.16193.
Küçük, Dilek and Fazlı Can (2019). A Tweet Dataset Annotated for Named Entity Recog-
nition and Stance Detection. arXiv: 1901.04787 [cs.CL].
Küçük, Dilek, Guillaume Jacquet, and Ralf Steinberger (2014). “Named Entity Recognition
on Turkish Tweets”. In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14). Reykjavik, Iceland: European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 450–454. url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/procee
dings/lrec2014/pdf/380_Paper.pdf.
Küçük, Dilek and Adnan Yazıcı (2008). “Identiﬁcation of coreferential chains in video texts
for semantic annotation of news videos”. In: 2008 23rd International Symposium on
Computer and Information Sciences. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Küçük, Dilek and Meltem Turhan Yöndem (2007). “Automatic identiﬁcation of pronominal
Anaphora in Turkish texts”. In: 2007 22nd international symposium on computer and
information sciences. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Kuriyozov, Elmurod, Yerai Doval, and Carlos Gómez-Rodríguez (2020). “Cross-Lingual
Word Embeddings for Turkic Languages”. In: Proceedings of The 12th Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European Language Resources
Association, pp. 4054–4062. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.lrec-1.4
99.
Kutlu, Mücahid and İlyas Çiçekli (2013). “A Hybrid Morphological Disambiguation System
for Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing. Nagoya, Japan: Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing,
pp. 1230–1236. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/I13-1175.
Kutlu, Mücahid, Celal Çığır, and İlyas Çiçekli (2010). “Generic text summarization for
Turkish”. In: The Computer Journal 53.8, pp. 1315–1323.
Kwiatkowski, Tom, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh,
Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina
Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov (2019). “Natural Questions: A Benchmark for
Question Answering Research”. In: Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 7, pp. 452–466. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00276. url: https://www.aclweb.org
/anthology/Q19-1026.
Kyjánek, Lukáš, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Magda Ševčíková, and Jonáš Vidra (2019). “Univer-
sal Derivations Kickoﬀ: A Collection of Harmonized Derivational Resources for Eleven
Languages”. In: Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Resources and
Tools for Derivational Morphology. Prague, Czechia: Charles University, Faculty of
Mathematics, Physics, Institute of Formal, and Applied Linguistics, pp. 101–110. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-8512.
Ladhak, Faisal, Esin Durmuş, Claire Cardie, and Kathleen McKeown (2020). “WikiLingua:
A New Benchmark Dataset for Cross-Lingual Abstractive Summarization”. In: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Online: Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4034–4048. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnl
p.360. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.findings-emnlp.360.
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
37
Lea, Martin, Tim O’Shea, Pat Fung, and Russell Spears (1992). “‘Flaming’in computer-
mediated communication: Observations, explanations, implications.” In: Contexts of
Computer-Mediated Communication. Ed. by Martin Lea. Harvester Wheatsheaf, pp. 89–
112.
Lewis, William D (2006). “ODIN: A model for adapting and enriching legacy infrastructure”.
In: 2006 Second IEEE International Conference on e-Science and Grid Computing (e-
Science’06). IEEE, pp. 137–137.
Lindén, Krister, Miikka Silfverberg, and Tommi Pirinen (2009). “HFST Tools for Morphology–
An Eﬃcient Open-Source Package for Construction of Morphological Analyzers”. In:
State of the Art in Computational Morphology. Ed. by Cerstin Mahlow and Michael
Piotrowski, pp. 28–47.
Longpre, Shayne, Yi Lu, and Joachim Daiber (2020). MKQA: A Linguistically Diverse
Benchmark for Multilingual Open Domain Question Answering. url: https://arxiv.o
rg/pdf/2007.15207.pdf.
MacWhinney, Brian and Catherine Snow (1985). “The child language data exchange system”.
In: Journal of Child Language 12.2, pp. 271–269. doi: 10.1017/S0305000900006449.
Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz (1993). “Building a
Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank”. In: Computational Linguistics
19.2, pp. 313–330. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J93-2004.
Marşan, Büşra, Neslihan Kara, Merve Özçelik, Bilge Nas Arıcan, Neslihan Cesur, Aslı
Kuzgun, Ezgi Sanıyar, Oğuzhan Kuyrukçu, and Olcay Taner Yıldız (2021). “Build-
ing the Turkish FrameNet”. In: Proceedings of the 11th Global Wordnet Conference.
University of South Africa (UNISA): Global Wordnet Association, pp. 118–125. url:
https://aclanthology.org/2021.gwc-1.14.
Megyesi, Beáta, Bengt Dahlqvist, Éva Á. Csató, and Joakim Nivre (2010). “The English-
Swedish-Turkish Parallel Treebank”. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10). Valletta, Malta: European
Language Resources Association (ELRA). url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedin
gs/lrec2010/pdf/116_Paper.pdf.
Megyesi, Beáta, Bengt Dahlqvist, Eva Pettersson, and Joakim Nivre (2008). “Swedish-
Turkish Parallel Treebank”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08). Marrakech, Morocco: European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA). url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings
/lrec2008/pdf/121_paper.pdf.
Mengüşoğlu, Erhan and Olivier Deroo (2001). “Turkish LVCSR: Database Preparation and
Language Modeling for an Aglutinative Language”. In: IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics Speech And Signal Processing. Vol. 6. IEEE; 1999, pp. 4018–4018.
Moran, Steven, Robert Schikowski, Danicai Pajović, Cazim Hysi, and Sabine Stoll (2015).
The ACQDIV Corpus: a comparative longitudinal language acquisition corpus. Version
1.0.
Navigli, Roberto and Simone Paolo Ponzetto (2012). “BabelNet: The automatic construction,
evaluation and application of a wide-coverage multilingual semantic network”. In: Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence 193, pp. 217–250. issn: 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.001.
url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370212000793.
Nguyen, Dong and A. Seza Doğruöz (2013). “Word Level Language Identiﬁcation in Online
Multilingual Communication”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Seattle, Washington, USA: Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 857–862. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D1
3-1084.
Nguyen, Dong, A. Seza Doğruöz, Carolyn P. Rosé, and Franciska de Jong (2016). “Compu-
tational Sociolinguistics: A Survey”. In: Computational Linguistics 42.3, pp. 537–593.
doi: 10.1162/COLI\_a\_00258.
Nivre, Joakim, Marie-Catherine de Marneﬀe, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič,
Christopher Manning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira,
Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman (2016). “Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilin-
gual Treebank Collection”. In: Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), pp. 23–28.
38
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Oﬂazer, Kemal (1994). “Two-level description of Turkish morphology”. In: Literary and
Linguistic Computing 9.2.
Oﬂazer, Kemal, Özlem Çetinoğlu, and Bilge Say (2004). “Integrating Morphology with Multi-
word Expression Processing in Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Integrating Processing. Barcelona, Spain: Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 64–71. url: https://aclanthology.org/W04-0409.
Oﬂazer, Kemal and Sharon Inkelas (2006). “The architecture and the implementation of a
ﬁnite state pronunciation lexicon for Turkish”. In: Computer Speech & Language 20.1,
pp. 80–106.
Oﬂazer, Kemal and Murat Saraçlar, eds. (2018). Turkish Natural Language Processing. The-
ory and Applications of Natural Language Processing. Springer International Publishing.
isbn: 9783319901657.
Oﬂazer, Kemal, Bilge Say, Dilek Zeynep Hakkani-Tür, and Gökhan Tür (2003). “Building
a Turkish treebank”. In: Treebanks: Building and Using Parsed Corpora. Ed. by Anne
Abeillé. Springer. Chap. 15, pp. 261–277.
Oﬂazer, Kemal, Reyyan Yeniterzi, and İlknur Durgar-El Kahlout (2018). “Statistical Ma-
chine Translation and Turkish”. In: ed. by Kemal Oﬂazer and Murat Saraçlar. Theory
and Applications of Natural Language Processing. Springer International Publishing.
Chap. 10, pp. 207–236. isbn: 9783319901657.
Orhan, Zeynep, Emine Çelik, and Neslihan Demirgüç (2007). “SemEval-2007 Task 12: Turk-
ish Lexical Sample Task”. In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007). Prague, Czech Republic: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 59–63. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S07-1011.
Ortiz Suárez, Pedro Javier, Laurent Romary, and Benoît Sagot (2020). “A Monolingual
Approach to Contextualized Word Embeddings for Mid-Resource Languages”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1703–1714. url: https://www.a
clweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.156.
Ortiz Suárez, Pedro Javier, Benoît Sagot, and Laurent Romary (2019). “Asynchronous
pipelines for processing huge corpora on medium to low resource infrastructures”. In: ed.
by Piotr Bański, Adrien Barbaresi, Hanno Biber, Evelyn Breiteneder, Simon Clematide,
Marc Kupietz, Harald Lüngen, and Caroline Iliadi. Proceedings of the Workshop on
Challenges in the Management of Large Corpora (CMLC-7) 2019. Cardiﬀ, 22nd July
2019. Mannheim: Leibniz-Institut für Deutsche Sprache, pp. 9–16. doi: 10.14618/ids
-pub-9021. url: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-90215.
Özel, Selma Ayşe, Erhan Öztürk, and Esra Saraç Eşsiz (2017). “A New Dataset for Cyber-
bully Detection from Turkish Texts”. In: 5th International Conference on Natural and
Engineering Sciences (ICNES). IEEE, pp. 366–370.
Özsoy, Makbule Gülçin, Ferda Nur Alpaslan, and İlyas Çiçekli (2011). “Text summarization
using latent semantic analysis”. In: Journal of Information Science 37.4, pp. 405–417.
Öztürel, Adnan, Tolga Kayadelen, and Işın Demirşahin (2019). “A Syntactically Expressive
Morphological Analyzer for Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Con-
ference on Finite-State Methods and Natural Language Processing. Dresden, Germany:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 65–75. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-3110. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-3110.
Pala Er, Nagehan (2009). “Turkish factoid question answering using answer pattern match-
ing”. MA thesis. Bilkent University.
Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury (2005). “The Proposition Bank: An
Annotated Corpus of Semantic Roles”. In: Computational Linguistics 31.1, pp. 71–106.
doi: 10.1162/0891201053630264. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J05-1004.
Pamay, Tuğba, Umut Sulubacak, Dilara Torunoğlu-Selamet, and Gülşen Eryiğit (2015).
“The Annotation Process of the ITU Web Treebank”. In: Proceedings of The 9th Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop. Denver, Colorado, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 95–101. doi: 10.3115/v1/W15-1610. url: https://www.aclweb.org/an
thology/W15-1610.
Papalexakis, Evangelos, Dong Nguyen, and A. Seza Doğruöz (2014). “Predicting Code-
switching in Multilingual Communication for Immigrant Communities”. In: Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Computational Approaches to Code Switching. Doha, Qatar:
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
39
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 42–50. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-3905. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W14-3905.
Paul, Michael, Marcello Federico, and Sebastian Stüker (2010). “Overview of the IWSLT
2010 evaluation campaign”. In: International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
(IWSLT) 2010.
Polat, Hüseyin and Saadin Oyucu (2020). “Building a Speech and Text Corpus of Turkish:
Large Corpus Collection with Initial Speech Recognition Results”. In: Symmetry 12.2,
p. 290.
Qazi, Umair, Muhammad Imran, and Ferda Oﬂi (2020). “GeoCoV19: A dataset of hundreds
of millions of multilingual COVID-19 tweets with location information”. In: SIGSPA-
TIAL Special 12.1, pp. 6–15.
Quasthoﬀ, Uwe, Dirk Goldhahn, and Thomas Eckart (2014). “Building Large Resources
for Text Mining: The Leipzig Corpora Collection”. In: Text Mining. Ed. by Chris Bie-
mann and Alexander Mehler. Theory and Applications of Natural Language Processing.
Springer, pp. 3–24. isbn: 978-3-319-12654-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-12655-5_1.
Rajpurkar, Pranav, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang (2016). “SQuAD:
100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of Text”. In: Proceedings of the 2016
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Austin, Texas: As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2383–2392. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1264.
url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D16-1264.
Rogers, Anna, Timothy Baldwin, and Kobi Leins (2021). “‘Just What do You Think You’re
Doing, Dave?’ A Checklist for Responsible Data Use in NLP”. In: Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021. Punta Cana, Dominican Republic:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4821–4833. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.fin
dings-emnlp.414. url: https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.414.
Rothweiler, Monika (2011). Turkish-German Successive-Bilinguals Corpus (TÜ_DE_cL2
Hamburg). Version 0.1. Publication date 2011-06-30. url: http://hdl.handle.net/110
22/0000-0000-7D90-1.
Ruhi, Şükriye, Betil Eröz-Tuğa, Çiler Hatipoğlu, Hale Işık-Güler, M Güneş Can Acar, Kerem
Eryılmaz, Hümeyra Can, Özlem Karakaş, and Derya Çokal Karadaş (2010). “Sustaining
a corpus for spoken Turkish discourse: Accessibility and corpus management issues”. In:
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Resources: From Storyboard to Sustainability
and LR Lifecycle Management. Vol. 44.
Ruhi, Şükriye, Kerem Eryılmaz, and M Güneş Can Acar (2012). “A Platform for Creating
Multimodal and Multilingual Spoken Corpora for Turkic Languages: Insights from the
Spoken Turkish Corpus”. In: Proceedings of the First Workshop on Language Resources
and Technologies for Turkic Languages, pp. 57–63.
Safaya, Ali, Emirhan Kurtuluş, Arda Göktoğan, and Deniz Yüret (May 2022). “Mukayese:
Turkish NLP Strikes Back”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: ACL 2022. Dublin, Ireland: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 846–
863. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.69. url: https://aclanthology.org/2022
.findings-acl.69.
Şahin, Gözde Gül and Eşref Adalı (2018). “Annotation of semantic roles for the Turkish
proposition bank”. In: Language Resources and Evaluation 52.3, pp. 673–706.
Sak, Haşim, Tunga Güngör, and Murat Saraçlar (2008). “Turkish language resources: Mor-
phological parser, morphological disambiguator and web corpus”. In: International Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (GoTAL 2008). Springer, pp. 417–427.
Sak, Haşim, Tunga Güngör, and Murat Saraçlar (2011). “Resources for Turkish morpholog-
ical processing”. In: Language resources and evaluation 45.2, pp. 249–261.
Salor, Özgül, Bryan L. Pellom, Tolga Çiloğlu, and Mübeccel Demirekler (2007). “Turkish
speech corpora and recognition tools developed by porting SONIC: Towards multilingual
speech recognition”. In: Computer Speech & Language 21.4, pp. 580–593. issn: 0885-2308.
doi: 10.1016/j.csl.2007.01.001.
Say, Bilge (2011). “To Build on The Past for a Better Future in Turkish Natural Language
Processing”. In: Multisaund: Ulusal Konuşma ve Dil Teknolojileri Platformu Kuruluşu
ve Türkçede Mevcut Durum Çalıştayı Bildirileri. Ed. by M Doğan. TÜBİTAK-BİLGEM.
Gebze, pp. 54–56.
40
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Say, Bilge, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oﬂazer, and Umut Özge (2002). “Development of a Corpus
and a TreeBank for Present-day Written Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh Inter-
national Conference of Turkish Linguistics. Eastern Mediterranean University, Cyprus.
Scherer, Klaus R and Harald G Wallbott (1994). “Evidence for universality and cultural
variation of diﬀerential emotion response patterning”. In: Journal of personality and
social psychology 66.2, p. 310.
Schmid, Helmut (2005). “A programming language for ﬁnite state transducers”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Workshop on Finite State Methods in Natural Language
Processing (FSMNLP 2005). Helsinki, pp. 308–309.
Schroeder, Christoph, Christin Schellhardt, Mehmet-Ali Akıncı, Meral Dollnick, Ginesa
Dux, Esin Işıl Gülbeyaz, Anne Jähnert, Ceren Koç-Gültürk, Patrick Kühmstedt, Flo-
rian Kuhn, Verena Mezger, Carol Pfaﬀ, and Betül Sena Ürkmez (2015). MULTILIT:
Manual, criteria of transcription and analysis for German, Turkish and English. Ed.
by Christoph Schroeder and Christin Schellhardt.
Schüller, Peter, Kübra Cingilli, Ferit Tunçer, Barış Gün Sürmeli, Ayşegül Pekel, Ayşe Hande
Karatay, and Hacer Ezgi Karakaş (2018). “Marmara Turkish Coreference Corpus and
Coreference Resolution Baseline”. In: CoRR abs/1706.01863. arXiv: 1706.01863. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.01863.
Schultz, Tanja, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Tim Schlippe (2013). “Globalphone: A multilingual
text & speech database in 20 languages”. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE, pp. 8126–8130.
Schweter, Stefan (2020). BERTurk - BERT models for Turkish. Version 1.0.0. doi: 10.5281
/zenodo.3770924. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3770924.
Scialom, Thomas, Paul-Alexis Dray, Sylvain Lamprier, Benjamin Piwowarski, and Jacopo
Staiano (2020). “MLSUM: The Multilingual Summarization Corpus”. In: Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 8051–8067. doi: 10.18653/v1/20
20.emnlp-main.647. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.647.
Şeker, Gökhan Akın and Gülşen Eryiğit (2017). “Extending a CRF-based named entity
recognition model for Turkish well formed text and user generated content”. In: Semantic
Web 8.5, pp. 625–642.
Şen, Mehmet Umut and Hakan Erdoğan (2014). “Learning word representations for Turkish”.
In: 2014 22nd Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU).
IEEE, pp. 1742–1745.
Sezer, Taner (2017). “TS Corpus Project: An online Turkish Dictionary and TS DIY Corpus”.
In: European Journal of Language and Literature 3.3, pp. 18–24.
Sezer, Taner and Bengü Sever Sezer (2013). “TS corpus: Herkes için Türkçe derlem”. In:
Proceedings of the 27th Turkish National Linguistics Conference, pp. 217–225.
Sezerer, Erhan, Ozan Polatbilek, and Selma Tekir (2019). “A Turkish Dataset for Gen-
der Identiﬁcation of Twitter Users”. In: Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 203–207. doi:
10.18653/v1/W19-4023. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-4023.
Sincan, Özge Mercanoğlu and Hacer Yalım Keleş (2020). “Autsl: A large scale multi-modal
turkish sign language dataset and baseline methods”. In: IEEE Access 8, pp. 181340–
181355.
Speer, Robert and Joanna Lowry-Duda (2017). “ConceptNet at SemEval-2017 Task 2: Ex-
tending Word Embeddings with Multilingual Relational Knowledge”. In: Proceedings of
the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). doi: 10.18
653/v1/s17-2008. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/S17-2008.
Speer, Robyn, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi (2018). ConceptNet 5.5: An Open Multi-
lingual Graph of General Knowledge. arXiv: 1612.03975 [cs.CL].
Stamou, Soﬁa, Kemal Oﬂazer, Karel Pala, Dimitris Christoudoulakis, Dan Cristea, Dan
Tuﬁs, Svetla Koeva, George Totkov, Dominique Dutoit, and Maria Grigoriadou (2002).
“Balkanet: A multilingual Semantic Network for Balkan Languages”. In: Proceedings of
the First Global WordNet Conference. Mysore, India.
Sulubacak, Umut, Memduh Gökırmak, Francis Tyers, Çağrı Çöltekin, Joakim Nivre, and
Gülşen Eryiğit (2016). “Universal Dependencies for Turkish”. In: Proceedings of COL-
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
41
ING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical
Papers. Osaka, Japan, pp. 3444–3454. url: http://aclweb.org/anthology/C16-1325.
Šuster, Simon, Stéphan Tulkens, and Walter Daelemans (2017). “A Short Review of Ethical
Challenges in Clinical Natural Language Processing”. In: Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing. Valencia, Spain: Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 80–87. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-1610. url: https://acla
nthology.org/W17-1610.
Sylak-Glassman, John, Christo Kirov, Matt Post, Roger Que, and David Yarowsky (2015).
“A universal feature schema for rich morphological annotation and ﬁne-grained cross-
lingual part-of-speech tagging”. In: International Workshop on Systems and Frameworks
for Computational Morphology. Springer, pp. 72–93.
Tantuğ, A Cüneyd, Eşref Adalı, and Kemal Oﬂazer (2007). “A MT system from Turkmen to
Turkish employing ﬁnite state and statistical methods”. In: Machine Translation Summit
XI. European Association for Machine Translation (EAMT).
Tantuğ, A. Cüneyd and Eşref Adalı (2018). “Machine Translation Between Turkic Lan-
guages”. In: Turkish Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Kemal Oﬂazer and Murat
Saraçlar. Springer International Publishing. Chap. 11, pp. 317–336.
Thelwall, Mike, Kevan Buckley, and Georgios Paltoglou (2012). “Sentiment strength detec-
tion for the social web”. In: Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 63.1, pp. 163–173. doi: 10.1002/asi.21662.
Tiedemann, Jörg (2012). “Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS”. In: Proceedings of
the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12).
Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 2214–2218.
url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/463_Paper.pdf.
Toçoğlu, Mansur Alp and Adil Alpkoçak (2018). “TREMO: A dataset for emotion analysis
in Turkish”. In: Journal of Information Science 44.6, pp. 848–860. doi: 10.1177/01655
51518761014.
Toçoğlu, Mansur Alp and Adil Alpkoçak (2019). “Lexicon-based emotion analysis in Turkish”.
In: Turkish Journal Of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences 27.2, pp. 1213–
1227.
Toçoğlu, Mansur Alp, Okan Öztürkmenoğlu, and Adil Alpkoçak (2019). “Emotion Analysis
From Turkish Tweets Using Deep Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Access 7, pp. 183061–
183069. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2960113.
Topkaya, İbrahim Saygın and Hakan Erdoğan (2012). “SUTAV: A Turkish Audio-Visual
Database”. In: Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’12). Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), pp. 2334–2337. url: http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/l
rec2012/pdf/483_Paper.pdf.
Toraman, Çağrı, Furkan Şahinuç, and Eyüp Halit Yılmaz (2022). “Large-Scale Hate Speech
Detection with Cross-Domain Transfer”. In: Proceedings of the Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association,
pp. 2215–2225. url: https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.238.
Tür, Gökhan, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and Kemal Oﬂazer (2003). “A statistical information
extraction system for Turkish”. In: Natural Language Engineering 9.2, pp. 181–210. doi:
10.1017/S135132490200284X.
Türk, Utku, Furkan Atmaca, Şaziye Betül Özateş, Balkız Öztürk Başaran, Tunga Güngör,
and Arzucan Özgür (2019). “Improving the Annotations in the Turkish Universal De-
pendency Treebank”. In: Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Universal Dependen-
cies (UDW, SyntaxFest 2019). Paris, France: Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 108–115. doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-8013. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W
19-8013.
Türk, Utku, Furkan Atmaca, Şaziye Betül Özateş, Gözde Berk, Seyyit Talha Bedir, Ab-
dullatif Köksal, Balkız Öztürk Başaran, Tunga Güngör, and Arzucan Özgür (2022).
“Resources for Turkish Dependency Parsing: Introducing the BOUN Treebank and the
BoAT Annotation Tool”. In: Language Resources and Evaluation 56, pp. 259–307. doi:
10.1007/s10579-021-09558-0.
Türkmenoğlu, Cumali and Ahmet Cüneyd Tantuğ (2014). “Sentiment analysis in Turkish
media”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
42
Ç. Çöltekin, A. S. Doğruöz, Ö. Çetinoğlu
Türkoğlu, Filiz, Banu Diri, and M Fatih Amasyalı (2007). “Author attribution of Turk-
ish texts by feature mining”. In: International Conference on Intelligent Computing.
Springer, pp. 1086–1093.
Tyers, Francis M and Murat Serdar Alperen (2010). “South-East European Times: A parallel
corpus of Balkan languages”. In: Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on Exploitation of
Multilingual Resources and Tools for Central and (South-) Eastern European Languages,
pp. 49–53.
Upadhyay, Shyam, Manaal Faruqui, Gökhan Tür, Hakkani-Tür Dilek, and Larry Heck (2018).
“(Almost) zero-shot cross-lingual spoken language understanding”. In: 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
pp. 6034–6038.
Van der Goot, Rob and Özlem Çetinoğlu (2021). “Lexical Normalization for Code-switched
Data and its Eﬀect on POS Tagging”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long
Papers. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vossen, Piek, ed. (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic
Networks. Kluwer Academic Publishers. isbn: 978-94-017-1491-4.
Vural, A Güral (2013). “Sentiment-focused web crawling”. PhD thesis. Middle East Technical
University.
Wieling, Martijn, Josine Rawee, and Gertjan van Noord (2018). “Reproducibility in Com-
putational Linguistics: Are We Willing to Share?” In: Computational Linguistics 44.4,
pp. 641–649. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00330. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J
18-4003.
Wiese, Heike, Artemis Alexiadou, Shanley Allen, Oliver Bunk, Natalia Gagarina, Kateryna
Iefremenko, Esther Jahns, Martin Klotz, Thomas Krause, Annika Labrenz, Anke Lüdel-
ing, Maria Martynova, Katrin Neuhaus, Tatiana Pashkova, Vicky Rizou, Tracy Rose-
marie, Christoph Schroeder, Luka Szucsich, Wintai Tsehaye, Sabine Zerbian, and Yulia
Zuban (2020). RUEG Corpus. Version 0.3.0. Zenodo. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3765218.
url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3765218.
Williams, Adina, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman (2018). “A Broad-Coverage Challenge
Corpus for Sentence Understanding through Inference”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers). New Orleans, Louisiana:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1112–1122. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-1101.
url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N18-1101.
Wołk, Krzysztof and Krzysztof Marasek (2014). “Building Subject-aligned Comparable Cor-
pora and Mining it for Truly Parallel Sentence Pairs”. In: Procedia Technology 18. In-
ternational workshop on Innovations in Information and Communication Science and
Technology, IICST 2014, 3-5 September 2014, Warsaw, Poland, pp. 126–132. issn: 2212-
0173. doi: 10.1016/j.protcy.2014.11.024. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/sci
ence/article/pii/S2212017314005453.
Xanthos, Aris, Sabine Laaha, Steven Gillis, Ursula Stephany, Ayhan Aksu-Koç, Anastasia
Christoﬁdou, Natalia Gagarina, Gordana Hrzica, F. Nihan Ketrez, Marianne Kilani-
Schoch, Katharina Korecky-Kröll, Melita Kovacěvić, Klaus Laalo, Marijan Palmović,
Barbara Pfeiler, Maria D. Voeikova, and Wolfgang U. Dressler (2011). “On the role of
morphological richness in the early development of noun and verb inﬂection”. In: First
Language 31.4, pp. 461–479. doi: 10.1177/0142723711409976.
Yeniterzi, Reyyan (2011). “Exploiting Morphology in Turkish Named Entity Recognition
System”. In: Proceedings of the ACL 2011 Student Session. Portland, OR, USA: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 105–110. url: https://www.aclweb.org/ant
hology/P11-3019.
Yirmibeşoğlu, Zeynep and Gülşen Eryiğit (2018). “Detecting Code-Switching between
Turkish-English Language Pair”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop W-
NUT: The 4th Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text. Brussels, Belgium: Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 110–115. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18- 6115. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-6115.
Yıldız, Olcay Taner, Ercan Solak, Onur Görgün, and Razieh Ehsani (2014). “Constructing
a Turkish-English Parallel TreeBank”. In: Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of
Resources for Turkish Natural Language Processing
43
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers). Baltimore,
Maryland: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 112–117. doi: 10.3115/v1/P
14-2019. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P14-2019.
Yüret, Deniz and Ferhan Türe (2006). “Learning morphological disambiguation rules for
Turkish”. In: Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics. HLT-NAACL ’06.
New York, pp. 328–334. doi: 10.3115/1220835.1220877.
Zaghouani, Wajdi (2014). “Critical Survey of the Freely Available Arabic Corpora”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the LREC 2014 Workshop on Free/Open-Source Arabic Corpora and Cor-
pora Processing Tools, pp. 1–8.
Zampieri, Marcos, Shervin Malmasi, Preslav Nakov, Sara Rosenthal, Noura Farra, and
Ritesh Kumar (2019). “Predicting the Type and Target of Oﬀensive Posts in Social
Media”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pp. 1415–1420. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1144. url: https://www.aclweb.org/a
nthology/N19-1144.
Zeman, Daniel, Martin Popel, Milan Straka, Jan Hajic, Joakim Nivre, Filip Ginter, Juhani
Luotolahti, Sampo Pyysalo, Slav Petrov, Martin Potthast, Francis Tyers, Elena Bad-
maeva, Memduh Gökırmak, Anna Nedoluzhko, Silvie Cinkova, Jan Hajic jr., Jaroslava
Hlavacova, Václava Kettnerová, Zdenka Uresova, Jenna Kanerva, Stina Ojala, Anna Mis-
silä, Christopher D. Manning, Sebastian Schuster, Siva Reddy, Dima Taji, Nizar Habash,
Herman Leung, Marie-Catherine de Marneﬀe, Manuela Sanguinetti, Maria Simi, Hiroshi
Kanayama, Valeria dePaiva, Kira Droganova, Héctor Martínez Alonso, Çağrı Çöltekin,
Umut Sulubacak, Hans Uszkoreit, Vivien Macketanz, Aljoscha Burchardt, Kim Harris,
Katrin Marheinecke, Georg Rehm, Tolga Kayadelen, Mohammed Attia, Ali Elkahky,
Zhuoran Yu, Emily Pitler, Saran Lertpradit, Michael Mandl, Jesse Kirchner, Hector
Fernandez Alcalde, Jana Strnadová, Esha Banerjee, Ruli Manurung, Antonio Stella, At-
suko Shimada, Sookyoung Kwak, Gustavo Mendonca, Tatiana Lando, Rattima Nitisaroj,
and Josie Li (2017). “CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to
Universal Dependencies”. In: Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multilingual
Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies. Vancouver, Canada: Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–19. url: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K/K17
/K17-3001.pdf.
Zeyrek, Deniz and Kezban Başıbüyük (2019). “TCL - a Lexicon of Turkish Discourse Con-
nectives”. In: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Designing Meaning
Representations. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 73–81.
doi: 10.18653/v1/W19-3308. url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-3308.
Zeyrek, Deniz, Işın Demirşahin, Ayışığı B. Sevdik-Çallı, and Ruket Çakıcı (2013). “Turkish
Discourse Bank: Porting a discourse annotation style to a morphologically rich language”.
In: Dialogue Discourse 4.2, pp. 174–184.
Zeyrek, Deniz and Murathan Kurfalı (2017). “TDB 1.1: Extensions on Turkish Discourse
Bank”. In: Proceedings of the 11th Linguistic Annotation Workshop. Valencia, Spain:
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 76–81. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-0809. url:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-0809.
Zeyrek, Deniz, Amália Mendes, Yulia Grishina, Murathan Kurfalı, Samuel Gibbon, and
Maciej Ogrodniczuk (2020). “TED Multilingual Discourse Bank (TED-MDB): a parallel
corpus annotated in the PDTB style”. In: Language Resources and Evaluation 54.2,
pp. 587–613. doi: s10579-019-09445-9.
Zeyrek, Deniz, Amália Mendes, and Murathan Kurfalı (2018). “Multilingual Extension of
PDTB-Style Annotation: The Case of TED Multilingual Discourse Bank”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018). Miyazaki, Japan: European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
url: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1301.
