Title: Stock Market Prediction using Natural Language Processing -- A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.13564v1
--------------------------------------------------

David C. Wyld et al. (Eds): NLPA, AIS, BDAP, SOENG, IPPR - 2022 
pp. 33-48, 2022. CS & IT - CSCP 2022                                                          DOI: 10.5121/csit.2022.121404 
 
STOCK MARKET PREDICTION USING NATURAL 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING -A SURVEY 
 
Om mane and Sarvanakumar kandasamy 
 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The stock market is a network which provides a platform for almost all major economic 
transactions. While investing in the stock market is a good idea, investing in individual stocks 
may not be, especially for the casual investor. Smart stock-picking requires in-depth research 
and plenty of dedication. Predicting this stock value offers enormous arbitrage profit 
opportunities. This attractiveness of finding a solution has prompted researchers to find a way 
past problems like volatility, seasonality, and dependence on time. This paper surveys recent 
literature in the domain of natural language processing and machine learning techniques used 
to predict stock market movements.  The main contributions of this paper include the 
sophisticated categorizations of many recent articles and the illustration of the recent trends of 
research in stock market prediction and its related areas. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Stock market Prediction, Sentiment Analysis, Opinion Mining, Natural Language Processing, 
Deep Learning. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Stock movement prediction is a central task in computational and quantitative finance. With 
recent advances in deep learning and natural language processing technology, event-driven stock 
prediction has received increasing research attention [12, 13]. With the increasing influence of 
the stock market on economic trends, forecasting the trend of stocks has become a hot topic in 
research. Many researchers have conducted scientific and meticulous research on the stock 
market, trying to formulate rules for the operation of the stock market. However, the results of the 
research have found that the changes in the stock market seem to be unrelated [14, 15] The 
efficient market hypothesis theory proposed by Eugene Fame is a more authoritative explanation 
in the current financial circles to study the law of stock market changes. In this theory, the stock 
price is mainly affected by future information, namely news, rather than being driven by current 
or past prices [16-18]. For example, Lin et al. proposed an end-to-end hybrid neural network, 
which uses convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract data features and uses long- and 
short-term memory recurrent neural networks to capture the long-term dependence in the 
historical trend sequence of the time series to learn. Contextual features predict the trend of stock 
market prices [19]. Hu et al. designed a hybrid attention network (HAN) to predict stock trends 
based on related news sequences [20]. Li et al. proposed a multitask recurrent neural network 
(RNN) and a high-order Markov random domain to predict the movement direction of stock 
prices Hindawi Security and Communication [21]. The most popular technique used in financial 
time series analysis to detect the trend and seasonality is Autoregressive integrated moving 
average. ARIMA. The current advancement in technology has improved modern techniques in 
34 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
forecasting financial time series data. Deep LSTM, Shallow LSTM, 1-CNN and machine learning 
models were used to predict stock market data. An attention LSTM model is also used in 
prediction of financial time series data.  ARIMA model is used in prediction of the closing prices 
of time series data. Va Yassine, Khadija and Faddoul in formulated classification model designed 
based on LSTM network to predict the probability of investing or not. For each of the selected 
papers the extracted data and information about (a) research characteristics, as authors, year of 
publication, languages covered, methodology, corpus characteristics; (b) sentiment level and 
categorization (binary, ternary, or fine-grained, e.g., rates 0 − 5); (c) deep learning architectures 
and techniques, and (d) results and effectiveness of the proposal against baselines or state-of-the-
art models. 
 
This survey can be useful for newcomer researchers in this field as it covers the most famous 
Sentiment Analysis (SA) techniques and applications in one research paper. This survey uniquely 
gives a refined categorization to the various SA techniques which is not found in other surveys. 
Existing work has investigated news representation using deep learning [4, 8], neural fuzzy 
networks [2], heterogeneous graphs [7], long short-term memory and the random forest 
framework [10]. 
 
2. RELATED WORKS 
 
2.1. Noisy Recurrent State Transition 
 
Heyan Huang, Xiao Liu, discussed the prediction of the stock market through news events with 
the help of advances in deep learning techniques and machine learning technology. They 
proposed a novel future event prediction module to factor in likely next events according to 
natural events consequences. The future event module was trained over "future" data over 
historical events. They were able to visualize past events over a large time window, and their 
model is also more explainable. To their knowledge, they are the first to explicitly model both 
events and noise over a fundamental stock value state for news-driven stock movement 
prediction.  
 
2.2. Deep Learning 
 
Jiake Li, tried to establish a stock index forecast and network security model based on time series 
and deep learning. Based on the time series model, the author proposed to use CNN to extract in 
depth emotional information to replace the basic emotional features of the emotional extraction 
level. At the data source level, other information sources, such as basic features, are introduced to 
further improve the predictive performance of the model. The prediction model constructed in 
this paper is also based on the model in the specific direction of deep learning in data mining. 
Agüero, M.M. Salas, proposed the method of Multilingual Sentiment Analysis (MSA) which is 
an attempt to address the sentiment analysis issue through several strategies. They improved over 
previous reviews with wider coverage from 2017 to 2020 as well as a study focused on the 
underlying ideas and commonalities behind the different solutions to achieve multilingual 
sentiment analysis. 
 
2.3.  Constrained Learning 
 
Chen, X., Rajan, D., & Quek, H.C, proposed an efficient and interpretable neuro-fuzzy system for 
stock price prediction using multiple technical indicators with focus on interpretability–accuracy 
trade-off. Neuro-fuzzy systems offer to represent complex solutions in a natural language like 
representation in the form of interpretable fuzzy rules which are easier to comprehend by users. 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        35 
These systems are well suited to uncertain and complex real-world problems like stock market 
environments as these systems can deal with incomplete and uncertain data conditions and do not 
require large numbers of observations as other AI-based prediction models. Various studies have 
integrated neuro-fuzzy systems with other techniques to improve the prediction accuracy. 
Atsalakis et al. (2011) introduced a novel stock trading system based on neuro-fuzzy modeling 
method. The trading system augmented the neuro-fuzzy system with the concepts from Elliot 
Wave Theory to enhance forecasting accuracy. The study demonstrated high performance of this 
system in predicting the trends in stock prices. Tan et al. (2011) presented an ANFIS-based 
model for stock trading. Authors supplemented the model using reinforcement learning (RL). 
 
2.4. Graph based Prediction 
 
Junran Wua, Ke Xua discussed a method to develop a novel framework based on the structural 
information embedded in price graphs by conducting numerous experiments on real-world 
market data. In this study, they propose a novel framework to address both issues. Specifically, in 
terms of transforming time series into complex networks, they convert market price series into 
graphs. Then, structural information, referring to associations among temporal points and the 
node weights, is extracted from the mapped graphs to resolve the problems regarding long-term 
dependencies and the chaotic property. They take graph embeddings to represent the associations 
among temporal points as the prediction model inputs. Node weights are used as a priori 
knowledge to enhance the learning of temporal attention. The effectiveness of their proposed 
framework is validated using real-world stock data, and their approach obtains the best 
performance among several state-of-the-art benchmarks. Feature based methods only use simple 
lexical features such as bags-of-words, noun phrases and named entities (Kogan et al., 2009; 
Schumaker and Chen, 2009) extracted from financial text to predict the movement of stock 
market. To better predict the movement of stock market, Ding et al. (2015, 2019) propose to 
utilize the event level information extracted from titles or abstracts. Moreover, to capture 
contextual information within document, many document representation learning based methods 
(Augenstein et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2016) are proposed to 
learn a distributed representation of the whole document or abstract, and build prediction model 
based on the representation vector, so that information from overall document can be utilized for 
making predictions. 
 
2.5. Liquidity Prediction for Learning Models 
 
As an evaluative consideration in investment decisions, stock liquidity is of critical importance 
for all stakeholders in the market. It also has implications for the stock market’s growth. 
Liquidity sanctions investors and issuers to meet their quotas regarding investment, financing or 
hedging, reducing investment costs and the cost of capital experimental results, it can be 
concluded that the LSTM model allows for prediction characterized by lowest value of mean 
square error (MSE). The aim of [6] is to develop the machine learning models for liquidity 
prediction. The subject of research is the Vietnamese stock market, focusing on the recent years - 
from 2011 to 2019. Vietnamese stock market differs from developed markets and emerging 
markets. It is characterized by a limited number of transactions, which are also relatively small. 
The Multilayer Perceptron, Long-Short Term Memory and Linear Regression models have been 
developed. Data was prepared for further analysis before data was preliminarily analyzed and 
relationships were found that enable illiquidity prediction. After preparing and selecting data, a 
deep learning model was developed. The study was conducted on the Ho Chi Minh City Stock 
Exchange in Vietnam. A sample of daily data of 220 companies representing different sectors 
was used for analysis. The main disadvantage of the proposed approach is the performing 
prediction only for one day. 
 
36 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
3. ARCHITECTURE 
 
This section gives a detailed explanation about the methods used in analyzing and evaluating the 
trend of S&P500 stocks, where a System Architecture of stock market price prediction is designed 
which explains its associated process flow. Also, there has been a great interest in novelty 
architectures for Sentiment Analysis (SA). One approach that has received substantial attention 
when working at the basic document level, is the design of hierarchical models which learn a 
representation for sentences from its words, on top of this level, another model can learn 
representations for documents. Other substitutes such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) 
or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) can be used at each level. Works in [25,26] and [27] are 
some examples of this approach. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  System Architecture [3] 
 
In [1] the authors explicitly model both noise and events over a recurrent stock value state, which 
is modelled using LSTM. For each day of trading, they consider the news events happened in that 
day as well as the past news events using neural attention [28]. Assessing the impacts of insider 
trading, they also pre-suppose future news in the training method and procedure. To model the 
high stochasticity of stock market, they illustrate a supplemented noise using a neural module. 
Their model is named attention-based noisy recurrent states transition (ANRES) as can be seen 
from figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The ANRES model framework for trading day t in a trading sequence. The black solid elbows 
are used both in the training and the evaluating procedures. The red solid elbows are only used in the 
training procedure, while the blue dotted elbows in the evaluating procedure [1] 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        37 
3.1. Time Series Model 
 
The object of the stock model based on time series is the historical data of stocks. The core step is 
to divide the historical data of stocks to facilitate the subsequent stock market forecasts. In this 
model, the first and most important step is to collect and process time series data. When 
predicting a time series, it is mainly by observing the trend changes of the time series first and 
predicting future time series changes by learning the law of past changes. Time series data often 
have a large amount of data and are difficult to process directly. This requires dividing it and 
dividing the time series by finding the key trend points. Through this division method, the 
originally complex data can be compressed while also removing some noise in the stock 
sequence. Some points that are not helpful for prediction, so that the retained information is more 
effective for the model to learn the changes in the time series data, and the time series rules can 
be found more clearly [4]. 
 
3.2. Deep Learning Model 
 
First, for traditional classifiers (such as SVM and KNN) to deal with the general problem of time 
series data classification, with the help of the recurrent neural network to facilitate the modelling 
of time series data, a depth-based stock prediction model learned, and on the basis of this model, 
the sentiment analysis results of stock-related data in the social media text are added to construct 
a trend prediction model that integrates basic emotional features. Among the deep learning 
technologies that have emerged in recent years, convolutional neural networks are the most 
widely used. Figure 3 shows the index prediction process based on deep learning [4]. 
 
3.3. Heterogeneous Graphs 
 
Given one or several news documents of a corporation, [7]’s goal is to predict the future stock 
reaction of this corporation based on corresponding financial text. Rather than predicting the 
specific price reaction range, we formulate the prediction as fluctuation polarity. The prediction 
will be “Positive” for the rise in stock price or “Negative” for the decline in stock price. The 
edges in the heterogeneous graphs are undirected. 
 
Table 1.  Example of sentences in Financial Text and stock prices of corporations 
 
Sentence 
After three consecutive days rise on               
stock prices, H & M was pushed to the forefront of 
public opinion due to the Xinjiang cotton incident. 
Stock Price Reaction 
H&M Negative 
 
4. METHODOLOGY 
 
4.1. Dataset Description 
 
To study the proposed algorithm, Hadi Rezaei, Hamidreza Faaljou extract the historical daily 
financial time series from January 2010 to September 2019 from the Yahoo Finance Website. 
The daily data includes the close price of S&P 500, Dow Jones, DAX, and Nikkei225. The 
authors use the dataset released by Duan et al. in their experiments. The dataset includes more 
than 100k financial articles from Reuters. They have used an open source openIE tool for 
information extraction. Training is stopped if the performance doesn't improve for 10 epochs. 
38 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
Use of heuristic rules to build connections among words, event triples and sentences is done. 
Employment of multi-grained encoders to encode the nodes within HGk into embedding is done. 
Following baselines are used in this model: Sentiment, Event Tensor, Event Tensor-CS, TGT-
CTX-LSTM, Conditional Encoding, TGT-HN, TGT-HAN, GCN, GAT. The paper [6] covers the 
sample period from January 2011 to December 2019, which contains 2,242 trading days. The 
eligible stocks in the sample consist of 378 companies in two stock exchanges, which included 
179 stocks on the HOSE and 199 stocks on the HNX. Stock market liquidity is represented by 
seven liquidity measures. 
 
[6] Covers the sample period from January 2011 to December 2019, which contains 2,242 trading 
days. The eligible stocks in the sample consist of 378 companies in two stock exchanges, which 
included 179 stocks on the HOSE and 199 stocks on the HNX. In [2] Daily stock data of three 
indices, viz. BSE, CNX Nifty and S&P 500, comprising of five fundamental stock quantities, 
namely maximum price, open price, minimum price, close price, and trading volume, are used to 
evaluate the proposed system. The dataset of BSE index is from January 30, 2005, to December 
30, 2015. For Nifty index, dataset from January3, 2005, to December 24, 2015, is used. In case of 
S&P 500, daily stock data of 2865 records from February 9, 2005, to June 28, 2016, have been 
used. 
 
4.2. Dataset Pre-Processing 
 
To work with this dataset, there is a need to pre-process it, wherein visualization followed by 
illustration is foremost importance. This results in us being able to identify trends, missing 
values, noise, and outliers. To study the proposed algorithm, data was extracted from the 
historical daily financial time series from October 2021 to April 2022 from the Yahoo Finance 
Website. The daily data includes the close price of S&P500, Dow Jones and DAX. To better 
visualize these indices, The data is described in graph 1. 
 
 
 
Graph 1.  Price Index for S&P 500, Dow Jones, DAX 
 
Due to the complexity of financial stock exchange environment, stock prices contain a lot of 
noise that make it very difficult to achieve a good model accuracy when trying to forecast it trend 
movement. Since is the interest of investors to achieve good forecasting model, then there is a 
need to reduce the noise in the dataset because stock environment is containing noise from the 
news articles and other source media information. A wavelength transform, a mathematical 
function introduced in the pre-processing stage by de noise S&P500 dataset and present it trend 
and structure of the dataset. The authors transform the dataset using wavelength mathematical 
transform function: 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        39 
 
 
 
After transformation we drop the co-efficient with more standard deviation away from the co-
efficient and inversely transform the new co-efficient to get the denoise S&P 500 dataset [3]. 
 
4.3. Equations 
 
From [1] the ANRES model uses LSTM with peephole connections. The underlying stock value 
trends are represented as a recurrent state z transited over time, which can reflect the 
fundamentals of a stock. In each trading day, they consider the impact of corresponding news 
events and a random noise. 
 
 
where 𝑣𝑡 is the news events impact vector on the trading day t and f is a function in which 
random noise will be integrated. In deep learning models, loss error is usually used to evaluate 
the prediction, which refers to the difference between the actual observed value and the predicted 
value. In order to evaluate the loss error, different tools can be used. The standard metrics in this 
type of models include root-mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and mean 
absolute percentage error (MAPE) [8]. The formula for their calculation is as follows: 
 
 
 
In order to select key information and get the stock price fluctuation of a specific corporation. 
Firstly, we use the corporation to softly select relevant information from sentences: 
 
 
 
where 𝐻𝑐𝜖ℝ𝑑 is the corporation representation and 𝐻𝑠′𝜖ℝ𝑑∗𝑟 is the embedding of sentences, 
𝐴𝜖ℝ𝑟 is the weight matrix and 𝑈𝜖ℝ𝑑 is the weight sum of sentences representation. 
𝑋𝜔 𝑎, 𝑏 = 1
 𝑎 𝑥 𝑡 𝜓 𝑡−𝑏
𝑎
 ⅆ𝑡
∞
−∞
 
𝑧𝑡
′ = 𝐋𝐒𝐓𝐌
              𝑣𝑡, 𝑧𝑡−1  
𝑧𝑡= 𝑓 𝑧𝑡
′  
𝑀𝑆𝐸= 1
𝑛  𝑦𝑖−𝑦 𝑖 2
𝑛
𝑖
 
𝑀𝐴𝐸= 1
𝑛  𝑦𝑖−𝑦 𝑖 
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
𝑀𝐴𝑃𝐸= 1
𝑛  𝑦𝑖−𝑦 𝑖
𝑦𝑖
 
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
𝛼𝑖= 𝐻𝑐𝐻𝑠
′, 
𝐴𝑖=
𝛼𝑖
𝛴𝑗𝜖𝑆𝑘𝛼𝑗
 
𝑢= 𝐴𝐻𝑠 
40 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
 
 
Figure 3.  Index prediction process based on deep learning [4] 
 
Therefore, based on U, the authors have used a linear function to predict future stock market 
fluctuation of this corporation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       𝑋𝑝𝑟ⅇ𝑑= 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒[𝐻𝑐,U], 
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑊𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑋𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 , 
                           
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 𝐴𝑟𝑔𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠 , 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        41 
where  𝑋𝑝𝑟ⅇ𝑑𝜖ℝ2∗𝑑 is the concatenation of corporation and sentence representation and 
𝑊𝑝𝑟ⅇ𝑑𝜖ℝ𝑑 is a trainable parameter. Probabilities 𝜖 ℝ2 denotes the final distribution of Positive 
and Negative. Predictions are the final prediction on stock market fluctuation, 0 and 1 denotes 
Negative and Positive, respectively. 
 
5. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION 
 
5.1. Evaluation Metrics 
 
In [2] in order to evaluate the performance of the proposed model, root- mean-squared error 
(RMSE) and mean average percentage (MAPE) have been used to measure forecasting accuracy. 
RMSE and MAPE measure the deviation between the actual and the forecasted values. Smaller 
the value of these metrics larger is the forecasting performance of the model. Also, directional 
accuracy (DA) has been used which gives the correctness of a system for the predicted trend of a 
stock price index. For [3] MACD Moving average convergence divergence displays the trend 
following the characteristic of market prices. CCI Consumer channel index identifies price 
reversals, price extreme and the strength of rise prices. ROC Rate of change is a momentum 
indicator that measures the percentage change in prices from one period to the next. For 
comparison, the baseline approach is chosen based on classical machine learning algorithms. The 
machine learning algorithm is a traditional method that is widely used but less complex than the 
model used in this work. Using the same input variables trained and tested their system 
architecture predictions on S&P 500 new process data. They chose the Logistic regression and 
Random Forest model. They implemented the two baseline models using Scikit -Learn library. 
List of supporting algorithms used in this paper are RSI, Momentum, OBV, MA, EMA, ADX.  In 
[7] the authors use the dataset released by Duan et al. (2018) in their experiments. The dataset 
includes more than 100k financial articles from Reuters2, which also includes stock prices of 
different corporations. The time interval of the articles starts from October 2006 to December 
2015. Only articles that mentioned at least one firm are selected by them, and the dataset is 
balanced on positive and negative classes. The statistics of this dataset are listed in Table 2. 
Evaluation Metrics Follow the metrics used in prior works (Chang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 
2018), they adopt the area under the precision-recall curve (AUC) as our evaluation metrics. To 
construct the heterogeneous graph, they use an open source openIE tool (Schmitz et al., 2012) for 
information extraction. Following the settings of Wang et al. (2020), they initialize the word 
nodes with 300-dimension GloVe embeddings (Pennington et al., 2014), and the dimension of 
every node feature is d = 128. The heads of multi-head attention is set as 8. For the training 
process, the learning rate is set as 5e-4. Moreover, they apply an early stopping mechanism, 
training will be stopped if the performance on the development set doesn’t improve for 10 
epochs. 
 
Table 2. The statistics of [7] dataset. 
 
 
Train 
Development 
Test 
Positive 
9,376 
477 
973 
Negative 
9,394 
486 
981 
Total 
18,770 
963 
1,954 
Docs 
27,657 
1,419 
2,989 
 
42 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
For trend forecasting in financial time series with indicator system, the evaluation metric formula 
is as follows: 
 
 
They further move on to evaluate the performance of our prediction model, the selected 
performance metrics: Recall, Precision and F1 is chosen. They define the chosen metrics as 
positive class (true positive), negative class (true negative). 
 
 
 
For ANRES Model in [1] the authors use the public financial news dataset released by [13], 
which is crawled from Reuters and Bloomberg over the period from October 2006 to November 
2013. They conduct their experiments on predicting the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock (S&P 500) 
index and its selected individual stocks, obtaining indices and prices from Yahoo Finance. 
Detailed statistics of the training, development and test sets are shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Statistics of ANRES Model Dataset 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following previous work [20, 3, 21], they adopt the standard measure of accuracy and Matthews 
Correlation Coefficient (MCC) to evaluate S&P 500 index prediction and selected individual 
stock prediction. MCC is applied because it avoids bias due to data skew. Given the confusion 
matrix which contains true positive(tp), false positive(fp), true negative(tn) and false negative(fn) 
values, MCC is calculated as: 
 
 
 
In summary, the following four baselines are designed: 
 
• ANRES_Sing_R: randomly initializing the states for each single trading day. 
• ANRES_Sing_Z: initializing the states as zeros for each single trading day. 
•ANRES_Seq_R: randomly initializing the first states for each trading sequence only. 
• ANRES_Seq_Z: initializing the first states as zeros for each trading sequence only. 
 
𝑦𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏=  0,𝑦 model < 0.5
1,     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛= 
𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙= 
𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒+ 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 
    𝑀𝐶𝐶= 
tp×tn−fp×fn
 (tp+fp)(tp+fn)(tn+fp)(tn+fn) 
 
Training 
Development 
Test 
#documents 
358,122 
96,299 
99,030 
#samples 
1,425 
169 
191 
time span 
10/20/2006-
06/18/2012 
06/19/2012-02/21/2013 
02/22/2013-
11/21/2013 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        43 
For Deep Learning Model, the evaluation is done by Simulation Environment and Data. 
Compared with individual stocks, the volatility of stock indexes is generally smaller because 
stock indexes are composed of many stocks in different industries and can better reflect the 
overall economic momentum and overall condition. Index Forecasting Effect Analysis. Using the 
1219-day data samples of the Shanghai Composite Index for 5 years from 2015 to 2019, the stock 
data of 10 consecutive days and 20 days were used as input samples to establish a prediction 
model for closing price prediction. Using the 731-day data sample of the Shanghai Composite 
Index for 3 years from 2017 to 2019, 5 consecutive days and 10 days of stock data were used as 
input samples to establish a prediction model for closing price prediction. 
 
5.2. Baselines 
 
 
Sentiment (Mayew and Venkatachalam, 2012) is a lexicon-based sentiment analysis 
method. We use the sentiment lexicons and method released by Loughran and McDonald 
(2011). 
 
Event Tensor (Ding et al., 2015) is a neural tensor network based event representation 
learning method. They extract event triples from titles or abstracts. The event triples from 
the abstract will be averaged for prediction 
 
Event Tensor-CS (Ding et al., 2019) is an external common sense knowledge enhanced 
event representation learning method. Similar events are trained to be close to each other 
in vector space by predicting their sentiment polarities and contextual events. 
 
TGT-CTX-LSTM (Chang et al., 2016) uses dependency parse tree to learn a target-
related representation of abstract for stock market prediction. 
 
LSTM: a basic LSTM network used to predict the future trends of stock prices based on 
historical price data [29]. 
 
DARNN: a dual-stage attention-based RNN that employs input attention and temporal 
attention in the encoder and decoder stages, respectively [30]. 
 
DARNN-SA: an extension of the DARNN that employs a self-attention layer between 
the output of the DARNN and the prediction layer [9] 
 
MFNN: a multifilter deep learning model that integrates convolutional and recurrent 
neurons for feature extraction with respect to financial time series and stock prediction 
[31]. 
 
CA-SFCN: a fully convolutional network (FCN) incorporating cross attention (CA), in 
which CA is also used as dual-stage attention for the variable and temporal dimensions 
(with temporal attention first) [32]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
6. RESULTS 
 
Given below are the results which were obtained after reviewing several research papers: 
 
Table 4. Result of Deep Learning (LSTM) and Baseline models by indicator system 
 
 
In heterogeneous graphs the overall results are shown in Table 5, from which we can make the 
following observations: 
 
Table 5. Results of heterogenous graph method [7] 
 
Methods 
AUC 
Sentiment 
0.533 
Event Tensor + Title 
0.544 
Event Tensor + Abstract 
0.549 
Event Tensor-CS + Title 
0.564 
Event Tensor-CS + Abstract 
0.570 
Conditional Encoding 
0.603 
TGT-CTX-LSTM 
0.632 
TGT-HN 
0.615 
TGT-HAN 
0.633 
GCN 
0.621 
GAT 
0.615 
HGM-GIF 
0.638 
 
1. Semantic knowledge acquisition methods (Event Tensor, Conditional Encoding, TGT-
CTX-LSTM, TGT-HN, TGTHAN, HGM-GIF) achieve better results than feature-based 
method. The reason is that learning semantics within financial text is more effective than 
learning linguistic features for stock market prediction. 
 
2. Comparison between Event Tensor –CS, Conditional Encoding, TGT-CTX-LSTM, TGT-
HN, TGT-HAN, HGM-GIF and Event Tensor shows that external knowledge or 
sentences within documents can supplement contextual information and offer more 
useful information for prediction. This confirms that predictions need rich contextual 
information. With the sequential heterogeneous graph layer, we can capture rich 
contextual information within financial text. 
 
 
Metrics 
Deep Learning (LSTM 
model) (%) 
Baseline (random 
forest model) 
Baseline (logistic regression 
model) 
Accuracy 
0.687% 
0.56% 
0.551% 
Precision 
0.538 
0.514 
0.594 
Recall 
0.697 
0.412 
0.236 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        45 
 
 
Figure 4. The prediction results of the Shanghai Composite Index at 30-days. 
 
Using the 1219-day data samples of the Shanghai Composite Index for 5 years from 2018 to 
2022, the stock data of 7 consecutive days and 30 days were used as input samples to 
establish a prediction model for closing price prediction. +ese two models are called 
SHYSD10 and SHYSD20, respectively. Figures 4 and 5 show their prediction results. Figure 
4 shows the prediction results of the Shanghai Composite Index at 30-day intervals. Figure 5 
shows the forecast results of the Shanghai Composite Index at 70 consecutive days. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The prediction results of the Shanghai Composite Index at 7 consecutive days. 
46 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
 
 
Figure 6. Prediction based on EMD based algorithm 
 
7. CONCLUSION 
 
Concerning the significance of stock market prediction and its challenges, researchers always try 
to introduce modern methods in the analysis of these markets. LSTM as a state-of-the-art model 
and CNN which are deep learning models yield good results in the analysis of stock market. 
EMD and CEEMD are among the effective algorithms that have recently been considered in this 
research area. Thus, this article sought to introduce the proposed algorithm of CEEMD-CNN-
LSTM by studying each of these models and evaluate them based on data of different stock price 
indices. The major concept of the suggested algorithm was to create a collaboration between 
CEEMD, CNN, and LSTM models by joining them together, which could extract deep features 
and time sequences. Then, we applied the trained algorithm for one-step-ahead stock price 
forecasting. In this regard, first, we decomposed the financial time series to different IMFs and 
the residual by CEEMD and EMD algorithms. The IMFs and the residual were separately 
analysed by CNN-LSTM model. Facilitation of their analysis with CEEMD and EMD, as well as 
extracting features and patterns in data with CNN and further analysis in the context of the time 
plus analysis of the dependencies with LSTM enhanced the predictive capabilities of this model. 
The practical results of this article also support this claim. Note that the assessment metrics used 
in this study were RMSE, MAE, and MAPE [3]. 
 
8. FUTURE WORKS 
 
ANRES model tends to pay more attention to a new event when it first occurs, which offers us a 
potential improving direction in the future. In future, the model can be applied to other stock 
indexes like NSE, TAIEX. For further improving the system accuracy, an underlying TSK-based 
fuzzy system with a constrained gradient-based technique can be employed. Also, a constrained 
gradient-based technique can be integrated with a Mamdani-type fuzzy system so that 
interpretability is not compromised which may happen in case of a TSK system. For reducing the 
rule base size, techniques like similar rule merging can also be used. Some area that will be 
needed to achieved better accuracy in our future work, some scholars are concerning the used of 
sentiment analysis on twitter to predict stock market trend movement, Beside the social media, 
other qualitative indicators like news, internet and domestic policy changes can also be used as 
input to predict the trend of stocks. Another important concept is Elliot waves principles which 
can perform better on stock market trend prediction. 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        47 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The authors would like to thank Vellore Institute of Technology for providing them with the 
resources necessary to complete this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Heyan Huang, Xiao Liu, Yue Zhang, Chong Feng, (2022, Volume 470), News-driven stock 
prediction via noisy equity state representation, Neurocomputing. 
[2] 
Chen, X., Rajan, D., & Quek, H.C. (2021). An interpretable Neural Fuzzy Hammerstein-Wiener 
network for stock price prediction. Inf. Sci., 577, 324-335. 
[3] 
Gyamerah, S., & Awuah, A. (2020). Trend Forecasting in Financial Time Series with Indicator 
System. 
[4] 
Jiake Li, "Research on Market Stock Index Prediction Based on Network Security and Deep 
Learning", Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, Article ID 5522375, 8 pages, 2021. 
[5] 
Agüero-Torales, M.M., Salas, J.I., & López-Herrera, A.G. (2021). Deep learning and multilingual 
sentiment analysis on social media data: An overview. Appl. Soft Comput., 107, 107373 
[6] 
Khang, P.Q., Hernes, M., Kuziak, K., Rot, A., & Gryncewicz, W. (2020). Liquidity prediction on 
Vietnamese stock market using deep learning. KES. 
[7] 
Xiong, K., Ding, X., Du, L., Liu, T., & Qin, B. (2021). Heterogeneous graph knowledge enhanced 
stock market prediction. AI Open, 2, 168-174. 
[8] 
Hadi Rezaei, Hamidreza Faaljou, Gholamreza Mansourfar, Stock price prediction using deep learning 
and frequency decomposition, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 169,2021,114332, 
[9] 
Junran Wu & Ke Xu & Xueyuan Chen & Shangzhe Li & Jichang Zhao, 2021. "Price graphs: 
Utilizing the structural information of financial time series for stock prediction," Papers 2106.02522, 
arXiv.org, revised Nov 2021. 
[10] Hyun Jun Park, Youngjun Kim, Ha Young Kim, Stock market forecasting using a multi-task 
approach integrating long short-term memory and the random forest framework, Applied Soft 
Computing, Volume 114,2022, 
[11] Ronen Feldman. 2013. Techniques and applications for sentiment analysis. Commun. ACM 56, 4 
(April 2013), 82–89. 
[12] Boyi Xie, Rebecca J. Passonneau, Leon Wu, and Germán Creamer. Semantic frames to predict stock 
price movement. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 873–883, 2013. 
[13] Xiao Ding, Yue Zhang, Ting Liu, and Junwen Duan. Deep learning for event-driven stock prediction. 
In Proceedings of the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 2327–
2333, 2015. 
[14] J.-F. Fournier, C. Bouix-Peter, D. Duvert, A.-P. Luzy, and G. Ouvry, “Intrinsic property forecast 
index (iPFI) as a rule of thumb for medicinal chemists to remove a phototoxicity liability,” Journal of 
Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 3231–3236, 2018 
[15] J. F. Fournier, C. Bouix-Peter, D. Duvert et al., “Intrinsic property forecast index (iPFI) as a rule of 
thumb for medicinal chemist to remove a phototoxicity liability,” Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 
vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 3231–3236, 2018. 
[16] A. Yoshimura and Y. Matsuno, “Dynamic material flow analysis of copper and copper alloy in global 
scale: —forecast of in-use stock and inputs and the estimation of scrap recovery potential—,” Journal 
of the Japan Institute of Metals, vol. 82, no. 1, 2017. 
[17] X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Wang et al., “Improving stock market prediction via heterogeneous 
information fusion,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 11, 2017. 
[18] X. Pang, Y. Zhou, P. Wang, W. Lin, and V. Chang, “An innovative neural network approach for 
stock market prediction,” 7e Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 2098–2118, 2020. 
[19] P. F. Bestwick, “A forecast monitoring and revision system for top management,” Journal of the 
Operational Research Society, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 419–429, 1975. 
[20] M. G. Jacox, M. A. Alexander, C. A. Stock et al., “On the skill of seasonal sea surface temperature 
forecasts in the California Current System and its connection to ENSO variability,” Climate 
Dynamics, vol. 53, pp. 7519–7533, 2017 
48 
       
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 
[21] B. D. Williams and M. A. Waller, “Estimating a retailer’s base stock level: an optimal distribution 
centre order forecast policy,” Journal of the Operational Research Society, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 662–
666, 2017 
[22] Derbentsev, Vasily, Semerikov, Serhiy, Serdyuk, Olexander, Solovieva, Victoria, and Soloviev, 
Vladimir (2020) “Recurrence based entropies for sustainability indices” in EasyChair Preprint 3454. 
[23] Hwang, Jungsik (2020) “Modeling Financial Time Series using LSTM with Trainable Initial Hidden 
States”, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. Seoul, South Korea  
[24] Xu, Wenquan, Peng, Hui, Zeng, Xiaoyong., Zhou, Feng, Tian, Xiaoying, and Peng, Xiaoyan (2019) 
”A hybrid modelling method for time series forecasting based on a linear regression model and deep 
learning.” Applied Intelligence 49: 3002–3015. 
[25] S. Ruder, P. Ghaffari, J.G. Breslin, A hierarchical model of reviews for aspect-based sentiment 
analysis, in: Proc. of the 2016 Conf. on Empirical Methods in NLP, 2016, pp. 999–1005. 
[26] D. Tang, B. Qin, T. Liu, Document modelling with gated recurrent neural network for sentiment 
classification, in: Proc. of the 2015 Conf. on Empirical Methods in NLP, 2015, pp. 1422–1432. 
[27] G. Rao, W. Huang, Z. Feng, Q. Cong, LSTM with sentence representations for document-level 
sentiment classification, Neurocomputing 308 (2018) 49–57. 
[28] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, 
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, pages 
5998–6008, 2017. 
[29] Nelson, D.M., Pereira, A.C., de Oliveira, R.A. Stock market’s price movement prediction with lstm 
neural networks. In: IJCNN. IEEE; 2017. p. 1419–1426. 
[30] Qin, Y., Song, D., Cheng, H., Cheng, W., Jiang, G., Cottrell, G.W. A dual-stage attention-based 
recurrent neural network for time series prediction. In: Proceedings of the 26th IJCAI. 2017. p. 2627–
2633. 
[31] Long, W., Lu, Z., Cui, L. Deep learning-based feature engineering for stock price movement 
prediction. Knowledge-Based Systems 2019; 164:163– 173. 
[32] Hao, Y., Cao, H. A new attention mechanism to classify multivariate time series. In: Proceedings of 
the 29th IJCAI. 2020. 
 
AUTHOR
 
Om Mane is a sophomore at Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore in Computer 
Science and Engineering. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 By AIRCC Publishing Corporation. This article is published under the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license. 
 
 
