Title: A Critical Reflection and Forward Perspective on Empathy and Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.16604v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Critical Reﬂection and Forward Perspective on
Empathy and Natural Language Processing
Allison Lahnala1, Charles Welch1,3, David Jurgens2, Lucie Flek1,3
1Conversational AI and Social Analytics (CAISA) Lab
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Marburg
2 School of Information, University of Michigan
3 The Hessian Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Hessian.AI)
{allison.lahnala,welchc,lucie.flek}@uni-marburg.de, jurgens@umich.edu
Abstract
We review the state of research on empathy
in natural language processing and identify
the following issues: (1) empathy deﬁnitions
are absent or abstract, which (2) leads to low
construct validity and reproducibility. More-
over, (3) emotional empathy is overempha-
sized, skewing our focus to a narrow subset of
simpliﬁed tasks. We believe these issues hin-
der research progress and argue that current
directions will beneﬁt from a clear conceptu-
alization that includes operationalizing cogni-
tive empathy components.
Our main objec-
tives are to provide insight and guidance on
empathy conceptualization for NLP research
objectives and to encourage researchers to pur-
sue the overlooked opportunities in this area,
highly relevant, e.g., for clinical and educa-
tional sectors.
1
Introduction
Interest in empathetic language continues to grow
in natural language processing research. Empathy
recognition and empathetic response generation
tasks have become well-established research di-
rections, especially since the introduction of now
fairly mainstream benchmark datasets for each task,
EMPATHIC REACTIONS (Buechel et al., 2018) and
EMPATHETIC DIALOGUES (Rashkin et al., 2019),
and an empathy detection shared task established
on the former (Tafreshi et al., 2021; Barriere et al.,
2022).
These empathy-focused tasks are highly moti-
vated by myriad beneﬁts, including (i) improved ex-
periences with conversational agents (Shuster et al.,
2020; Roller et al., 2021) and satisfaction with cus-
tomer care dialogue agents (Firdaus et al., 2020;
Sanguinetti et al., 2020), (ii) computational social
science analyses, e.g., supportive interactions in
online forums (Khanpour et al., 2017; Zhou et al.,
2020; Sharma et al., 2020), and (iii) tools to assist
in training and evaluating health practitioners (De-
masi et al., 2019; Pérez-Rosas et al., 2017). With
this increased interest in empathy-focused NLP,
however, has come little clarity on what empathy
is and how it is being operationalized. Papers vary
substantially in how they deﬁne, annotate, and eval-
uate empathy, leading to a fractured landscape that
hinders progress.
Most NLP work has loosely deﬁned empathy as
the ability to understand another person’s feelings
and respond appropriately. As a result, these works
have focused primarily on detecting sentiment and
emotions in text as proxies for understanding feel-
ings and consider empathetic responses to be those
that demonstrate success in emotion recognition
and express so with a tone consistent with the va-
lence of the target’s sentiment. Under this view,
systems that primarily recognize or perform emo-
tionally coherent interactions supposedly fulﬁll the
goal of having an empathetic system. However,
established ﬁndings and theories about human em-
pathy show that this objective is short-sighted—
or even misdirected—and misses a critical system
known as cognitive empathy.
We argue that NLP research has omitted key as-
pects of empathy through its narrow focus on emo-
tion and, as a result, led us to neglect the cognitive
components. Our paper offers three key contribu-
tions. First, to show this gap in research on empa-
thy, we provide a theoretical grounding for empathy
from psychology (§2). We then survey empathy
literature in NLP focusing on ACL∗venues (§3)
and highlight three central problems: (1) compu-
tational work has overlooked much of empathy
through vague deﬁnitions and a focus on emotion
(§4), (2) our current underspeciﬁcation of empathy
leads to issues in construct and data validity (§5),
and (3) the narrow empathy tasks we choose as
a community limit our progress (§6). Finally, we
propose a way forward (§7) through a clear concep-
tualization of empathy that operationally considers
processes of cognitive empathy and highlight over-
looked research opportunities (§8).
arXiv:2210.16604v1  [cs.CL]  29 Oct 2022
2
What is Empathy? A Theoretical
Guide
Empathy is a multi-dimensional construct that con-
tains both emotional and cognitive aspects which
relate to how an observer reacts to a target (Davis,
1980, 1983). In practice, empathy is diversely de-
ﬁned in terms of these social, emotional, cogni-
tive, and even neurological dimensions (Cuff et al.,
2016). Indeed, while folk conceptions of empathy
refer to a single construct, multiple studies have
pointed to distinct neurological systems for emo-
tional and cognitive empathy (Decety and Jackson,
2006; Shamay-Tsoory, 2011).
In describing empathy in communication, we
adopt the standard terminology of (i) a target as
someone experiencing an emotion or situation and
(ii) an observer as another person at the disposition
for an empathic experience through perceiving the
target’s emotions and situation.
In psychology, the most discussed aspects of em-
pathy are its affective and cognitive components
(Cuff et al., 2016). The affective components, re-
ferred to as emotional empathy, relate to the ob-
server’s emotional reaction to the target (Shamay-
Tsoory, 2011). The cognitive components, referred
to as cognitive empathy, relate to active processes
used by the observer to infer the mental state of the
target (Blair, 2005). Emotional empathy represents
automatic (bottom-up) processes whereas cogni-
tive empathy represents controlled (top-down) pro-
cesses (Lamm et al., 2007), and they interact with
each other.
2.1
Emotional Empathy
Emotional empathy, or the observer’s capacity
to experience affective reactions upon perceiving
the target, can involve processes such as emotion
recognition, contagion, and pain sharing (Shamay-
Tsoory, 2011).1 When these affective processes
caused by perceiving the target’s emotional state in-
teract with certain contextual factors, the observer’s
experience is a form of emotional empathy. Such
forms include the concepts of sympathy, compas-
sion, and tenderness. In NLP, we often use these
terms to deﬁne empathy without any distinction
between them. Accordingly, our review ﬁnds we
do not investigate them as speciﬁc empathy-related
phenomena or characterizations of empathetic re-
sponses. As we describe in this section, however,
1We further discuss contagion and mimicry in Appendix C.
the degree to which speciﬁc contextual factors in-
teract with the internal affective processes renders
these concepts distinct. We propose differentiable
characteristics of sympathy, compassion, and ten-
derness based on psychology literature. Further-
more, these characteristics are operationalizable for
more precise NLP research on emotional empathy.
Distinguishing sympathy, compassion, and ten-
derness.
While each of these concepts relates to
having feelings for the target, each one is distinct
regarding the perceived immediacy of the target’s
needs, vulnerability, and a desire to help. Sympa-
thy relates to the present situation of the target and
involves sorrow and concern for the target arising
from perceived suffering, whereas tenderness re-
lates to their long-term needs, and involves warm
and fuzzy feelings from perceiving the target as
vulnerable, delicate, or defenseless. Compassion is
a higher construct that involves feelings based on
the target’s perceived needs and motivated desires
to protect the vulnerable and provide care to those
who suffer (Goetz et al., 2010).
Feeling for the target means emotions can be dif-
ferent between the target and observer. Emotional
congruence is used to describe when an emotion
is felt by both target and observer, though some
deﬁne congruence as a response to a situation that
is similar but may result in a different emotion. In
this case, the emotion is congruent if it is appropri-
ate for the situation. This idea plays a signiﬁcant
role in how the NLP community views empathetic
responses, though we consider it unnecessary for
empathy in general.
We can perceive another person as vulnerable or
suffering and experience tenderness, sympathy, and
compassion for them without thinking hard about it.
In other words, cognitive processes are not strongly
required for these experiences, distinguishing them
as emotional empathy. However, empathic cogni-
tive processes can help render these experiences
by elevating awareness of those contextual factors
(i.e., realizing the target’s needs and vulnerability)
through active deliberation of the target’s situation.
In the next section, we describe such processes of
cognitive empathy.
2.2
Cognitive Empathy
Cognitive empathy centers, in part, on perspective-
taking, the process of the observer conceptualizing
the target’s point of view. This active process is
the primary way of achieving cognitive empathy,
though other scenarios such as imagined memories
or ﬁctional scenarios may also be processes that
help to achieve it (Eisenberg, 2014; Stinson and
Ickes, 1992).
Psychologists have proposed a variety of frame-
works for what actions or processes constitute
perspective-taking. For example, in the appraisal
theory of empathy (Wondra and Ellsworth, 2015),
empathy is considered with respect to different as-
pects or dimensions of perspective that an observer
might have for the target’s situation. Six differ-
ent types of appraisals are proposed: pleasantness,
anticipated effort to deal with the situation, antici-
pated control of the situation, self-other agency for
responsibility of the situation, attentional activity
(degree of surprise), and certainty of the situation
or outcome. With this view, how “empathetic” the
observer is depends on the number of appraisals
and the degree to which their responses or actions
mirror the true feelings of the target.
To be able to empathize successfully, the ob-
server needs to be able to accurately infer the con-
tent of the target’s thoughts and feelings (Ickes,
2011). The degree of accuracy in the observer’s
inferences is known as empathic accuracy. High
empathic accuracy is particularly essential in clin-
ical domains, such as Motivational Interviewing
(Miller and Rollnick, 2012), where the therapist
(observer) formulates reﬂections based on inter-
preting what the patient (target) says (see examples
in Table 1).
When considering the factors that affect em-
pathic accuracy, the observer is not the only pos-
sible source of error. The target must also express
and convey the situation accurately. As a result, it is
unlikely that both the observer and target will ever
perceive situations exactly the same (Stotland et al.,
1978). This limitation has implications for em-
pathy annotations, with the inter-annotator agree-
ment being subject to the empathic accuracy and
subjective interpretations of the annotators. The
unstructured dyadic interaction and standard stimu-
lus paradigms are two study approaches developed
in interpersonal perception research for measuring
empathic accuracy that involve comparing observer
inferences with the target self-reports of their ac-
tual thoughts and feelings (Ickes, 2001); such ap-
proaches to study empathic accuracy have (to our
knowledge) never been explored in NLP research.
Client
Well, I know I need to stay active. “Use it or
lose it,” they say. I want to get my strength
back, and they say regular exercise is good
for your brain, too.
Interviewer
So that’s a puzzle for you – how to be active
enough to get your strength back and be
healthy, but not so much that would put you
in danger of another heart attack.
Client
I think I’m probably being too careful. My
last test results were good. It just scares me
when I feel pain like that.
Interviewer
It reminds you of your heart attack.
Client
That doesn’t make much sense, does it–
staying away from activity so I won’t have
another one?
Interviewer
Like staying away from people so you
won’t be lonely.
Client
Right. I guess I just need to do it, ﬁgure
out how to gradually do more so I can stick
around for a while.
Table 1:
A motivational interviewing interaction
demonstrating complex reﬂections.
Example from
(Miller and Rollnick, 2012).
3
Literature Review: Empathy in NLP
Empathy research in NLP primarily focuses on
empathy recognition and empathetic response gen-
eration. There is also work that analyzes empathy-
related behaviors, such as supportive intents and
counselor strategies. Across this literature, we have
found highly varied and often underspeciﬁed usage
of the term empathy.
We summarize our ﬁndings from reviewing a
collection of computational linguistics and natu-
ral language processing papers. Papers were iden-
tiﬁed by searching for the term “empath" in the
ACL anthology. Then we narrowed the resulting
sample from 90 to 69 papers whose investigation
involves empathy, as opposed to mentioning “empa-
thy”, “empathetic”, or “empathic” rhetorically. We
also included a selection of relevant works outside
the ACL anthology from venues such as AAAI.
We focused on papers presenting systems for em-
pathy prediction or empathetic response generation,
evaluations of empathy dialogue models, empathy
annotation schemes and datasets, and corpus anal-
yses of empathetic language. We labeled a total
of 48 papers (excluding 14 WASSA2 shared task
papers) based on their descriptions of empathy and
empathy evaluation approaches.
2Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity,
Sentiment & Social Media Analysis
Deﬁnition Themes
Count
D0
Studies do not deﬁne or describe empathy.
8
D1
Studies do not describe empathy but an abstract conceptualization could be inferred
from the task or system description.
10
D2
Studies provide empathy descriptions that are vague or ambiguous with other concepts.
10
D3
Studies describe relationships between certain behaviors and empathy.
3
D4
Studies provide succinct yet explicitly theory-grounded empathy descriptions and
adhere to the theoretical foundation.
9
D5
Studies provide thorough, theory-based descriptions of empathy.
8
Table 2: The number of papers identiﬁed for each Deﬁnition Theme in our review.
3.1
Findings
We identiﬁed six predominant themes of empathy
descriptions (D0-5), and seven empathy evaluation
approaches (E0-6). Tables 2 and 3 show the cat-
egories we deﬁned for grouping the description
and evaluation themes, together with the number of
papers we identiﬁed characterized by these themes.
The deﬁnition themes are as follows (details and
examples are provided in Appendix A):
D0: Studies do not deﬁne or describe empathy.
Despite the signiﬁcance of empathy in such stud-
ies, a conceptualization is not given nor can it be
reasonably inferred. In some cases, empathy is
associated with politeness and courtesy.
D1: Studies do not describe empathy but an ab-
stract conceptualization could be inferred from
the task or system description. This is especially
the case among empathetic response generation
research. In task descriptions, the tendency is to
describe empathetic response generation as the task
of understanding the user’s emotions and respond-
ing appropriately. System descriptions can be in-
formative about the grounding concept when the
design reﬂects speciﬁc dimensions of empathy. For
instance, an empathetic response generation sys-
tem that mainly relies on an emotion recognition
module for the purpose of response conditioning
suggests the signiﬁcance of emotion understanding
in the work’s conceptualization.
D2: Studies provide empathy descriptions that
are vague or ambiguous with other concepts.
Some studies use sympathy and empathy inter-
changeably, and others nearly exchange the term
empathy with emotion recognition by strongly as-
sociating them without providing disambiguation.
These often regard an appropriate response as one
that mimics or mirrors the target’s response. This
characterization usually accompanies a system that
conditions a response on emotions or sentiments
predicted by a dedicated module. In other cases,
papers reference the conceptualization linked to the
dataset they used, as is frequent among WASSA
shared task papers (listed in Appendix §B) using
the EMPATHIC REACTIONS dataset (Buechel et al.,
2018).
D3: Studies describe relationships between cer-
tain behaviors and empathy.
These works,
mainly concerned with narrative and conversation
analyses, provide thorough descriptions of other
concepts and their relations to empathy that are
consistent with multiple aspects of empathy de-
scribed in §2.
D4:
Studies provide succinct yet explicitly
theory-grounded empathy descriptions and ad-
here to the theoretical foundation. This research
often involves a counseling/therapy conversations
dataset with labels from a scheme developed by
experts in those domains.
D5: Studies provide thorough, theory-based de-
scriptions of empathy. This is often the case in
works that develop a novel multi-dimensional em-
pathy framework for analysis and annotations. As
in D4, they also tend to involve experts in behav-
ioral, social, and health domains.
4
The Deﬁnition Problem
The lack of delineation between empathy and re-
lated concepts in psychology ultimately leaves us
wondering what we are studying. When empa-
thy is not explicitly conceptualized (D0-1), the
training data is often implicitly focused on compo-
nents of emotional empathy and responses based
on emotion-matching strategies. However, since
the data properties are often under-speciﬁed in the
NLP papers as well, we only have indirect proxies
Evaluation Themes
Count
E6
Multi-item: cognitive & emotional
8
E5
Single label/rating: cognitive & emotional empathy
3
E4
Single label/rating: only emotional empathy
19
E3
Single label/rating: no speciﬁcation
8
E2
Heuristic empathy labels/ratings
4
E1
Target-observer role labeling
2
E0
No manual evaluation or only automatic
4
Table 3: Themes of evaluations and annotations of empathetic language in NLP literature with counts of papers
described the theme. Detailed descriptions of the themes are provided in Appendix B.
to infer such emotion-centric conceptualizations.
In an ideal case, the training data description would
reveal more about the relevant features of emotion
matching/mirroring, e.g., separating contextual fac-
tors that would deﬁne a particular emotional em-
pathy behavior such as sympathy, compassion, or
tenderness.
While empathy is indeed complex, we demon-
strated in Section 2.1 a way to disambiguate these
empathetic behaviors by considering the variables
of how the observer perceives the target’s vulner-
ability and needs. These are just some possible
manifestations of emotional empathy that NLP re-
searchers could investigate using more detailed
study designs to control such variables. To alle-
viate the problem of abstractness and potential in-
consistencies, we recommend that researchers dis-
ambiguate their objectives from simply “empathy”
by considering such concepts as sub-areas of the
empathy research direction.
Nearly thirty studies in our review provide vague
or no empathy descriptions (D0-2). Without the
ability to focus on individual aspects or an under-
standing of the nature of empathetic interactions
and thus what constitutes “appropriate” responses,
the issue of what we are measuring arises. Figure
1 displays the interaction between empathy deﬁ-
nitions and evaluation designs. There is a clear
correspondence between under-speciﬁed empathy
descriptions and under-speciﬁed evaluations. Even
when a study provides a multi-dimensional deﬁni-
tion of empathy (D4-5), it often is not reﬂected in
the evaluation design. Rather the evaluations de-
fault intuitively to the emotional components (E4).
The undeﬁned nature of empathy ultimately man-
ifests in poor operationalization and may contribute
to inconsistency in how empathy is measured from
observations, resulting in poor construct validity
0
1
0
1
3
1
2
0
1
1
1
3
0
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
2
4
1
1
0
0
1
3
5
1
0
3
0
1
1
3
0
0
E0 E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6
D5
D4
D3
D2
D1
D0
Evaluation Themes
Deﬁnition Themes
0
2
4
Figure 1: Heatmap of deﬁnition and evaluation themes.
(Coll et al., 2017). With unstable validity, these
works may not be deemed reliable for clinical ap-
plications, such as counselor training, which has
been noted as a critical application of artiﬁcial in-
telligence to the ﬁeld of psychotherapy (Imel et al.,
2017). Aside from such applications, poor validity
and lack of deﬁnitions lead to reproducibility issues
(Cuff et al., 2016). Lacking a shared understanding
and robust conceptualization of empathy makes it
difﬁcult to interpret ﬁndings and compare studies.
5
The Measurement Problem
Given the overwhelmingly abstract portrayal of
empathy, the effectiveness and validity of our ap-
proaches for measuring, annotating, and evaluating
it are questionable. Simply put, we do not know if
we are investigating the same thing or doing so con-
sistently. Following, we outline where NLP needs
to improve in its measurements to move forward.
Construct validity implications for resource
construction and evaluation.
Yalçın (2019) re-
views several scales developed in psychology and
suggests potential adaptations for evaluating em-
pathy in NLP. However, issues with measurement,
construct, and predictive validity also persist in
psychology (Ickes, 2001) and reﬂect similarly in
the limitations of NLP research, e.g., ambiguous
evaluation (Coll et al., 2017).
Established psychological scales can help mea-
sure empathy, such as the often used Empathic
Concern and Personal Distress Scale (Batson et al.,
1987; Buechel et al., 2018). One could, for in-
stance, ask participants to read a passage written by
an individual and ask the reader about their emo-
tions. However, various non-empathetic factors
can affect how someone feels after reading, not
resulting from perspective-taking or understanding
the target’s emotional state. Psychological studies
that use these scales devise experimental controls
to promote an other-focus state (Fabi et al., 2019;
Batson et al., 1997). One method is to instruct
participants to “imagine how the person ... feels
about what has happened and how it has affected
his or her life” (Toi and Batson, 1982). Another
is to control how similar the observer perceives
themselves to be to the target (Batson et al., 1981).
Self-report measures such as the Davis IRI scale
(Davis, 1983) can measure empathic capabilities,
but empathy still varies across situations (Litvak
et al., 2016; Cuff et al., 2016).
Empathy involves an accurate understanding of
another’s mental state. As such, one can com-
pare descriptions given by an observer and a tar-
get (Ickes, 2001). These ﬁrst-person assessments
are more accurate than annotations by a third party
attempting to judge mental states from language,
behaviors, or situational factors.
Empathy and domain shift: What exactly are
we trying to transfer? The scarcity and diversity
of existing datasets motivate investigating knowl-
edge transfer between them (Wu et al., 2021b; Lah-
nala et al., 2022). Domains vary across datasets,
but datasets also vary in how they capture em-
pathy.
These differences make larger-scale ef-
forts that combine datasets more difﬁcult. Some
studies leverage heuristics to curate empathy data
(see Appendix B), such as bootstrapping with pre-
trained models, selecting interactions from particu-
lar contexts (e.g., particular subreddits), and crowd-
sourcing conversations grounded on particular emo-
tions. While heuristic approaches can help mitigate
curation costs (Hosseini and Caragea, 2021b; We-
livita et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021b), the effective-
ness is subject to their validity.
In a study motivated to minimize annotation ef-
fort through domain transfer, for instance, Wu et al.
(2021b)’s experimental results demonstrated the
heuristically curated datasets, EMPATHETIC DI-
ALOGUES and PEC (Zhong et al., 2020), were
insufﬁcient for predicting empathy in the Moti-
vational Interviewing domain. They suggest that
more ﬁne-grained empathy annotation labels would
help smooth the domain gaps by distinguishing the
empathy aspects expected to be present. Such ef-
forts are needed for the community to build off of
each other’s work. Meanwhile, further investiga-
tions of knowledge transfer techniques between ex-
isting resources could have positive contributions.
6
The Narrow Task Problem
While empathy is widely recognized as a construct
NLP should be modeling, we argue that the ﬁeld
has focused on a narrow set of tasks that have held
back progress. By bridging current work with a per-
spective of cognitive empathy, we motivate a series
of new and reimagined tasks that would advance
the ﬁeld’s ability to model empathy.
Empathy is more than emotions. The predom-
inant empathy conceptualization requires the ob-
server to understand the target’s emotions and re-
spond appropriately. We recommended that re-
searchers disambiguate sympathy, compassion, and
tenderness and view these as subareas of empathy
research. However, we argue that this research
would still suffer by ignoring cognitive empathy
and its interaction with emotion understanding and
empathetic responses. Some perspectives from psy-
chology emphasize that the distinction between
emotional and cognitive empathy is less impor-
tant than the interaction between the two compo-
nents (Cuff et al., 2016)–and we can draw inspira-
tion from that. Cognitive empathy processes are
necessary considerations that can more effectively
achieve goals for the emotional empathy subareas.
Cognitive
empathy
processes
can
improve
methods for understanding emotions. In NLP,
we often consider emotions ﬁrst, assuming they can
be inferred directly from what the target expresses.
However, the target could minimize expressions,
making the emotions harder to perceive (refer to
the discussion on empathic accuracy §2.2). Fur-
thermore, most papers only operate on text (e.g.,
transcripts), which misses opportunities for empa-
thetic cues in other modalities.
Cognitive processes help with better emotional
understanding yielding higher empathic accuracy
of inferences about the target’s affective state. Cuff
et al. (2016) argue that the observer can infer emo-
tionality through perspective-taking, imagination,
and retrieval of relevant memories. In this way, a
cognitive approach ﬁrst leads to an understanding
and more accurate perception of emotions.
We argue that cognitive empathy can beneﬁt
from approaches such as common sense reason-
ing (Sabour et al., 2021), external knowledge (Li
et al., 2020b), and abductive NLI (Bhagavatula
et al., 2020).
For example, Shen et al. (2021)
integrated external knowledge to improve coun-
selor reﬂection generation. Tu et al. (2022) pre-
sented an approach to understanding the target’s
emotional state using commonsense knowledge
that improves over more emotion-focused models.
Their approach was inspired by Ma et al. (2020)’s
survey of empathetic dialogue systems, which ar-
gued that future work should go beyond emotional
empathy by pursuing personalization and knowl-
edge (both contextual and general external knowl-
edge. Integrating these types of knowledge sup-
ports reasoning about emotion cause, as opposed
to only recognizing emotions, which itself is insuf-
ﬁcient (Gao et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021). Models
that incorporate reasoning about the cause of emo-
tion were shown to outperform emotion recognition
and mirroring counterparts, notably including those
that included external commonsense and emotional
lexical knowledge, by human evaluated empathy
scores, i.e. (Lin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Ma-
jumder et al., 2020).
Studies may even be able to specify and investi-
gate what type of information is necessary in order
to understand the user’s emotions and model em-
pathically accurate responses. This can be done
with a controlled selection of samples from knowl-
edge bases. For instance, (Shen et al., 2020, 2022)’s
work uses particular aspects of common sense and
domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Researchers must be-
come more intimate with data and understand the
nature of dialogue to design empathetic systems.
Cognitive empathic processes can improve
methods to select appropriate response strate-
gies. Approaches inspired by cognitive processes
could thus result in not only valuable represen-
tations of emotion but also enhanced methods
for response strategies. Though we critiqued the
generally-lacking speciﬁcity about response appro-
priateness earlier, the most salient idea we grasp is
that observers should mirror the target’s emotion
or express a similar sentiment valence. Contrary to
this idea, Xie and Pu (2021) ﬁnd that empathetic
listeners often respond to negative emotions such
as sadness and anger with questions rather than ex-
pressing similar or opposite emotions. In addition,
speciﬁc empathetic question intents of observers
may play more signiﬁcant roles in regulating the
target’s emotions (Svikhnushina et al., 2022). Ap-
proaches designed both on emotional and cognitive
schemes also had effective results in assisting stu-
dents write peer-reviews that are perceived more
empathetic (Wambsganss et al., 2021, 2022).
7
Refocusing our efforts
We overlook research opportunities that bet-
ter align with described motivations, and these
problems necessitate cognitive empathy. Most
empathy research in NLP focuses on emotional
chatbots or social media analysis. This focus proba-
bly drives the overemphasis on emotional empathy.
Neither of the domains, we argue, is helpful for the
purposes where empathetic NLP systems would
be needed the most; for clinical or educational
praxis or other rather formal contexts. Such scarce
applications include research on Motivational In-
terviewing (Pérez-Rosas et al., 2016, 2017, 2018,
2019; Wu et al., 2021b; Shen et al., 2022), assis-
tive writing systems for peer-to-peer mental health
support (Sharma et al., 2021, 2022), and other coun-
seling conversations (Althoff et al., 2016; Zhang
and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020; Sun et al., 2021). Work in these areas make
the need for cognitive empathy even more apparent.
Empathic capacities vary across individuals, as
some experience more intense affective responses
to certain target perceptions than others (Eisenberg,
2014). Without techniques to manage affective re-
sponses, people can experience signiﬁcant distress.
Cognitive empathy skills strengthen observers’ abil-
ity to regulate or manage their affective responses.
Thus, these skills are critical for individuals in care-
giving roles (e.g., counselors and doctors) who in-
terpersonally engage with others who are vulnera-
ble, suffering, or in crisis daily. At the same time,
the ability to empathize with the target is essen-
tial for their roles in providing effective treatment,
making the role of cognitive empathy signiﬁcant
both for self-care and care for others.
NLP research is highly needed for virtual stan-
dardized patient (VSP) systems. VSPs provide an
effective way for learners to develop cognitive em-
pathy and clinical skills (Lok and Foster, 2019).
The need for VSPs has grown from the necessity
for methods that allow learners to practice rare and
realistic crisis scenarios and concern for the safety
and expenses of standardized patients. Needs in
this area include but are not limited to conversa-
tional models for practice in intercultural commu-
nication, end-of-life discussions, and breaking bad
news. Development of such systems naturally re-
quires the skills of NLP researchers, and these re-
search efforts would beneﬁt the ﬁeld.
So far, the task of modeling and simulating the
empathy target has received little attention in NLP,
leaving a signiﬁcant research gap that our commu-
nity is positioned to ﬁll, with exciting challenges
that align with the motivations of research on em-
pathy and that can have a broad impact within and
beyond our ﬁeld. One work, for instance, focused
on simulating individuals in crisis for the use case
of counselor training (Demasi et al., 2019). Sim-
ilarly, modeling and simulating the target could
support broader educational objectives, such as
training students’ emotionally and cognitively em-
pathic feedback skills (Wambsganss et al., 2021).
This direction of simulating a mental health sup-
port seeker aligns with the goals of related work
for developing tools to assist with evaluating and
training counselors (Pérez-Rosas et al., 2018, 2019;
Imel et al., 2017; Zhang and Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, 2020). The ethics section further discusses
our perspective on this approach compared to de-
veloping empathetic response generation models
for support-related motivations.
8
A Forward Perspective
Here we summarize the main obstacles we identi-
ﬁed and our recommendations for moving forward.
The Deﬁnition Problem: Deﬁne research goals
and design methodologies based on empathy’s
more concrete and measurable aspects. The ab-
stractness of empathy has negative implications for
the construct validity of measurement approaches
and, thereby, the scientiﬁc effectiveness and com-
parability.
The Measurement Problem: Draw inspiration
from measurements established in psychology,
and in addition, learn from investigations and
critiques on their construct validity. As well as
referencing psychology literature to aid the devel-
opments of measurement techniques (Yalçın, 2019),
we should be familiar with existing evaluations and
discussions on their construct validity. Future work
is needed to investigate the validity of our current
approaches methodologically.
The Narrow Task Problem: Lessons from our
own ﬁeld.
The interaction between cognitive
and emotional processes is signiﬁcant. Cognitive
processes can enable higher empathic accuracy.
Perspective-taking is a method of cognitive em-
pathy that enables better empathic understanding,
and the appraisal theory of empathy provides a
framework speciﬁc to situational aspects an ob-
server can consider. These processes relate clearly
to reasoning processes explored by NLP tasks. We
recommend future work that intersects with the
newer area of abductive commonsense reasoning
(Bhagavatula et al., 2020).
Refocusing our efforts: Supporting clinical and
educational domains aligns better with the mo-
tivations of the empathy research area. Much
of what motivates the empathy research area is a
desire to support those in need (i.e., compassionate
motivations, to employ the new terminology). Our
position is that current efforts in empathetic dia-
logue generation should be reallocated to support
the needs of clinical domains, e.g., systems that
support communicative skill training for people
in care-providing roles and systems for supportive
cognitive empathic skills development in-general.3
The need for cognitive empathy is even more press-
ing for these applications, and therefore NLP re-
search can best support these needs by emphasizing
the cognitive aspects in our empathy conceptualiza-
tions going forward.
9
Conclusion
Language technology is deployed increasingly in
interpersonal settings that require an empathetic
understanding of the speaker. Our ﬁeld’s construct
represents a signiﬁcant obstacle to advancing our
ability to develop empathetic language technolo-
gies. While multiple NLP works have attempted to
incorporate empathy into their models and applica-
tions, we argue that these works have underspec-
iﬁed empathy—focusing primarily on emotion—
and overlooked a major component: cognitive em-
pathy. However, we argue that this gap represents a
signiﬁcant opportunity for developing new models
that better reﬂect cognitive processes and theory
of mind while supporting much-needed human-
3Ethical perspective is provided in the ethics section.
centered applications, such as those in clinical set-
tings.
Ethical Perspectives
While our paper is largely an argument for in-
creased depth and speciﬁcity in the study of NLP,
our call to overcome these obstacles still comes
with ethical considerations. Following, we outline
two main ethical points.
The conversational settings used for empathetic
communication often feature highly personal dia-
log from the target that require special care, e.g.,
those in the medical domain. Advocating for more
work in empathy comes at a potential risk to these
targets in keeping their potentially-sensitive data
private outside of valid uses. The sensitive nature
of the data also likely increases the costs and difﬁ-
culty of developing empathy resources, rendering
such efforts rather infeasible for many (Hosseini
and Caragea, 2021b; Welivita et al., 2021). Fur-
thermore, some datasets cannot be made public
to uphold license agreements to protect the rights
and privacy of the stakeholders, which is espe-
cially the case in counseling domains (Althoff et al.,
2016; Pérez-Rosas et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2020;
Zhang and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020). While these efforts to preserve pri-
vacy are rightly stringent, they also create a two-
tier system where only researchers who have ac-
cess to subjects can use the data to participate in
such research. Thus, we call for consideration of
possible initiatives to enable researchers to utilize
datasets crafted for domains beyond publishable
social media data. For instance, shared tasks (such
as WASSA 2021 and 2022 (Tafreshi et al., 2021;
Barriere et al., 2022)) may enable many to experi-
ment on carefully crafted datasets. Initiatives may
draw inspiration from recent CLPsych shared task
models that enabled approved researchers to work
on sensitive data under signed data use and ethical
practice agreements.4
Prior work has, for the most part, assumed that
empathy must be prosocial and, therefore, im-
proved empathy models would offer societal ben-
eﬁts. However, emotional and cognitive under-
standing is not always employed for prosocial pur-
poses. For instance, understanding emotions can be
used for abuse, and manipulation (Hart et al., 1995;
Hodges and Biswas-Diener, 2007). Empathy is also
capable of motivating hostile acts and fueling hos-
4https://clpsych.org/sharedtask2022/
tility toward out-groups (Breithaupt, 2012, 2018);
or, if an observer engages with a target with whom
they have a bad relationship, empathy for the tar-
get’s negative experiences may lead to “malicious
gloating” on the observer’s behalf (Bischof-Köhler,
1991, p. 259). Thus, the development of new em-
pathetic systems and data could lead to uses that
are decidedly antisocial. Consider also the role of
empathy in persuasion. In a prosocial context, one
study on advice-giving robots showed that students
were more likely to be persuaded by the advice
of the robot when it used empathetic strategies
(Langedijk and Ham, 2021). Emotional appeals are
an effective rhetorical tool for persuasion, such as
through personal narratives that can increase under-
standing of other perspectives (Wachsmuth et al.,
2017; Vecchi et al., 2021). But on that end, emo-
tional understanding can also be used for manipu-
lative appeals to emotion. Huffaker et al. (2020) in-
troduced a task of detecting emotionally manipula-
tive language, language intended to induce an emo-
tional reaction in the reader (e.g., fear-mongering
rhetoric to spread). Their study reviews how ad-
versarial actors have strategically used emotionally
manipulative rhetoric in media manipulation. NLP
attention on abstract ideas of empathy could be ded-
icated to such problems. For instance, a new setup
could be imagined to anticipate emotional empathy
to emotionally manipulative stimuli or focus more
on the target’s language, which leads to pathogenic
empathy in the observers.
Limitations
We presented theoretical groundwork on empathy
from psychology and neuroscience. We provide
distinct descriptions of empathy-related concepts
in a way we view practical for aligning research
methodologies with more precise conceptualiza-
tions for the NLP community. The disambiguation
approach we presented is informed by our efforts to
review and understand multiple perspectives from
psychology and neuroscience thoroughly. We ulti-
mately constructed this approach with references to
selected studies from ﬁelds that helped us to iden-
tify meaningful delineations between the concepts.
However, there is no single conceptualization of
empathy or related concepts from those areas, so
our construct will differ from some. We hope our
paper as a whole inspires collective efforts from
our community to scrutinize the empathy frame-
works that ground the empathy research direction
with more informed perspectives.
This work presented themes about empathy de-
scriptions and evaluations based on a systematic
literature review. The search methodology is lim-
ited in that it focuses primarily on papers in the
ACL Anthology. Our review of related works in-
cludes literature outside of ACL venues, and they
are consistent with the themes we identify. How-
ever, a more extensive study, including works from
a broader set of publication venues using standard
survey methodology, would provide a more com-
prehensive outlook on empathetic technology re-
search.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
as a part of the Junior AI Scientists program under
the reference 01-S20060, the Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation, and by Hessian.AI. Any opin-
ions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or recommendations in
this material are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reﬂect the views of the BMBF, Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation, or Hessian.AI.
References
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Anneke Buffone, Hao
Peng, Johannes Eichstaedt, and Lyle Ungar. 2017.
Recognizing pathogenic empathy in social media.
In Proceedings of the International AAAI Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media, volume 11, pages
448–451. 20
Aseel Addawood, Rezvaneh Rezapour, Omid Abdar,
and Jana Diesner. 2017.
Telling apart tweets as-
sociated with controversial versus non-controversial
topics. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on
NLP and Computational Social Science, pages 32–
41, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 20
Firoj Alam, Shammur Absar Chowdhury, Morena
Danieli, and Giuseppe Riccardi. 2016a.
How in-
terlocutors coordinate with each other within emo-
tional segments? In Proceedings of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, pages 728–738, Os-
aka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing Commit-
tee. 19
Firoj Alam, Morena Danieli, and Giuseppe Riccardi.
2016b. Can we detect speakers’ empathy?: A real-
life case study. In 2016 7th IEEE International Con-
ference on Cognitive Infocommunications (CogInfo-
Com). IEEE. 19
Firoj Alam, Morena Danieli, and Giuseppe Riccardi.
2018. Annotating and modeling empathy in spoken
conversations. Computer Speech & Language, 50.
19, 21
Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec. 2016.
Large-scale analysis of counseling conversations:
An application of natural language processing to
mental health. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 4:463–476. 7, 9
Valentin Barriere, Shabnam Tafreshi, João Sedoc, and
Sawsan Alqahtani. 2022. WASSA 2022 shared task:
Predicting empathy, emotion and personality in re-
action to news stories. In Proceedings of the 12th
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjec-
tivity, Sentiment & Social Media Analysis, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
1, 9, 20
C Daniel Batson, Bruce D Duncan, Paula Acker-
man, Terese Buckley, and Kimberly Birch. 1981.
Is empathic emotion a source of altruistic motiva-
tion? Journal of personality and Social Psychology,
40(2):290. 6
C Daniel Batson, Shannon Early, and Giovanni Sal-
varani. 1997. Perspective taking: Imagining how an-
other feels versus imaging how you would feel. Per-
sonality and social psychology bulletin, 23(7):751–
758. 6
C Daniel Batson, Jim Fultz, and Patricia A Schoenrade.
1987. Distress and empathy: Two qualitatively dis-
tinct vicarious emotions with different motivational
consequences. Journal of personality, 55(1). 6
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya
Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Han-
nah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Wen-tau Yih, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. Abductive commonsense reasoning. In
8th International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April
26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net. 7, 8
Vitthal
Bhandari
and
Poonam
Goyal.
2022.
bitsa_nlp@LT-EDI-ACL2022:
Leveraging
pre-
trained language models for detecting homophobia
and transphobia in social media comments.
In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Language
Technology for Equality, Diversity and Inclusion,
pages 149–154, Dublin, Ireland. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 20
Shweta Bhargava,
Srinivasan Janarthanam,
Helen
Hastie, Amol Deshmukh, Ruth Aylett, Lee Corrigan,
and Ginevra Castellano. 2013. Demonstration of the
EmoteWizard of Oz interface for empathic robotic
tutors. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Confer-
ence, pages 363–365, Metz, France. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 20
Doris Bischof-Köhler. 1991. The development of em-
pathy in infants. Infant development: Perspectives
from German-speaking countries, pages 245–273. 9
Robert James R Blair. 2005. Responding to the emo-
tions of others:
Dissociating forms of empathy
through the study of typical and psychiatric popula-
tions. Consciousness and cognition, 14(4):698–718.
2
Fritz Breithaupt. 2012. A three-person model of empa-
thy. Emotion Review, 4(1). 9
Fritz Breithaupt. 2018.
The bad things we do be-
cause of empathy.
Interdisciplinary Science Re-
views, 43(2). 9
Sven Buechel, Anneke Buffone, Barry Slaff, Lyle Un-
gar, and João Sedoc. 2018. Modeling empathy and
distress in reaction to news stories.
In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 4758–4765,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 1, 4, 6, 19
Yash Butala, Kanishk Singh, Adarsh Kumar, and Shrey
Shrivastava. 2021. Team phoenix at WASSA 2021:
Emotion analysis on news stories with pre-trained
language models.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjec-
tivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages
274–280, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 20
Laurie Carr, Marco Iacoboni, Marie-Charlotte Dubeau,
John C. Mazziotta, and Gian Luigi Lenzi. 2003.
Neural mechanisms of empathy in humans: A re-
lay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(9):5497–5502. 20
Ginevra Castellano, Ana Paiva, Arvid Kappas, Ruth
Aylett, Helen Hastie, Wolmet Barendregt, Fernando
Nabais, and Susan Bull. 2013. Towards empathic
virtual and robotic tutors. In International confer-
ence on artiﬁcial intelligence in education. Springer.
20
Kezhen Chen, Qiuyuan Huang, Daniel McDuff, Xiang
Gao, Hamid Palangi, Jianfeng Wang, Kenneth For-
bus, and Jianfeng Gao. 2021. NICE: Neural image
commenting with empathy. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 20
Yue Chen, Yingnan Ju, and Sandra Kübler. 2022. IUCL
at WASSA 2022 shared task: A text-only approach
to empathy and emotion detection. In Proceedings
of the 12th Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity, Sentiment & Social Media Analysis,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 20
Michel-Pierre Coll, Essi Viding, Markus Rütgen, Gior-
gia Silani, Claus Lamm, Caroline Catmur, and Geof-
frey Bird. 2017. Are we really measuring empathy?
proposal for a new measurement framework. Neu-
roscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 83:132–139. 5,
6
Benjamin MP Cuff, Sarah J Brown, Laura Taylor, and
Douglas J Howat. 2016. Empathy: A review of the
concept. Emotion review, 8(2). 2, 5, 6, 7
Mark Davis. 1980.
A multidimensional approach to
individual differences in empathy. JSAS Catalog Sel.
Doc. Psychol., 10. 2, 19
Mark H Davis. 1983. Measuring individual differences
in empathy: evidence for a multidimensional ap-
proach. Journal of personality and social psychol-
ogy, 44(1). 2, 6, 19
Jean Decety and Philip L Jackson. 2006.
A social-
neuroscience perspective on empathy.
Current di-
rections in psychological science, 15(2):54–58. 2
Jean Decety and Claus Lamm. 2006. Human empathy
through the lens of social neuroscience. TheScien-
tiﬁcWorldJOURNAL, 6:1146–1163. 20
Flor Miriam Del Arco, Jaime Collado-Montañez, L. Al-
fonso Ureña, and María-Teresa Martín-Valdivia.
2022. Empathy and distress prediction using trans-
former multi-output regression and emotion analysis
with an ensemble of supervised and zero-shot learn-
ing models. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Senti-
ment & Social Media Analysis, Dublin, Ireland. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 20
Orianna Demasi, Marti A. Hearst, and Benjamin Recht.
2019.
Towards augmenting crisis counselor train-
ing by improving message retrieval. In Proceedings
of the Sixth Workshop on Computational Linguistics
and Clinical Psychology, pages 1–11, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 1, 8, 20
Dorottya Demszky, Dana Movshovitz-Attias, Jeong-
woo Ko, Alan Cowen, Gaurav Nemade, and Sujith
Ravi. 2020. GoEmotions: A dataset of ﬁne-grained
emotions. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4040–4054, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 20
Alexandre Denis, Samuel Cruz-Lara, Nadia Bellalem,
and LotﬁBellalem. 2014. Synalp-empathic: A va-
lence shifting hybrid system for sentiment analysis.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2014), pages 605–
609, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 20
Nancy Eisenberg. 2014. Altruistic emotion, cognition,
and behavior (PLE: Emotion). Psychology Press. 3,
7
Sarah Fabi, Lydia Anna Weber, and Hartmut Leuthold.
2019. Empathic concern and personal distress de-
pend on situational but not dispositional factors.
PloS one, 14(11):e0225102. 6
Neele Falk and Gabriella Lapesa. 2022.
Reports of
personal experiences and stories in argumentation:
datasets and analysis.
In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
5530–5553, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Mauajama Firdaus, Asif Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2020.
Incorporating politeness across
languages in customer care responses:
Towards
building a multi-lingual empathetic dialogue agent.
In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, pages 4172–4182, Mar-
seille, France. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation. 1, 19, 20
Tommaso Fornaciari, Federico Bianchi, Debora Nozza,
and Dirk Hovy. 2021. MilaNLP @ WASSA: Does
BERT feel sad when you cry? In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analy-
sis, pages 269–273, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 20
Pascale Fung, Anik Dey, Farhad Bin Siddique, Ruixi
Lin, Yang Yang, Dario Bertero, Yan Wan, Ricky
Ho Yin Chan, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2016a. Zara:
A virtual interactive dialogue system incorporat-
ing emotion, sentiment and personality recogni-
tion.
In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics: System Demonstrations, pages 278–281, Os-
aka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing Commit-
tee. 20
Pascale Fung, Anik Dey, Farhad Bin Siddique, Ruixi
Lin, Yang Yang, Yan Wan, and Ho Yin Ricky Chan.
2016b. Zara the Supergirl: An empathetic personal-
ity recognition system. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Demon-
strations, pages 87–91, San Diego, California. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 20
Jun Gao, Yuhan Liu, Haolin Deng, Wei Wang, Yu Cao,
Jiachen Du, and Ruifeng Xu. 2021. Improving em-
pathetic response generation by recognizing emo-
tion cause in conversations. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 7, 18, 20
Soumitra Ghosh,
Dhirendra Maurya,
Asif Ekbal,
and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2022.
Team IITP-
AINLPML at WASSA 2022: Empathy detection,
emotion classiﬁcation and personality detection. In
Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment & Social Me-
dia Analysis, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Jennifer L Goetz, Dacher Keltner, and Emiliana Simon-
Thomas. 2010. Compassion: an evolutionary anal-
ysis and empirical review.
Psychological bulletin,
136(3):351. 2
Alvin I. Goldman. 1993. Ethics and cognitive science.
Ethics, 103(2):337–360. 20
Bhanu Prakash Reddy Guda, Aparna Garimella, and
Niyati Chhaya. 2021.
EmpathBERT: A BERT-
based framework for demographic-aware empathy
prediction. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 3072–
3079, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 20
Marco Guerini, Sara Falcone, and Bernardo Magnini.
2018.
A methodology for evaluating interaction
strategies of task-oriented conversational agents. In
Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop SCAI:
The 2nd International Workshop on Search-Oriented
Conversational AI, pages 24–32, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Yuting Guo and Jinho D. Choi. 2021. Enhancing cogni-
tive models of emotions with representation learning.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Model-
ing and Computational Linguistics, pages 141–148,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
20
Stephen David Hart, David Neil Cox, and Robert D
Hare. 1995. Hare psychopathy checklist: Screening
version (PCL: SV). Multi-Heath Systems. 9
Helen Hastie, Mei Yii Lim, Srini Janarthanam, Amol
Deshmukh, Ruth Aylett, Mary Ellen Foster, and
Lynne Hall. 2016. I remember you! interaction with
memory for an empathic virtual robotic tutor. 20
Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria, Rada Mihal-
cea, Erik Cambria, and Roger Zimmermann. 2018a.
ICON: Interactive conversational memory network
for multimodal emotion detection. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 2594–2604,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 20
Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria, Amir Zadeh,
Erik Cambria, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Roger
Zimmermann. 2018b. Conversational memory net-
work for emotion recognition in dyadic dialogue
videos.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages
2122–2132, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 20
Sara D Hodges and Robert Biswas-Diener. 2007. Bal-
ancing the empathy expense account: Strategies for
regulating empathic response. Empathy in mental
illness, pages 389–407. 9
Mahshid Hosseini and Cornelia Caragea. 2021a. Dis-
tilling knowledge for empathy detection. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2021, Punta Cana, Dominican Repub-
lic. Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Mahshid Hosseini and Cornelia Caragea. 2021b.
It
takes two to empathize: One to seek and one to pro-
vide. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, 35(14):13018–13026. 6, 9, 20
Dou Hu, Lingwei Wei, and Xiaoyong Huai. 2021a.
DialogueCRN: Contextual reasoning networks for
emotion recognition in conversations. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7042–7052,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
20
Jingwen Hu, Yuchen Liu, Jinming Zhao, and Qin
Jin. 2021b. MMGCN: Multimodal fusion via deep
graph convolution network for emotion recognition
in conversation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 5666–5675, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 20
Jordan S. Huffaker, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Walter S.
Lasecki, and Mark S. Ackerman. 2020.
Crowd-
sourced detection of emotionally manipulative lan-
guage.
In CHI ’20: CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Honolulu, HI, USA,
April 25-30, 2020, pages 1–14. ACM. 9
William Ickes. 2001.
Measuring empathic accuracy.
Interpersonal sensitivity: Theory and measurement,
1:219–241. 3, 6
William Ickes. 2011.
Everyday mind reading is
driven by motives and goals. Psychological Inquiry,
22(3):200–206. 3, 20
Tatsuya Ide and Daisuke Kawahara. 2022. Building a
dialogue corpus annotated with expressed and expe-
rienced emotions. In Proceedings of the 60th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pages 21–
30, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 20
Zac E Imel, Derek D Caperton, Michael Tanana, and
David C Atkins. 2017.
Technology-enhanced hu-
man interaction in psychotherapy. Journal of coun-
seling psychology, 64(4):385. 5, 8
Koji Inoue, Divesh Lala, Kenta Yamamoto, Shizuka
Nakamura, Katsuya Takanashi, and Tatsuya Kawa-
hara. 2020.
An attentive listening system with
android ERICA: Comparison of autonomous and
WOZ interactions. In Proceedings of the 21th An-
nual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue, pages 118–127, 1st virtual
meeting. Association for Computational Linguistics.
20
Koji Inoue, Hiromi Sakamoto, Kenta Yamamoto, Di-
vesh Lala, and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2021. A multi-
party attentive listening robot which stimulates in-
volvement from side participants.
In Proceedings
of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Special Inter-
est Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 261–
264, Singapore and Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 20
Micah Iserman and Molly Ireland. 2017. A dictionary-
based comparison of autobiographies by people and
murderous monsters. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clini-
cal Psychology — From Linguistic Signal to Clinical
Reality, pages 74–84, Vancouver, BC. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 20
Etsuko Ishii, Genta Indra Winata, Samuel Cahyawijaya,
Divesh Lala, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Pascale Fung.
2021. ERICA: An empathetic android companion
for covid-19 quarantine. In Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-
course and Dialogue, pages 257–260, Singapore and
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
20
Koichiro Ito, Masaki Murata, Tomohiro Ohno, and
Shigeki Matsubara. 2020. Relation between degree
of empathy for narrative speech and type of respon-
sive utterance in attentive listening.
In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 696–701, Marseille, France. Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association. 18, 19, 21
Jin Yea Jang,
San Kim,
Minyoung Jung,
Saim
Shin, and Gahgene Gweon. 2021. BPM_MT: En-
hanced backchannel prediction model using multi-
task learning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 3447–3452, Online and Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 20
Hamed Khanpour, Cornelia Caragea, and Prakhar
Biyani. 2017. Identifying empathetic messages in
online health communities. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 2:
Short Papers),
pages 246–251, Taipei, Taiwan. Asian Federation of
Natural Language Processing. 1, 18, 20
Hyunwoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, and Gunhee Kim.
2021.
Perspective-taking and pragmatics for gen-
erating empathetic responses focused on emotion
causes. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 7, 20
Atharva Kulkarni, Sunanda Somwase, Shivam Rajput,
and Manisha Marathe. 2021. PVG at WASSA 2021:
A multi-input, multi-task, transformer-based archi-
tecture for empathy and distress prediction. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Computa-
tional Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and So-
cial Media Analysis, pages 105–111, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 20
Allison Lahnala, Charles Welch, and Lucie Flek. 2022.
CAISA at WASSA 2022: Adapter-tuning for empa-
thy prediction. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Senti-
ment & Social Media Analysis, Dublin, Ireland. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 6, 20
Claus Lamm, C. Daniel Batson, and Jean Decety. 2007.
The Neural Substrate of Human Empathy: Effects of
Perspective-taking and Cognitive Appraisal.
Jour-
nal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(1). 2
Rosalyn M Langedijk and Jaap Ham. 2021. More than
advice: The inﬂuence of adding references to prior
discourse and signals of empathy on the persuasive-
ness of an advice-giving robot. Interaction Studies,
22(3). 9, 20
Bin Li, Yixuan Weng, Qiya Song, Bin Sun, and Shutao
Li. 2022. Continuing pre-trained model with mul-
tiple training strategies for emotional classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Computa-
tional Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment & So-
cial Media Analysis, pages 233–238, Dublin, Ire-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Qintong Li, Hongshen Chen, Zhaochun Ren, Pengjie
Ren, Zhaopeng Tu, and Zhumin Chen. 2020a. Em-
pDG: Multi-resolution interactive empathetic dia-
logue generation. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 4454–4466, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguistics.
7, 19
Qintong Li, Piji Li, Zhumin Chen, and Zhaochun
Ren. 2020b.
Towards empathetic dialogue gener-
ation over multi-type knowledge.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.09708. 7
Zhaojiang Lin, Andrea Madotto, Jamin Shin, Peng Xu,
and Pascale Fung. 2019. MoEL: Mixture of empa-
thetic listeners.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 121–132, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 7, 19
Marina Litvak, Jahna Otterbacher, Chee Siang Ang,
and David Atkins. 2016. Social and linguistic behav-
ior and its correlation to trait empathy. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Computational Modeling
of People’s Opinions, Personality, and Emotions in
Social Media (PEOPLES), pages 128–137, Osaka,
Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee.
6, 19
Benjamin Lok and Adriana E. Foster. 2019.
Can
Virtual Humans Teach Empathy?, pages 143–163.
Springer International Publishing, Cham. 8
Xin Lu, Yijian Tian, Yanyan Zhao, and Bing Qin. 2021.
Retrieve, discriminate and rewrite: A simple and ef-
fective framework for obtaining affective response
in retrieval-based chatbots. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021, pages 1956–1969, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
20
Yukun Ma, Khanh Linh Nguyen, Frank Z. Xing, and
Erik Cambria. 2020. A survey on empathetic dia-
logue systems. Information Fusion, 64. 7
Khyati Mahajan and Samira Shaikh. 2019. Emoji us-
age across platforms: A case study for the char-
lottesville event. In Proceedings of the 2019 Work-
shop on Widening NLP, pages 160–162, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Himanshu Maheshwari and Vasudeva Varma. 2022.
An ensemble approach to detect emotions at an essay
level. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment &
Social Media Analysis, pages 276–279, Dublin, Ire-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Navonil Majumder, Pengfei Hong, Shanshan Peng,
Jiankun Lu, Deepanway Ghosal, Alexander Gel-
bukh, Rada Mihalcea, and Soujanya Poria. 2020.
MIME: MIMicking emotions for empathetic re-
sponse generation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 8968–8979, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 7, 19, 20
William R Miller and Stephen Rollnick. 2012. Motiva-
tional interviewing: Helping people change. Guil-
ford press. 3
Jay Mundra, Rohan Gupta, and Sagnik Mukherjee.
2021.
WASSA@IITK at WASSA 2021:
Multi-
task learning and transformer ﬁnetuning for emotion
classiﬁcation and empathy prediction. In Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Me-
dia Analysis, pages 112–116, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 20
Tarek Naous, Wissam Antoun, Reem Mahmoud, and
Hazem Hajj. 2021. Empathetic BERT2BERT con-
versational model: Learning Arabic language gen-
eration with little data.
In Proceedings of the
Sixth Arabic Natural Language Processing Work-
shop, pages 164–172, Kyiv, Ukraine (Virtual). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 19, 21
Tarek Naous, Christian Hokayem, and Hazem Hajj.
2020. Empathy-driven Arabic conversational chat-
bot.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Arabic Natu-
ral Language Processing Workshop, pages 58–68,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 19
Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Rada Mihalcea, Kenneth Resni-
cow, Satinder Singh, and Lawrence An. 2016. Build-
ing a motivational interviewing dataset. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics and Clinical Psychology, pages 42–51, San
Diego, CA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 7
Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Rada Mihalcea, Kenneth Resni-
cow, Satinder Singh, and Lawrence An. 2017. Un-
derstanding and predicting empathic behavior in
counseling therapy. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1426–
1435, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 1, 7, 9, 18, 19
Verónica Pérez-Rosas,
Xuetong Sun,
Christy Li,
Yuchen Wang, Kenneth Resnicow, and Rada Mihal-
cea. 2018. Analyzing the quality of counseling con-
versations: the tell-tale signs of high-quality coun-
seling. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA). 7, 8
Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Xinyi Wu, Kenneth Resnicow,
and Rada Mihalcea. 2019. What makes a good coun-
selor? learning to distinguish between high-quality
and low-quality counseling conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 926–935,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 7, 8
Vitou Phy, Yang Zhao, and Akiko Aizawa. 2020.
Deconstruct to reconstruct a conﬁgurable evalua-
tion metric for open-domain dialogue systems. In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 4164–4178,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee
on Computational Linguistics. 19
Yada Pruksachatkun, Sachin R. Pendse, and Amit
Sharma. 2019. Moments of change: Analyzing peer-
based cognitive support in online mental health fo-
rums. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2019,
Glasgow, Scotland, UK, May 04-09, 2019, page 64.
ACM. 20
Shenbin Qian, Constantin Orasan, Diptesh Kano-
jia, Hadeel Saadany, and Félix Do Carmo. 2022.
SURREY-CTS-NLP at WASSA2022: An experi-
ment of discourse and sentiment analysis for the pre-
diction of empathy, distress and emotion. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment & Social Me-
dia Analysis, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Hannah Rashkin, Eric Michael Smith, Margaret Li, and
Y-Lan Boureau. 2019.
Towards empathetic open-
domain conversation models: A new benchmark and
dataset.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 5370–5381, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 1, 19, 20
Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju,
Mary Williamson, Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle Ott,
Eric Michael Smith, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason We-
ston. 2021.
Recipes for building an open-domain
chatbot. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 300–325,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
1, 20
Sahand Sabour, Chujie Zheng, and Minlie Huang.
2021.
Cem:
Commonsense-aware
empa-
thetic
response
generation.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2109.05739. 7, 18, 19, 20
Manuela Sanguinetti, Alessandro Mazzei, Viviana
Patti, Marco Scalerandi, Dario Mana, and Rossana
Simeoni. 2020. Annotating errors and emotions in
human-chatbot interactions in Italian. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
pages 148–159, Barcelona, Spain. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 1, 19, 21
João Sedoc, Sven Buechel, Yehonathan Nachmany, An-
neke Buffone, and Lyle Ungar. 2020. Learning word
ratings for empathy and distress from document-
level user responses. In Proceedings of the 12th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
1664–1673, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association. 20
Simone G. Shamay-Tsoory. 2011. The neural bases for
empathy. The Neuroscientist, 17(1):18–24. PMID:
21071616. 2, 20
Ashish Sharma, Inna W Lin, Adam S Miner, David C
Atkins, and Tim Althoff. 2021.
Towards facilitat-
ing empathic conversations in online mental health
support: A reinforcement learning approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 7
Ashish Sharma, Inna W. Lin, Adam S. Miner, David C.
Atkins, and Tim Althoff. 2022. Human-ai collabo-
ration enables more empathic conversations in text-
based peer-to-peer mental health support. 7
Ashish Sharma, Adam Miner, David Atkins, and Tim
Althoff. 2020.
A computational approach to un-
derstanding empathy expressed in text-based men-
tal health support. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 5263–5276, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 1, 9, 18, 19
Lei Shen and Yang Feng. 2020.
CDL: Curriculum
dual learning for emotion-controllable response gen-
eration.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 556–566, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Lei Shen, Jinchao Zhang, Jiao Ou, Xiaofang Zhao,
and Jie Zhou. 2021.
Constructing emotional con-
sensus and utilizing unpaired data for empathetic di-
alogue generation. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 7, 18, 19
Siqi Shen, Veronica Perez-Rosas, Charles Welch, Sou-
janya Poria, and Rada Mihalcea. 2022. Knowledge
enhanced reﬂection generation for counseling dia-
logues.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3096–3107, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
7
Siqi Shen,
Charles Welch,
Rada Mihalcea,
and
Verónica Pérez-Rosas. 2020.
Counseling-style re-
ﬂection generation using generative pretrained trans-
formers with augmented context.
In Proceedings
of the 21th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 10–20, 1st
virtual meeting. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 7
Kurt Shuster, Da Ju, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Y-
Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. 2020.
The di-
alogue dodecathlon: Open-domain knowledge and
image grounded conversational agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 2453–2470,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
1, 20
Farhad Bin Siddique, Onno Kampman, Yang Yang,
Anik Dey, and Pascale Fung. 2017.
Zara returns:
Improved personality induction and adaptation by
an empathetic virtual agent. In Proceedings of ACL
2017, System Demonstrations, pages 121–126, Van-
couver, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 20
Eric Michael Smith, Mary Williamson, Kurt Shuster,
Jason Weston, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2020. Can you
put it all together: Evaluating conversational agents’
ability to blend skills. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 2021–2030, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 19
Achim Stephan. 2015. Empathy for artiﬁcial agents.
International Journal of Social Robotics, 7(1). 20
Linda Stinson and William Ickes. 1992.
Empathic
accuracy in the interactions of male friends versus
male strangers.
Journal of personality and social
psychology, 62(5):787. 3
E Stotland, KE Mathews Jr, S Sherman, , R.O. Hans-
son, and B.Z. Richardson. 1978. Empathy, fantasy
and helping. Empathy, fantasy, and helping. Beverly
Hills: Sage. 3
Merlin Teodosia Suarez, Jocelynn Cu, and Made-
lene Sta. Maria. 2012. Building a multimodal laugh-
ter database for emotion recognition.
In Proceed-
ings of the Eighth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages
2347–2350, Istanbul, Turkey. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA). 20
Hao Sun, Zhenru Lin, Chujie Zheng, Siyang Liu, and
Minlie Huang. 2021. PsyQA: A Chinese dataset for
generating long counseling text for mental health
support.
In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages
1489–1503, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 7, 21
Ekaterina Svikhnushina, Iuliana Voinea, Anuradha We-
livita, and Pearl Pu. 2022.
A taxonomy of empa-
thetic questions in social dialogs.
In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 7, 19
Shabnam Tafreshi, Orphee De Clercq, Valentin Bar-
riere, Sven Buechel, João Sedoc, and Alexandra Bal-
ahur. 2021. WASSA 2021 shared task: Predicting
empathy and emotion in reaction to news stories. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Compu-
tational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and
Social Media Analysis, pages 92–104, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 1, 9, 20
Miho Toi and C Daniel Batson. 1982.
More evi-
dence that empathy is a source of altruistic motiva-
tion. Journal of personality and social psychology,
43(2):281. 6
Alicia Tsai, Shereen Oraby, Vittorio Perera, Jiun-Yu
Kao, Yuheng Du, Anjali Narayan-Chen, Tagyoung
Chung, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2021. Style control
for schema-guided natural language generation. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Processing for Conversational AI, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 20
Quan Tu, Yanran Li, Jianwei Cui, Bin Wang, Ji-Rong
Wen, and Rui Yan. 2022. MISC: A mixed strategy-
aware model integrating COMET for emotional sup-
port conversation. In Proceedings of the 60th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Dublin, Ire-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics. 7,
20
Lindsey Vanderlyn, Gianna Weber, Michael Neumann,
Dirk Väth, Sarina Meyer, and Ngoc Thang Vu. 2021.
“it seemed like an annoying woman”: On the percep-
tion and ethical considerations of affective language
in text-based conversational agents. In Proceedings
of the 25th Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Deeksha Varshney, Asif Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2021.
Modelling context emotions us-
ing multi-task learning for emotion controlled dia-
log generation.
In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages
2919–2931, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 20
Himil Vasava, Pramegh Uikey, Gaurav Wasnik, and
Raksha Sharma. 2022. Transformer-based architec-
ture for empathy prediction and emotion classiﬁca-
tion. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment &
Social Media Analysis, Dublin, Ireland. Association
for Computational Linguistics. 20
Eva Maria Vecchi, Neele Falk, Iman Jundi, and
Gabriella Lapesa. 2021. Towards argument mining
for social good: A survey. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 1338–1352, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 9
Giuseppe Vettigli and Antonio Sorgente. 2021. EmpNa
at WASSA 2021: A lightweight model for the pre-
diction of empathy, distress and emotions from re-
actions to news stories.
In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analy-
sis, pages 264–268, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 20
Henning Wachsmuth, Nona Naderi, Yufang Hou,
Yonatan Bilu, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Tim Al-
berdingk Thijm, Graeme Hirst, and Benno Stein.
2017. Computational argumentation quality assess-
ment in natural language. In Proceedings of the 15th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long
Papers, pages 176–187, Valencia, Spain. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 9
Thiemo Wambsganss, Christina Niklaus, Matthias Söll-
ner, Siegfried Handschuh, and Jan Marco Leimeister.
2021. Supporting cognitive and emotional empathic
writing of students. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 4063–4077, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 7, 8, 18, 19, 21
Thiemo Wambsganss, Matthias Soellner, Kenneth R
Koedinger, and Jan Marco Leimeister. 2022. Adap-
tive empathy learning support in peer review scenar-
ios.
In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’22,
New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing
Machinery. 7
Yan Wang, Jiayu Zhang, Jun Ma, Shaojun Wang, and
Jing Xiao. 2020. Contextualized emotion recogni-
tion in conversation as sequence tagging.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 21th Annual Meeting of the Special
Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages
186–195, 1st virtual meeting. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 20
Anuradha Welivita and Pearl Pu. 2020.
A taxon-
omy of empathetic response intents in human so-
cial conversations. In Proceedings of the 28th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 4886–4899, Barcelona, Spain (Online).
International Committee on Computational Linguis-
tics. 19
Anuradha Welivita, Yubo Xie, and Pearl Pu. 2021. A
large-scale dataset for empathetic response genera-
tion.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 6, 9, 20
Joshua D Wondra and Phoebe C Ellsworth. 2015.
An appraisal theory of empathy and other vicari-
ous emotional experiences.
Psychological review,
122(3):411. 3
Chen Henry Wu, Yinhe Zheng, Xiaoxi Mao, and Min-
lie Huang. 2021a.
Transferable persona-grounded
dialogues via grounded minimal edits. In Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2368–2382,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 19
Zixiu Wu, Rim Helaoui, Diego Reforgiato Recupero,
and Daniele Riboni. 2021b. Towards low-resource
real-time assessment of empathy in counselling. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on Computa-
tional Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: Improv-
ing Access, pages 204–216, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 6, 7, 18, 19
Yubo Xie and Pearl Pu. 2021. Empathetic dialog gen-
eration with ﬁne-grained intents. In Proceedings of
the 25th Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 7, 19
Özge Nilay Yalçın. 2019. Evaluating empathy in arti-
ﬁcial agents. In 2019 8th International Conference
on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
(ACII), pages 1–7. 5, 8
Clay H. Yoo, Shriphani Palakodety, Rupak Sarkar, and
Ashiqur KhudaBukhsh. 2021. Empathy and hope:
Resource transfer to model inter-country social me-
dia dynamics. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on NLP for Positive Impact, pages 125–134, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Chengkun Zeng, Guanyi Chen, Chenghua Lin, Ruizhe
Li, and Zhi Chen. 2021.
Affective decoding for
empathetic response generation. In Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Generation, pages 331–340, Aberdeen, Scot-
land, UK. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 19
Justine Zhang and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil.
2020. Balancing objectives in counseling conversa-
tions: Advancing forwards or looking backwards. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5276–
5289, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 7, 8, 9, 18, 19
Justine Zhang, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2020.
Quantifying the
causal effects of conversational tendencies. Proceed-
ings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
4(CSCW2). 7, 9
Chujie Zheng, Yong Liu, Wei Chen, Yongcai Leng, and
Minlie Huang. 2021. CoMAE: A multi-factor hier-
archical framework for empathetic response genera-
tion. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 813–
824, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 19
Peixiang Zhong, Chen Zhang, Hao Wang, Yong Liu,
and Chunyan Miao. 2020. Towards persona-based
empathetic conversational models.
In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
6556–6566, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 6, 20
Li Zhou, Jianfeng Gao, Di Li, and Heung-Yeung Shum.
2020. The design and implementation of XiaoIce,
an empathetic social chatbot.
Computational Lin-
guistics, 46(1):53–93. 1, 20
Naitian Zhou and David Jurgens. 2020. Condolence
and empathy in online communities. In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 609–
626, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 19
Xianda Zhou and William Yang Wang. 2018. MojiTalk:
Generating emotional responses at scale.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 1128–1137, Melbourne, Australia.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 20
Ling.Yu Zhu, Zhengkun Zhang, Jun Wang, Hongbin
Wang, Haiying Wu, and Zhenglu Yang. 2022. Multi-
party empathetic dialogue generation: A new task
for dialog systems. In Proceedings of the 60th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Dublin, Ire-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics. 18,
19
A
Deﬁnition Themes
(5) Thorough, theory-based description of em-
pathy. Empathy is extensively described with the
inclusion of perceptive insights from psychology,
neuroscience, or other related ﬁelds. There are
clear distinctions between empathy and concepts
such as emotion recognition and mirroring, sympa-
thy, and compassion. There may be explicit efforts
to describe and distinguish between emotional and
cognitive empathy and the signiﬁcance of the dis-
tinction. Examples: Sharma et al. (2020); Wambs-
ganss et al. (2021); Sabour et al. (2021).
(4) Description is succinct yet explicitly theory-
grounded and adheres to the theoretical foun-
dation. Empathy is explicitly deﬁned or described
in a way grounded in a complex psychological per-
spective. As opposed to (5), longer, more speciﬁed
descriptions of empathy and its dimensions are not
provided. Nevertheless, these works remain con-
sistent with the selected perspective through their
analyses and interpretations of their ﬁndings. Ex-
ample: Pérez-Rosas et al. (2017).
(3) Thorough descriptions of other concepts
and their relations to empathy are consistent
with multi-dimensional theories. Empathy itself
is not explicitly deﬁned or described. It may be
unclear whether the idea is rooted in psychology
with no speciﬁc references. However, behaviors
associated with empathy are described that are con-
sistent with multiple aspects of empathy described
in the Theoretical Guide §2. This category can
also include studies that do not speciﬁcally de-
scribe (or explore) the concept of empathy, but
relate empathy to other behaviors (e.g., counselor
strategies) in a way that is based on psychology
literature. There may also be descriptions of con-
cepts that are not speciﬁcally conveyed as empathy,
but suggest an independent thought process that
arrived at perspectives consistent with multiple as-
pects reviewed in §2. Examples: Ito et al. (2020);
Zhang and Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil (2020); Wu
et al. (2021b); Gao et al. (2021).
(2) Descriptions provided are vague or ambigu-
ous with other concepts. The descriptions may
go brieﬂy beyond the “understanding the user and
responding emotionally" concept by mentioning
other aspects (e.g., perspective-taking) in pass-
ing or by describing empathetic responses to be
those that mimic or mirror the target’s response.
Other concepts may be mentioned in a way that
lacks separable distinction. Some papers refer-
ence a psychology deﬁnition but leave one or more
(usually cognitive) components untouched in their
work (Khanpour et al., 2017). This theme typically
emerges when the study derives a conception based
on their own reasoning (Shen et al., 2021; Zhu
et al., 2022), which could beneﬁt by incorporating
terminology and distinctions we provide in §2.
(1) No empathy description but abstract con-
ceptualization may be inferred through task or
system description. No deﬁnition nor description
of empathy or empathetic behaviors is explicitly
stated, however some abstract conceptualization of
empathy can be inferred through the description of
the task or requirements of an empathetic system.
This includes describing the empathetic response
generation task as “to understand the user emo-
tion and respond appropriately" Lin et al. (2019);
Rashkin et al. (2019). Elaboration on the process of
understanding the user’s emotion in an empathetic
way or responding appropriately in an empathetic
way are not provided.
(0) No empathy description, and the conceptual-
ization is not inferrable through other informa-
tion. No deﬁnition of empathy is provided, despite
the apparent relevance of empathy to the study.
Such works may perform a human evaluation of
empathy, and an emotional perspective on empathy
may be inferred through a description of the evalu-
ation if provided (Phy et al., 2020). Generally, the
conceptualization cannot be inferred. This label
does not include works that reﬂect abstract concep-
tualization in their task description as in Theme 1.
This category includes cases where empathy may
be ambiguous with concepts such as “politeness"
and “courtesy” (Firdaus et al., 2020).
B
Evaluation Themes
Here we categorize papers by how they approached
evaluating, labeled, or rated empathy in their re-
search results or when constructing datasets.
Multi-item: cognitive & emotional (8). These
studies report manual tasks for labeling or rating
multiple items (e.g., behaviors, strategies) of em-
pathy and include cognitive and emotional aspects
in these items. This category includes studies that
developed a new scheme for labeling or rating re-
sponse intents and behaviors, or labeled counselor
behaviors based on schemes designed for a counsel-
ing style. In a setup particularly unique among the
NLP literature, one recruited participants to com-
plete a multi-item self-report scale for trait empathy
(Davis’ Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) (Davis,
1980, 1983)) and then analyzed linguistics behav-
iors with respect to those scales (Litvak et al., 2016).
All papers: Litvak et al. (2016); Pérez-Rosas
et al. (2017); Sharma et al. (2020); Welivita and
Pu (2020); Ito et al. (2020); Zhang and Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil (2020); Wambsganss et al. (2021);
Svikhnushina et al. (2022).
Single label/rating: cognitive & emotional em-
pathy (3). These studies report manual tasks for
labeling or rating empathy as a single item or
score based on multiple items or aspects represent-
ing both cognitive and emotional empathy. Two
are based on theoretical and practical psychology
conceptualizations (Appraisal Theory of Empathy
(Zhou and Jurgens, 2020) and MISC (Wu et al.,
2021b)). The other is based on a description of em-
pathy that includes intents or acts by the observer
to help regulate the target’s emotions (Sanguinetti
et al., 2020). All papers: Zhou and Jurgens (2020);
Sanguinetti et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2021b).
Single label/rating:
emotional empathy (19).
These studies report manual tasks for labeling or
rating empathy as a single item or score based on
a description of empathy (reported to be provided
to the annotators) representing only emotional as-
pects of empathy. Task setups include comparisons
between two items (which item is more empathetic
based on the provided description of empathy), bi-
nary labels (empathetic or not), and ratings on dif-
ferent Likert scales. The typical descriptions of
empathy provided are deﬁned by whether or the
degree to which the observer item shows, demon-
strates, or expresses an ability to infer or an un-
derstanding/awareness of the target’s emotions or
feelings. Often these descriptions include that the
observer should respond in a way that is appro-
priate, emotionally or otherwise, without guide-
lines on appropriate vs. inappropriate empathetic
responses. Some descriptions refer to emotion shar-
ing, such as saying the observer should manifest,
share, or experience the target’s emotions (Zhu
et al., 2022). Some studies appear to use sympathy
and empathy interchangeably (Rashkin et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2019). We determined this category to
be the best ﬁt for Buechel et al. (2018)’s study, in
which the single empathy ratings are based on a
multi-item questionnaire focused on emotions. All
papers: Alam et al. (2016b); Alam et al. (2016a);
Alam et al. (2018); Buechel et al. (2018); Rashkin
et al. (2019); Lin et al. (2019); Smith et al. (2020);
Majumder et al. (2020); Naous et al. (2020); Phy
et al. (2020); Li et al. (2020a); Zeng et al. (2021);
Wu et al. (2021a); Shen et al. (2021); Xie and Pu
(2021); Sabour et al. (2021); Zheng et al. (2021);
Naous et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2022).
Single label/rating: no speciﬁcation (8). These
studies refer to or report a manual task performed
to label or rate empathy without a clear description
of empathy upon which the task was based. Task
setups include asking annotators to label items as
“empathic responses” and to compare two items
of observer text (empathetic response generation
output) for which is “more empathetic.” Four of
these studies ask annotators to rate empathy on Lik-
ert scales (3-point, 4-point, 5-point, and 7-point).
A few studies indicated they recruited annotators
with linguistics or psychology backgrounds (Tu
et al., 2022). One study describes a procedure
for familiarizing the annotators with the concept
based on selected papers from psychology and uni-
fying their understanding with the help of psychol-
ogists (Khanpour et al., 2017). All papers: Abdul-
Mageed et al. (2017); Khanpour et al. (2017); Kim
et al. (2021); Gao et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2021);
Ishii et al. (2021); Jang et al. (2021); Tu et al.
(2022).
Heuristic empathy labels or ratings (4). These
studies include heuristic methods to gather or la-
bel empathetic data automatically. One study cre-
ated an “empathy lexicon” based on associations
with single-item empathy ratings on a prior dataset
(Sedoc et al., 2020). Another built a dataset by
training a model on data labeled with scheme
of empathetic response intents (Welivita et al.,
2021). One study selected conversations from two
subreddits (r/happy and r/offmychest) and man-
ually labeled samples from them and a control
group (r/CausalConversations) as empathetic or
non-empathetic (1 or 0), and compared the aver-
ages of the selected subreddits to the control to
demonstrate that they were more empathetic on
average (Zhong et al., 2020). Another considered
an “empathetic language style” to be the language
style of “more empathetic” of two Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator (MBTI) personality types (Vander-
lyn et al., 2021). We labeled Rashkin et al. (2019)’s
study based on their human evaluation of the em-
pathetic response generation model. However, we
also consider their data curation, in which crowd-
workers have conversations grounded on speciﬁc
emotions, to be a heuristic-based approach. All
papers: Sedoc et al. (2020); Zhong et al. (2020);
Welivita et al. (2021); Vanderlyn et al. (2021).
Role labeling (2). Instead of labeling, rating, or
associating behaviors with empathy, these studies
label target and observer roles (seeker vs. provider
(Hosseini and Caragea, 2021a) and seeking empa-
thy vs. providing empathy (Hosseini and Caragea,
2021b)).
All papers:
Hosseini and Caragea
(2021b); Hosseini and Caragea (2021a).
Only automatic or no manual evaluation (4).
This category includes studies that report empa-
thetic systems or results without reporting manual
evaluation (Siddique et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020;
Firdaus et al., 2020) or that evaluate empathy au-
tomatically only (Tsai et al., 2021). All papers:
Siddique et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2020); Firdaus
et al. (2020); Tsai et al. (2021).
Buechel/WASSA (15). All papers: Fornaciari et al.
(2021); Tafreshi et al. (2021); Butala et al. (2021);
Vettigli and Sorgente (2021); Mundra et al. (2021);
Kulkarni et al. (2021); Guda et al. (2021); Qian
et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022); Del Arco et al.
(2022); Vasava et al. (2022); Ghosh et al. (2022);
Lahnala et al. (2022); Barriere et al. (2022).
Not categorized (38). Not empathy task or does
not evaluate. All papers: Suarez et al. (2012);
Castellano et al. (2013); Bhargava et al. (2013);
Denis et al. (2014); Fung et al. (2016a); Hastie
et al. (2016); Fung et al. (2016b); Addawood
et al. (2017); Iserman and Ireland (2017); Hazarika
et al. (2018a); Hazarika et al. (2018b); Guerini
et al. (2018); Zhou and Wang (2018); Mahajan
and Shaikh (2019); Demasi et al. (2019); Demszky
et al. (2020); Shen and Feng (2020); Shuster et al.
(2020); Inoue et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020);
Roller et al. (2021); Hu et al. (2021a); Varshney
et al. (2021); Yoo et al. (2021); Inoue et al. (2021);
Guo and Choi (2021); Lu et al. (2021); Hu et al.
(2021b); Li et al. (2022); Maheshwari and Varma
(2022); Falk and Lapesa (2022); Ide and Kawa-
hara (2022); Bhandari and Goyal (2022); Stephan
(2015); Langedijk and Ham (2021); Pruksachatkun
et al. (2019); Sabour et al. (2021).
C
Emotion recognition, contagion, and
mimicry
Two underlying processes of emotional empathy,
emotion recognition, and contagion, are closely
related (Shamay-Tsoory, 2011). Emotional con-
tagion (“catching feelings”) refers to when an ob-
server’s brain activates similarly to a target’s (e.g.,
perception of pain), where the observer lacks aware-
ness of the origin of their emotion (Decety and
Lamm, 2006; Ickes, 2011). Research on the human
mechanism of imitating an affective state (Gold-
man, 1993; Carr et al., 2003) relates to some re-
sponse generation approaches in NLP (Majumder
et al., 2020). However, mimicking emotions with-
out experiencing contagion is a separate concept
referred to as “mimpathy” (Ickes, 2011).
D
Non-English Datasets
Arabic Naous et al., 2021, Italian Alam et al., 2018;
Sanguinetti et al., 2020, Chinese Sun et al., 2021,
Japanese Ito et al., 2020; Sanguinetti et al., 2020,
German Wambsganss et al., 2021.
