Title: Characterizing Phishing Threats with Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.07885v1
--------------------------------------------------

Characterizing Phishing Threats with Natural
Language Processing
Michael C. Kotson
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA
Email: Michael.Kotson@ll.mit.edu
Alexia Schulz
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA
Email: Alexia.Schulz@ll.mit.edu
Abstract—Spear phishing is a widespread concern in the
modern network security landscape, but there are few metrics
that measure the extent to which reconnaissance is performed on
phishing targets. Spear phishing emails closely match the expec-
tations of the recipient, based on details of their experiences and
interests, making them a popular propagation vector for harmful
malware. In this work we use Natural Language Processing
techniques to investigate a speciﬁc real-world phishing campaign
and quantify attributes that indicate a targeted spear phishing
attack. Our phishing campaign data sample comprises 596 emails
– all containing a web bug and a Curriculum Vitae (CV) PDF
attachment – sent to our institution by a foreign IP space. The
campaign was found to exclusively target speciﬁc demographics
within our institution. Performing a semantic similarity anal-
ysis between the senders’ CV attachments and the recipients’
LinkedIn proﬁles, we conclude with high statistical certainty
(p < 10−4) that the attachments contain targeted rather than
randomly selected material. Latent Semantic Analysis further
demonstrates that individuals who were a primary focus of the
campaign received CVs that are highly topically clustered. These
ﬁndings differentiate this campaign from one that leverages
random spam.
Spear phishing has grown to be the predominant vector
used to compromise an organization [1]. Federally Funded
Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) and University
Afﬁliated Research Centers (UARCs) have seen an uptick
in a speciﬁc form of phishing attempt in which r´esum´es or
Curriculum Vitae (CVs) are sent directly to researchers by
supposed job candidates. Over the last few years MIT Lincoln
Laboratory has become interested in one such campaign
originating from a foreign IP space. On the surface, these
messages are job applications from seemingly distinguished
researchers, and each email contains a cover letter and CV.
While it is certainly unusual that our institution - which hires
exclusively US citizens - would receive applications en masse
from a foreign source, the main point of concern in these
emails is a 1-pixel image containing a malicious link. This web
bug suggests the individual or group behind these messages
is acting in a purposefully adversarial manner.
If these emails are random spam - that is, if messages are
sent randomly to targets without forethought - the situation
poses little threat. However, the adversary may be directing
speciﬁc CVs to speciﬁc recipients in order to maximize the
This paper has been accepted for publication by the IEEE Conference on
Communications and Network Security in September 2015 at Florence, Italy.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no
longer be accessible.
probability that the target will respond to the message. If our
organization is the target of such a spear phishing campaign,
it implies the adversary is conducting reconnaissance on our
colleagues in order to determine their research backgrounds or
interests. Such foreign interest in the employees of an FFRDC
constitutes a security threat and merits further investigation.
According to a recent security report published by Syman-
tec Corporation, the number of observed spear phishing cam-
paigns doubled between 2012 and 2014, while the average
number of spear phishing emails detected per day fell sharply
in the same time range [2]. This seemingly contradictory
phenomenon has dangerous implications: Adversaries are pos-
sibly abandoning high-volume spear phishing in favor of more
focused attacks with a heavy emphasis on detailed reconnais-
sance. Given that most organizations’ main line of defense
against spear phishing attempts is training their employees
to recognize and avoid the attacks [3], [4], an increase in
the number of well-researched and convincing spear phishing
emails would pose severe security risks in the near future. It is
therefore vital that we develop a means of characterizing the
extent to which adversaries are proﬁling their phishing targets.
We seek to characterize the phishing threat in this case-
study using the techniques of Natural Language Processing
(NLP). NLP provides powerful tools which are often used to
compare documents or classify them into topical groups based
on the terms in their respective vocabularies. The adversaries
provided us with a set of documents describing the research
interests of their phishing identities. If we obtain similar
documents describing the targets, NLP allows us to visualize
and quantify the similarities between adversaries and targets
to determine if the attacks are more aligned with random spam
or spear phishing.
The unique contribution of our work is that we provide
a measure of the adversary’s reconnaissance efforts and ca-
pabilities, and we use Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to
gain insight into the adversary’s spear phishing plan of attack.
We present NLP-based tools which can compare phishing
agents to the recipients they have targeted. We demonstrate the
efﬁcacy of our techniques using our case-study, which we are
able to characterize to very high degrees of statistical certainty.
We outline strategies to improve our current methods, but
maintain that these tools could identify adversaries’ intent in
similar phishing scenarios.
arXiv:1508.07885v1  [cs.CR]  31 Aug 2015
I.
RELATED WORK
Many researchers have tried to understand the connection
between spear phishing adversaries and their targets of inter-
est. Van Nguyen of the Australian Government Department
of Defense provided a literature survey outlining the many
machine-learning techniques that could be used to identify
and characterize an adversary [5]. Those techniques include
the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) applied in our own effort.
While this reference is an exceptional summary of the tools
and approaches best suited for characterization, it does not
provide examples of the techniques in practice.
It is commonly understood that social media sites such
as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn can provide an adversary
a wealth of information on a target’s work interests and
expertise. As such, many researchers have examined whether
there are any connections between a target’s online presence
and the phishing emails he or she received. Dewan et al. [6]
studied a set of over 4,000 targeted and 9,000 non-targeted
emails and concluded that the information in the targets’
LinkedIn proﬁles did not indicate whether the emails they
received were spear phishing attempts. However, Dewan et al.
only analyzed the word and character counts of the LinkedIn
proﬁles, ignoring the semantic information they provide. In
our work, we focus on a semantic analysis of the targets’
LinkedIn proﬁles in order to better understand how their
topical information matches that of the phishing emails.
Similar topical analyses were performed by Le Blond et
al. [7] and DeBarr et al. [8]. When examining nearly 1,500
emails involved in a politically sensitive attack, Le Blond et
al. compared the roles and identies of the phishers to those
of the targets. The targets’ characteristics were pulled from
various sources of social media data. This work succeeded
in identifying several correlations between the adversaries
and targets, but the characterizations of both sides were
performed by manually examining all available text data and
assigning individuals to pre-deﬁned groups. Our analysis, in
contrast, compares the targets and adversaries automatically,
which is necessary if our techniques are to be of any use
to organizations facing incredible volumes of spear phishing
attempts. In their work, DeBarr et al. successfully applied NLP
methods similar to our own to identify spear phishing emails.
However, their comparison was only between their phishing
emails of interest and a previously compiled training set of
known spear phishing emails. This provides no measure of
how well-matched the phishing emails were to their recipients.
By comparing the phishing emails to the targets’ social media
proﬁles, we are able to determine not only the presence of
a spear phishing threat, but the degree of reconnaissance
performed by the adversaries.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, our work in this
paper is the ﬁrst to quantitatively characterize how much effort
adversaries devoted to researching their potential victims.
We use well-established spear phishing analysis techniques,
such as LSA and characterizing targets via their social media
proﬁles. While our data set is not as extensive as many other
analyses in this ﬁeld, we provide a crucial ﬁrst step towards
measuring spear phishers’ interest in an organization and its
employees, which will certainly be of use to companies and
institutions facing today’s attacks with increased focus on in-
depth reconnaissance [2].
II.
DATA SAMPLES
There are three data corpora used in this analysis: an
adversary dataset comprised of CV attachments to the phishing
emails; a target dataset comprised of LinkedIn [9] proﬁle
information harvested on the intended victims at MIT Lin-
coln Laboratory; and a benchmark dataset downloaded from
http://indeed.com [10], used to validate the interpretation of
our results.
A. Data on Adversaries
Our sample of email attacks comprises 647 messages
delivered between August 2013 and July 2014. These attacks
were sent from foreign IP address space, and each message
was sent from one of 60 unique email accounts. A total of 274
individuals in our organization were contacted. In our sample,
596 emails connected a unique phisher/recipient pair and 51
were repeated messages. This speciﬁc adversarial group was
sending attacks before August 2013 and is still active at the
time of this writing. These messages were initially brought to
our attention due to a suspicious web bug included in many
of the emails.
Each phishing email is disguised as a job application sent
by a foreign research scientist. The salutations of the emails
explicitly address the phishing target by name, but there is
no further mention of the target or Lincoln Laboratory in the
body text. While the messages are often written in broken
English, each individual seems to have a unique writing style
and cites speciﬁc research experiences.
Attached to each email is a CV (formatted as a PDF)
outlining the educational and research experiences of the
supposed applicants. Though two of the phishing identities’
CVs were corrupted and unreadable, the remaining 58 all
had unique content, formatting styles, and academic ﬁelds of
focus. We extracted the plain text of the documents using
the Apache TIKA [11] parsing software. We cross-referenced
the citations listed in these CVs against online databases
and veriﬁed that the papers were actually published by the
speciﬁed authors. Furthermore, the research experiences dis-
cussed in the CVs match those discussed within the body
of the email. Although the email address from which the
attack was sent does not match the address listed in any
of the CVs, some attempt is made to make the email look
legitimate; the email handle is usually some version of the
supposed job candidate’s name. Given the apparent legitimacy
of the candidates themselves, we infer that an adversary is
harvesting CVs and cover letters from research experts without
their knowledge, adding easily faked salutations addressed
to speciﬁc individuals, and sending phishing attacks from
falsiﬁed email addresses.
The data used in our analysis are simply the words used
within these CVs. If some adversarial party has harvested a
large, varied corpus of professional CVs and cover letters,
they could feasibly attack a phishing target under the guise
of an individual who shares the target’s research interests and
experiences. The adversary and target would thus be identiﬁed
as similar if their respective research proﬁles contain many
of the same words or phrases. We convert the CVs (and the
target proﬁles discussed in the following section) into “bag-
of-words” models, wherein a document is characterized only
by the presence or absence of terms from a vocabulary, not
by the organization of those terms.
B. Data on Targets
To determine if the adversaries were actively researching
their targets, we ﬁrst examined the demographics of the
phishing recipients. MIT Lincoln Laboratory is divided into 9
distinct groups, each of which has its own ﬁeld of expertise.
Figure 1 illustrates that most groups were targeted roughly
evenly by the adversary (group names have been anonymized
for security reasons). Group I received only 0.6% of the emails
because it only contains a few members. However, Groups G
and H are disproportionately under-represented for reasons we
have not yet uncovered. Figure 2 illustrates how the targets are
distributed by job role and hierarchical position (“Research 1”
has fewer responsibilities than “Research 2”, and so on). We
see that all of the targets worked as either technical research
staff or as group leaders. None of the targets were employed
as secretaries, information technology professionals, or mem-
bers of the security team. This is especially unusual given
the recent ﬁndings of the Symantec Corporation’s Internet
Security Threat Report: 39% of employees who received a
spear phishing email in 2014 were either interns or support
staff [2]. Either the adversary’s source of Lincoln emails
contained exclusively technical personnel, or the adversary
performed sufﬁcient background research on their targets to
determine whether or not they played a research role within
the organization.
Our sample of phishing CVs provides us with textual
information highlighting the interests and experiences of a
group of individuals. If the research background of the bait
matches that of the targets, we conclude that this foreign group
is performing reconnaissance on members of our organization,
and their attacks constitute a spear phishing campaign. To
characterize the threat, we require a text-based research proﬁle
on each of the targets of this campaign, as well as some
metric for comparing such a proﬁle against a phishing CV
and quantifying their similarity.
Fig. 1.
The distribution of phishing emails received by different groups at
MIT Lincoln Laboratory. Percentages are not adjusted to account for the size
of each group. Group I is small, but groups G and H are underrepresented in
the campaign.
Fig. 2.
The distribution of phishing emails received by employees sorted
by job title. Titles are divided into tiers, with level 1 for employees with the
least experience and responsibility, and higher levels for employees with more
experience and responsibility. Notably, all recipients held research or leadership
positions.
Because we did not have access to a CV for each of
the 274 attack recipients, we built our sample of research
proﬁles using publicly available information on the internet.
This method is not without downfalls, as searching for and
gathering this information was a time-consuming manual
process. The clear advantage of this approach, however, is
that it prohibits us from using any information which the
adversaries cannot access, so our proﬁles are similar to what
the adversaries themselves may have gathered. While we were
able to identify several online sources of research summaries
(such as personal websites and employee web pages), it was
vital that the proﬁles in our sample be uniformly formatted.
Otherwise, our methods prioritize similarity of data source
over similarity of research interests, an artifact that arises
because the vocabularies used by different sources all contain
uniquely identiﬁable traits. We determined that the research
proﬁles provided by the career networking website LinkedIn
[9] provided the most detailed information on the largest
number of targets. Much like a CV, Linked-In proﬁles often
list an individual’s educational history, work experience, skills,
and sometimes publications. After removing those which were
too sparse to analyze, our ﬁnal sample of research proﬁles
contained the copied text of the LinkedIn pages for 100 of
the 274 phishing targets.
C. Benchmark Dataset
It is critical that we benchmark the NLP characterization
techniques used in our analysis against a data set with known
topical relationships. To perform benchmark analyses, we
obtained a marked sample of CV data from the r´esum´e
database of http://indeed.com [10]. These CVs were divided
into three career categories: Postdoctoral Researchers (from
any ﬁeld), Managers, and Software Engineers. We repeat every
analytic test on this benchmark dataset to help interpret the
signiﬁcance of our ﬁndings about the phishing campaign.
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Similarity
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frequency: All Possible Pairs
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency: E-Mail Pairs
Fig. 3.
Similarity distributions for all possible phisher/target pairs (blue) and
all observed pairs (translucent red). The median and standard error of the mean
are (5.03 ± 0.04) × 10−3 for the blue histogram and (6.65 ± 0.20) × 10−3 for
the red, indicating that the email pairs share signiﬁcantly more similarities than
expected from a random spamming attack.
III.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
In this section we investigate the phishing threat posed by
this campaign using well-known NLP techniques. We have
relied heavily on the tools provided in the scikit-learn Python
package [12] for our analysis.
A. n-gram Model
We need a method of quantifying the similarity between
two documents to determine whether the adversaries are
selectively matching their CVs to the research backgrounds of
their targets. One common method of comparing documents
in Natural Language Processing is known as an n-gram model.
An n-gram is deﬁned as a sequence of n consecutive words
within a document. If a corpus of documents contains M
unique n-grams, then an n-gram model would represent each
individual document as a vector of length M. Each element
of the vector represents a different n-gram, and the value of
the element is a weight which represents how strongly that
n-gram characterizes the document.
For our analysis, we limit the value of n for our n-grams
to 1, 2, or 3 (unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams) and omit a pre-
deﬁned list of extremely common terms known as stop words.
If our document was the simple sentence “The quick brown
fox jumped over the lazy dog,” we would identify the words
“the” and “over” as stop words, and our list of bigrams would
be “quick brown,” “brown fox,” “fox jumped,” “jumped lazy,”
and “lazy dog.”
To quantify the weight of each n-gram, we use the term
frequency-inverse document frequency value, or tf-idf [13]. If
our corpus contains N documents and M n-grams, the tf-idf
n-gram model is best represented as an N ×M matrix where
the value of element (i,k) is
tf-idf(i,k) = tf(i,k)×

1+ln
 N +1
D(k)+1

(1)
where tf(i,k) is the term frequency of the kth n-gram within
the ith document and D(k) is the number of documents within
the corpus which contain the kth n-gram. While some tf-idf
models deﬁne tf(i,k) as the number of times n-gram k appears
in document i, we restrict the term frequency to only boolean
values. If document i contains n-gram k, then tf(i,k) = 1;
otherwise, tf(i,k)=0. Our boolean approach is recommended
for a corpus containing relatively short documents, such as
those in our corpus of CVs and research proﬁles [14].
The second factor in Equation 1 is known as the inverse
document frequency, or idf(k). Because this factor increases
as D(k) decreases, n-grams which appear within relatively
few documents in our corpus will have large tf-idf weights.
An underlying assumption of our n-gram model, therefore, is
that a document is best characterized by its most uncommon
words. If a word appears in only a few documents of our cor-
pus, we would expect that the individuals described by those
documents must have some similar trait which distinguishes
them from the rest of the population.
B. Similarity Analysis
The N × M tf-idf matrix characterizes the documents of
the corpus, but we require a metric to quantify the similarity
between any two individual documents. Two M-element col-
umn vectors from the matrix, DA and DB, can be extracted
to form feature vectors that describe documents A and B. The
similarity between the two documents is
sim(DA,DB) = DA ·DB
|DA||DB|
(2)
If two documents are very similar, we expect they share a
large number of n-grams in common, and the value of their
similarity will be near 1. Two very dissimilar documents will
contain mostly separate sets of n-grams, and their similarity
will be approximately 0. Geometrically, the similarity between
two documents is the cosine of the interior angle between their
two feature vectors in the M-dimensional tf-idf space.
To determine if the adversary is conducting a spear phish-
ing campaign, we study certain distributions of these similarity
values. We compare two cases: the distribution of similarity
values arising from the phishing campaign, and the distribution
we would expect if CVs were sent to random recipients. We
generate the latter distribution by computing the similarity
between all possible phisher/recipient pairings. Since we have
58 adversary CVs and 100 target research proﬁles, we can
calculate 5800 similarity values for this set. The distribution of
those values is shown in Figure 3 as the blue histogram. If the
adversary were haphazardly spamming our organization with
emails, they would effectively select a random subset of these
5800 possible pairs, and the resulting similarity distribution
would be drawn from the blue histogram. In contrast, the
translucent red histogram in Figure 3 shows the distribution
recovered when each adversary persona is paired only with
the targets to whom he sent an email. From the phishing
identities and subset of targets with identifying documentation,
we are able to calculate the similarities for 252 of these
email pairs. It is immediately clear in Figure 3 that the
distribution of email pairs is skewed towards higher values
than the distribution of all possible pairs. The median and
standard deviation of the mean for the all-pair distribution
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Similarity
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Cumulative Probability
All Possible Pairs
E-Mail Pairs
Fig. 4.
The two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test comparing the similarity
distributions in Figure 3. Each curve is a cumulative probability distribution,
and the black arrow marks their supremum difference of 0.224, which corre-
sponds to a probability of <0.01% that the set of emails is a random sample of
the set of all possible phisher/target pairs.
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Similarity
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Frequency: All Pairs
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Frequency: Software Engineer Pairs
Fig. 5.
The similarity metric applied to the benchmark data sample. The
gray histogram represents the distribution from an all-to-all comparison of
the documents in the benchmark corpus, while the translucent red distribution
shows document comparisons among Software Engineers only. The median
and standard error of the mean are (8.01±0.05)×10−3 for the gray histogram
and (15.06±0.20)×10−3 for the red.
is (5.03 ± 0.04) × 10−3, while those values for the email
distribution are (6.65±0.20)×10−3.
To conﬁrm that the set of email pairs is not consistent with
random spamming, we compared our observed and random
email similarity distributions using a two-sample Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test. The null hypothesis of this test is that two
probability distributions were derived from the same distri-
bution function. The K-S statistic (the supremum difference
between two cumulative probability functions, as illustrated
in Figure 4) for our two sets was 0.224, which allows us to
reject the null hypothesis with a p-value less than 10−4.
Based on this result, we are certain that the adversaries
did not randomly match their phishing CVs to their targets.
This implies they were instead proﬁling members of our
institution and conducting a spear phishing campaign. But how
in-depth was their reconnaissance, and how effectively were
the adversaries able to match their targets’ research interests
with the bait? To gain insight into these questions, we repeated
our similarity analysis on the indeed.com benchmark dataset.
The grey histogram in Figure 5 is the distribution of similarity
values arising from an all-to-all comparison of every document
in the benchmark corpus, whereas the red histogram is the
distribution of similarity values arising only from pairs of
software engineers. Just as in the case of the email campaign,
the distribution of similarity values in the matched sample
is skewed high compared to the random sample. The median
and standard deviation of the mean for the all-pair distribution
is (8.01 ± 0.05) × 10−3, while those values for the email
distribution are (15.06±0.20)×10−3.
In both the benchmark case and the case of the phishing
campaign, the median similarity of the observed pairings
is signiﬁcantly higher than expected for random selections.
However, it is clear that the separation between our observed
email distribution and the random spamming distribution
(Figure 3) is much less pronounced than the separation be-
tween the software engineer distribution and the all-career
distribution (Figure 5). We could say that the email cam-
paign separation is roughly (6.65 −5.03)/(0.20 + 0.04) =
6.75 standard deviations, while the benchmark separation
is (15.06 −8.01)/(0.20 + 0.05) = 28.2 standard deviations.
Future application of our similarity analysis to a wide variety
of spear phishing and spam campaigns could possibly deﬁne
a formal metric from these measurements, but for now we
simply state that the degree of reconnaissance in our case
study seems to be low.
We can further characterize the adversaries’ reconnais-
sance efforts by analyzing instances when a single CV was
sent to a single target. For the set of all recipients who received
only one email, the median similarity was 8.802×10−3 with
standard deviation of the mean 9.620×10−4. For the set of all
phishers who sent only one email the median similarity value
was 7.887×10−3 with standard deviation 1.369×10−3. Note
that some of these phishers could have sent more than one
email, but we lack any documentation on their other recipients.
In general, these singleton instances appear to be signiﬁcantly
more targeted than the pairings with multiple senders or
recipients. Given that we already suspect the adversaries’
proﬁling efforts as a whole were cursory, it is possible that
their reconaissance efforts were focused on only a few speciﬁc
individuals.
The results of this section strongly indicate that the ad-
versary did not randomly spam Laboratory employees with
emails. Instead, we have found conclusive evidence that they
have selected at least a portion of their phisher/target pairs on
the basis of similar research or career experiences. We deduce
that the adversaries are conducting reconnaissance on employ-
ees of MIT Lincoln Laboratory, though our characterizaion of
the reconnaissance suggests a limited proﬁling effort.
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Principal Component 1
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Principal Component 2
Software Engineers
Managers
PostDocs
Fig. 6.
Latent Semantic Analysis of the benchmark data set. Plotting principle
components 1 and 2 from the LSA of the indeed.com test data, we note that
documents corresponding to Software Engineers (red), Managers (green), and
Postdocs (blue) are separated into their own clusters with only slight overlap.
This illustrates that LSA can reliably cluster individuals with common interests
based on the content of their CVs.
C. Latent Semantic Analysis
After discovering that our adversaries are conducting a
spear phishing campaign against our organization, we wanted
to learn more about how they selected their targets. Such
information could help reveal what sort of reconnaissance this
foreign group is conducting. For instance, we could imagine
a scenario in which one phishing identity is matched to a sub-
group of targets, all of whom are semantically similar. This
could indicate the adversaries are less interested in attacking
speciﬁc individuals and more interested in reaching any mem-
ber of a speciﬁc research group. Alternatively, the adversaries
could identify a single target of interest and contact that
individual with many phishing identities who share his or her
background. This may imply the adversaries are conducting
in-depth research on a few individuals in our organization,
or perhaps that the phishing identities are sorted into pre-
determined attack groups.
Since each row of the tf-idf matrix represents a separate n-
gram, and because most n-grams will not appear in any given
document, our matrix has over 100,000 rows and contains
mostly zeroes. We need to reduce the rank of our tf-idf matrix
to a dimensional space we can visualize, to determine if the
phishing CVs and the target proﬁles are topically clustered.
This will indicate whether the scenarios discussed above
apply to our problem. We achieve this approximation using
truncated Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) [15]. SVD
is a technique by which an m × n matrix M is factored as
M = UΣV∗, where U and V are unitary matrices and Σ is an
m×n rectangular diagonal matrix.
The diagonal values of Σ, conventionally ordered from
greatest to least, are non-negative real numbers known as
singular values. According the the Eckart-Young theorem
[16], the closest possible k-rank approximation to M can be
calculated by using only the k columns of U and k rows of
V corresponding to the k greatest singular values, yielding
the matrix ˜M = UkΣkV∗
k. This process is known as truncated
SVD, and the application of truncated SVD upon a tf-idf
matrix is known as Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [17].
Before applying this method to analyze the phishing cam-
paign, we tested how effectively LSA could separate a corpus
of CVs into topical clusters. To perform this benchmark, we
used the marked sample of CV data from http://indeed.com
[10], divided into three categories: postdocs, managers and
software engineers. Figure 6 demonstrates that CVs with a
known relationship are signiﬁcantly clustered in at least one
projection onto the singular vectors (principle components or
PCs).
Returning to the analysis of the phishing campaign, after
performing LSA with k = 100 on our tf-idf matrix we obtain a
matrix with 158 columns (one for each phishing CV and target
research proﬁle) and 100 rows. Each row is now a principal
component vector which represents a linear combination of n-
grams. For instance, the ﬁrst component (PC1) assigns strong
negative weights to n-grams such as “lincoln laboratory” and
“greater boston area” and strong positive weights to terms such
as “curriculum vitae” and the name of the phishing group’s
home country. As a result, PC1 efﬁciently groups documents
into adversary and target groups. By plotting two principal
components against each other, we can visualize how each of
the 158 documents are related in that two-dimensional cross-
section of semantic space. If any given group of documents
share strong similarities, they will tend to form clusters in at
least some of these plots.
In Figures 7 and 8, we plot PC5 against PC3. We selected
this subspace because it spanned a semantically interesting
subset of terms. For PC3, strong negative weight is assigned to
n-grams such as “artiﬁcial intelligence,” “machine learning,”
and “statistical,” while strong positive weight is given to
terms like “optics,” “molecular,” and “quantum.” So among
other things PC3 seems to distinguish computer science from
physics. Likewise PC5 positively weights the terms “computer
science” and “national laboratory research” and negatively
weights “radar” and “sensor.” It’s important to note, however,
that these are just a few example terms, and each principle
component is actually a mixture of several different research
areas.
Each data point in Figures 7 and 8 represents a single
document, with orange or red markers for phishing CVs
and blue or cyan markers for target proﬁles. Each subplot
in Figure 7 highlights one of the six targets who received
the largest number of phishing emails (blue marker) and the
group of phishing CVs with which they were targeted (red
markers). Figure 8 uses the same highlighting scheme to
show the 6 phishing CVs which were most frequently sent
out and the targets who received them. We see in Figure 8
that the targets of these high-volume phishers seem to be
randomly scattered about this principal component space with
no apparent clustering. On the other hand, the phishing groups
targeting single individuals in each subplot of Figure 7 tend
to form tight clusters. Most notably, the tail of phishing CV
data points that stretches out towards positive values of PC3
– away from the targets – does not include a single red data
point in any plot.
These clustering observations are further supported by
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
-0.2
0.0
0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Principal Component 3
Principal Component 5
Fig. 7.
Principal components 3 and 5 from the Latent Semantic Analysis for groups of phishers targeting the same recipient. Cyan or blue markers represent
recipient research proﬁles, and orange or red markers represent phishing CVs. Each subplot highlights one of the six targets who was most frequently attacked
(blue) and the CVs they received (red). Because the red points tend to cluster together, we assert that many similar CVs are often used to target speciﬁc
individuals.
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
-0.2
0.0
0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Principal Component 3
Principal Component 5
Fig. 8.
Principal components 3 and 5 from the Latent Semantic Analysis for groups of recipients targeted by the same phisher. The color scheme is the same
as in Figure 7, but here we highlight the six phishers who sent the most attacks (red) and their respective groups of recipients (blue). There seems to be no
clustering or correlation between the blue points, implying that highly active phishers do not attack speciﬁc groups of targets.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Phisher Group
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
Principal Component 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Phisher Group
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
Principal Component 5
Fig. 9.
Search for clustering in individual Principal Components: phisher groups. The horizontal dashed line shows the median value of PC3 (left) or PC5
(right) for all the phishing CVs, and the shaded area represents the standard error of the mean for the same distributions. Each red marker and error bar
shows the median and standard error of the mean for the group of phishers who attacked one of the 12 most frequently targeted recipients. The signiﬁcant
and systematic offset of the red data points implies that these groups of phishers are not representative of the phisher population. Instead, they form clusters
as seen in Figure 7.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Recipient Group
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Principal Component 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Recipient Group
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Principal Component 5
Fig. 10.
Search for clustering in individual Principal Components: recipient groups. This ﬁgure is the same as Figure 9, but the cyan dashed line and shaded
region represent the median and standard error of the mean for all recipient research proﬁles, and the blue markers and error bars represent the same features
for the groups of recipients attacked by the 12 most active phishers. Unlike in Figure 9, there is no systematic offset of the blue data points, and the errors are
similar to or greater than the population error, so we see no evidence of clustering.
Figures 9 and 10, where we focus on one principal component
at a time. The dashed horizontal line in each plot represents
the median PC value of all phishing CVs (orange) or all target
proﬁles (cyan). The shaded areas around the dashed lines show
the standared error of the mean. Each data point and error
bar shows the median and standard error of the mean for the
phishing groups attacking a single target (red) or the group
of recipients of a single phisher (blue). In decreasing order
from left to right, the data points represent the twelve largest
groups attacking one recipient or the twelve largest target
groups attacked by a single phisher. For both PC3 and PC5
in Figure 10, we see that no points are signiﬁcantly removed
from the population median, and their errors are similar to
or larger than the population error. These observations are
in agreement with the lack of clustering seen in Figure 8.
However, the data points in Figure 9 show systematic removal
from the population median, often with small deviations in
PC3. The groups of red data points in Figure 7 are indeed
forming clusters which are not representative samples of the
population.
These ﬁndings reveal the adversaries’ general plan of
attack: Any single phisher may attack a large number of unre-
lated targets by itself, but groups of phishing CVs are often se-
lected to make a coordinated attack on a target with whom they
share greater-than-average similarity. This approach could be
effective if the adversaries’ plan is to maximize the probability
that a speciﬁc target will eventually respond to a message. The
clustering observed in PC3 and PC5 is not observed in all
principal components, which is in agreement with Figure 3’s
demonstration that even the most similar phisher/target pairs
are still quite different. Nonetheless, the clustering evident in
Figure 7 is apparently sufﬁcient to explain the statistically
signiﬁcant similarity distribution separations we found in the
previous section.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Through the application of Natural Language Processing,
we successfully identiﬁed and characterized a particular spear
phishing campaign against our organization. Our data sample
comprised a set of 58 Curriculum Vitae received from the
adversary, and the text from Linked-In proﬁles belonging to
100 of the targeted individuals. We demonstrated with a high
degree of statistical certainty (p < 10−4) that the phishing
identities used to contact the targets were, on average, more
similar to their respective recipients than expected if the
pairings were randomly chosen. We found that the median
of the email pair similarities was removed from the median
of all-possible-pair similarities by 6.75 standard deviations,
which is relatively minor compared to our benchmark analysis
(28.2 standard deviations), implying the adversary’s recon-
naissance capabilities were somewhat limited. Finally, we
applied Latent Semantic Analysis to explore the clustering
of the phishing identities and their targets in one principal
component subspace, ﬁnding clear evidence that individual
recipients were often contacted by a sub-group of semantically
similar attackers.
Our analysis has revealed that an adversarial group is
performing reconnaissance on our colleagues, and we have
a basic understanding of this phishing group’s plan of attack.
However, our work could be improved upon in many aspects.
First, our data sample could be expanded, both by retrieving
phishing CVs from earlier time periods and by obtaining
research proﬁles for more of the targets. Furthermore, we
would like to investigate further to determine if the adversaries
have a speciﬁc algorithm for selecting which targets to contact
using which identities. We may be able to achieve this by
analyzing if and how the relationships between adversary and
target change over time and across principal component space.
Repeating our analysis over time could also detect if the
adversary’s interest is escalating, as indicated by increasing
similarity between the target proﬁles and the bait.
Nonetheless, our work provides the ﬁrst quantitative char-
acterization of a spear phishing adversary’s reconnaissance
efforts. Our tools are highly automated, and none of our
techniques or methods were exclusively applicable to our case
study. As long as an analyst is able to obtain text-based
proﬁles characterizing both the phishing identities and their
targets, this similarity analysis and Latent Semantic Analysis
could be applied to any spear phishing problem to identify the
adversaries’ intent and capabilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Kara Greenﬁeld, Bill Campbell,
Robert Hall, and Sean Cavanaugh for their sage advice and
suggestions.
This work is sponsored by the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Research & Engineering under Air Force Contract
#FA8721-05-C-0002. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions
and recommendations are those of the authors and are not
necessarily endorsed by the United States Government.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Grow and M. Hosenball, “Special report: In cyberspy vs. cyberspy,
china has the edge,” 2011.
[2]
P. Wood, Ed., Internet Security Threat Report 2015, ser. Internet
Security Threat Report (Symantec).
Symantec Corporation.
[3]
P. Kumaraguru, S. Sheng, A. Acquisti, L. F. Cranor, and J. Hong,
“Lessons from a real world evaluation of anti-phishing training,” in
eCrime Researchers Summit, 2008.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–12.
[4]
M. Song, J. Seo, and K. Lee, “Study on the effectiveness of the secu-
rity countermeasures against spear phishing,” in Information Security
Applications.
Springer, 2014, pp. 394–404.
[5]
V. Nguyen, “Attribution of spear phishing attacks: A literature survey,”
DTIC Document, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[6]
P. Dewan, A. Kashyap, and P. Kumaraguru, “Analyzing social and
stylometric features to identify spear phishing emails,” in Electronic
Crime Research (eCrime), 2014 APWG Symposium on.
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 1–13.
[7]
S. Le Blond, A. Uritesc, C. Gilbert, Z. L. Chua, P. Saxena, and E. Kirda,
“A look at targeted attacks through the lense of an ngo,” in Proceedings
of the 23rd USENIX conference on Security Symposium.
USENIX
Association, 2014, pp. 543–558.
[8]
D. DeBarr, V. Ramanathan, and H. Wechsler, “Phishing detection using
trafﬁc behavior, spectral clustering, and random forests,” in Intelligence
and Security Informatics (ISI), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 67–72.
[9]
“Linkedin; https://www.linkedin.com.”
[10]
“Indeed: one search, all jobs; http://www.indeed.com/.”
[11]
“Apache tika; http://tika.apache.org/.”
[12]
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vander-
plas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duch-
esnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[13]
G. Salton and M. J. McGill, “Introduction to modern information
retrieval,” 1983.
[14]
G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic
text retrieval,” Information processing & management, vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 513–523, 1988.
[15]
W. H. Press, Numerical recipes 3rd edition: The art of scientiﬁc
computing.
Cambridge university press, 2007.
[16]
G. Salton, A. Wong, and C.-S. Yang, “A vector space model for
automatic indexing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 613–620, 1975.
[17]
S. C. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, T. K. Landauer, G. W. Furnas, and
R. A. Harshman, “Indexing by latent semantic analysis,” JASIS, vol. 41,
no. 6, pp. 391–407, 1990.
