Title: Natural Language Processing and Multimodal Stock Price Prediction
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.01487v1
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing and Multimodal
Stock Price Prediction
Kevin Taylor, Jerry Ng
July 2023
Abstract
In the realm of financial decision-making, predicting stock prices is
pivotal. Artificial intelligence techniques such as long short-term memory
networks (LSTMs), support-vector machines (SVMs), and natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) models are commonly employed to predict said
prices. This paper utilizes stock percentage change as training data, in
contrast to the traditional use of raw currency values, with a focus on an-
alyzing publicly released news articles. The choice of percentage change
aims to provide models with context regarding the significance of price
fluctuations and overall price change impact on a given stock. The study
employs specialized BERT natural language processing models to predict
stock price trends, with a particular emphasis on various data modalities.
The results showcase the capabilities of such strategies with a small nat-
ural language processing model to accurately predict overall stock trends,
and highlight the effectiveness of certain data features and sector-specific
data.
1
Introduction
Stock price prediction is a crucial part of financial decision making.
Previ-
ous works in this field tended to use artificial intelligence technologies such as
long short-term memory networks (LSTMs)[1, 2, 3, 4], support-vector machines
(SVMs)[5, 6, 7], and natural language processing (NLP) models[8, 9, 10, 11].
These techniques are relevant to the task of stock market prediction. LSTM
models are well-suited for time series predictions, which are useful in stock price
prediction because the price of a stock can follow certain trends and cycles over
time. SVM models are adept at handling high-dimension and nonlinear data.
Since most stocks are affected by multiple factors(dimensions) and do not have
linear price trends, SVM networks are a good candidate for prediction. Finally,
NLP models are useful because they can analyze textual sentiment, giving them
the ability to gauge public opinion about a stock based on news headlines, and
such articles can impact whether a stock rises or falls in a market.
This paper is not the first on the prediction of stock prices using natural lan-
guage processing, but it does touch upon a new technique: the use of percentage
1
arXiv:2401.01487v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2024
change as training data. Most models that aim to predict the stock market use
raw currency values[12], and very few papers have incorporated relative price
increase and decrease via the use of percent change into study, indicating that
this topic is prominent for research. This work aims to understand how the
behavior of stocks – such as their price direction – may be accurately predicted,
and gain a deeper understanding of how the market behaves. This goal is ac-
complished by leveraging sentiment analysis on publicly released news articles,
and training a model using stock value percent change instead of raw price val-
ues. The reasoning behind using percent change instead of raw dollar price is to
help models make more accurate decisions by marking changes in the context
of overall company stock price. A stock worth $50 dropping $5 in value is a
lot more significant than a stock worth $6,000 dropping $5. Arming the model
with stock percent change allows it to see the scope of impact that the price
change has. The models should be able to determine that $5 isn’t as significant
to a stock at $6000(0.083% change), aiding in their predictive accuracy.
2
Methodology
For our primary dataset, we searched the web for news articles on a given
set of dates for each stock in the S&P 500. The total number of data points
is approximately 8,000, with all collected during the 2022-2023 window. Our
secondary dataset was closer to 700 points, and focused specifically on the area
of physical and virtual technology companies like Google, Amazon, and Tesla.
We created the tech subclass in order to better study how predictive techniques
might be specialized to certain industries or fields.
Figure 1: Dataset Table
We tested our model by modifying the modalities it was able to access. For
each news article found, a data point was added to the collection containing key
information such as:
• The article headline
• The article source
• The date
• The company and stock symbol
• The price before, after, and the percent change from the market opening
to closing on a selected date
2
The versions/modalities of data given to the model are as follows:
• 1st version: Article Headlines, Article Sources, Company Name
• 2nd version: Article Headlines, Company Name
• 3rd version: Article Headlines, Article Sources
• 4th version: Article Headlines, Article Sources, Company Name, Date of
recorded price
• *5th version: Article Headlines, Article Sources, Company Name
• *6th version: Article Headlines, Article Sources, Company Name, Date of
recorded price
* indicates the version was trained symbolically, given only 1 or -1 based on the
sign of the actual value: 2.1232 is substituted for 1, -3.0832 is substituted for
-1, and so on
3
Model
We opted to use a variation of the BERT family of models known as Bert-
Tiny[13][14] for the backbone, because it is small and lightweight, with only
14.5M parameters.
The BERT architecture begins by tokenizing the input,
converting words into specialized numbers in between 0 and 1. This tokenization
process generated both word embeddings and input embeddings.
1. Word Embeddings: each word is assigned a unique set of numbers, and
every time that specific word is used, the same word embeddings will exist
in that positional space in the word embeddings array.
2. Positional embeddings: each word is placed in the context of the words
surrounding it. This means that while the word ”out” might be used in
2 parts of the sentence, it has a different context and potential meaning
each time.
Finally, both of these sets of embeddings are combined to form the input em-
beddings.
Next, the input embeddings are passed through the BERT model itself:
first, multi-head attention nodes, which contribute to the model being able to
realize the context of each word. This aids analysis. Then, the input is passed
through a neural network and activated using the GELU function. This process
is repeated N = 2 times. A dropout layer is next applied. Then comes the loss
function. Mean-Squared Error(MSE) loss is then applied.
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(ˆyi −yi)2
(1)
3
The MSE loss algorithm works by squaring the difference between the predicted
and real values, which serves two key purposes. The first is to make all error
values positive, so the MSE error can emphasize the accurate magnitude of
errors rather than their direction. The second purpose of the squaring function
is to discriminate based on the magnitude of error: large error values will be
that much larger when squared, while smaller error values will become less
significant when squared. This also means large outliers, such as data points
that vary drastically from the average, will be weighted heavily. MSE overall
enables the model to focus on avoiding large, significant errors. Finally, dropout,
MSE loss, and the Adam optimization algorithm is applied before the prediction
is completed.
4
Figure 2: The BERT-Tiny Architecture
5
4
Experimental Results
We analyzed our models in several different ways. First, we evaluated the models
by to price direction accuracy. We used mean squared error (MSE) accuracy as
an evaluation metric to gauge the performance of each model. The testing data
used to measure model performance was obtained by dividing our data into two
groups: testing and training. We opted for a 10:90 split, meaning 10% of our
original data became the testing data while the remaining 90% was used to train
the model. Both the testing and training classes were created at random from
the collected data.
4.1
LSTM Comparison
Our model groups compared to the LSTM standard model on testing data
collected periodically over the span of 1 year are as follows:
Figure 3: BERT vs LSTM Metrics
Note that the accuracy within 2% and accuracy within 5% when the prediction
is in the proper direction is only measured with the first 4 versions of each BERT
model class, since the last 2 versions of models were not trying to approach the
exact model price but symbolically indicate direction, and weren’t even trained
on exact prices. Thus, we cannot expect our model to predict them, and any
statistic including their approximation to the actual price would be inaccurate.
As shown in the table above, the LSTM seems to perform just a bit worse
than the general and tech models. The LSTM performed much worse than our
models when rated on how close to the real price it predicted.
However, the statistics above measured the average accuracy of models
trained using a variety of modalities. The higher performing models of each
version compared differently to the LSTM. This demonstrates that not all mod-
els are superior to LSTM, but the average variant of our models exceeds the
performance of the classic LSTM.
6
Figure 4: Tech Model (Ver. 2) vs. LSTM
4.2
Model Accuracy Statistics
Figure 5: General Model Price Direction Accuracy
Figure 6: Tech Model Price Direction Accuracy
In addition, there are patterns represented in each version’s accuracy that speaks
to the efficacy of the modalities used in each version. One important trait of
our model was its overall accuracy, in the sense that it is predicting not only
individual prices, but a specific trend and pattern as a whole. As we use more
and more validation data with the model, the more accurately it begins to
predict the overall trend. Using a larger scope, our model is generally able to
accurately predict stock prices and stock trends when simply given a collection
of news headlines.
7
Figure 8: Accuracy Graph of Tech 6 Model
Figure 7: Accuracy Graph of General 2 Model
As evident by the charts above, the models are capable of following long term
trends proficiently. While short-term case-by-case instances, such as individual
accuracy ratings, might not be as high (74.04% and 56.66% price direction
accuracy respectively), as time continues, the model is able to adapt quite well
to the trend of the data. The model’s ability to adapt to long-term data trends
is important, because while it may be only proficient in predicting small stock
movements, the ability to track and predict overall trends is much more useful
in long-term investment strategies than day-by-day cases.
4.3
Comparison With Similar Models
Our accuracy can be compared to a similar type of model on stock price prediction[15].
It is important to note that this model was only tested on specific stocks, while
our model was given a much more diverse pool of stocks as inputs. It is also
worth noting that their model was tested on less data than ours was.
8
Figure 9:
Figure 10:
As visible in our model accuracy graphs and the graphs of similar mod-
els displayed above, both of which relatively match the real stock price with
their predictions, our model’s accuracy over time is quite comparable to models
proposed by similar papers.
5
Discussion and Analysis
The BERT models we have developed have thus far shown promise in predicting
the stock market, especially in terms of overall trends, but they also introduce
several illuminating concepts about the process of stock prediction itself. One
such concept is observed in the metrics of models of version 2. In both types of
model, general and tech-based, the 2nd version was always the most successful
at predicting stock direction and was also the most accurate at predicting precise
9
price, as version 2 models were also very accurate in comparison with models of
other versions.
Figure 11: Version 2 Models Comparison
This version was only fed information about the company name and article
headline. It was restricted from the date and source of said article. It might
intuitively make sense for the model to perform strongly here because the name
of the target company and sentiment to be analyzed are both very strong indica-
tors of stock performance. This isn’t to say other information such as company
name and date isn’t as important(model version 4 performed well, see the gen-
eral and tech model accuracy charts), but feeding only the most important data
to the model might play a role in its accuracy. There might also be a bit of
confusion with the model, as it attempts to find a relationship between more
and more variables.
This observation illustrates a few key points. Firstly, it doesn’t appear to
matter where the article came from or by whom it was written. Adding this
information serves to decrease accuracy, as evidenced by the significantly lower
accuracy rates of models incorporating this information.
Secondly, the date
appears to have no effect on the algorithm. In fact, accuracy rates between
identical models apart from access to date information perform very similarly.
This might be because a factor such as the exact time of an article is just noise
to the model; not every date and time is going to be significant because there
isn’t always a correlation between the date an article is published and the price
of a stock.
Figure 12: Date Information Effect on Model Accuracy
Of course, as mentioned earlier, all of these prices were collected in the
window of the 2022-2023 year, so their accuracy is only known during this time
period. This does give the models the added benefit of not being influenced by
biased data such as that during the early 2000s, in which the technology market
was very different due to the dot com bubble in part.
Another trend in the metrics of our models is the comparison between the
symbolically trained models and the non-symbolically trained models. For ex-
ample, both versions 1 and 5 are identical save for the fact that version 5 models
10
are symbolic, and version 1 models are not. The same goes for models of version
4 and, it’s symbolic clone, version 6. When we examine the accuracy disparity
between the two, we see that there is not a significant shift in accuracy between
the symbolic and regular models. The regular models outperform the symbolic
models by some degree, but this difference in performance ranging from a frac-
tion of a percent to just under 4%. This proves that symbolic training doesn’t
have a significant impact on the performance of a model. In fact, looking at the
minute details, it is more beneficial to not train symbolically, as the models that
tended to train based on exact stock prices ended up scoring higher in direc-
tional accuracy than those that trained symbolically. This indicates that having
exact price data may be more beneficial in some cases than training based on
price direction alone.
Figure 13: Symbolic v Non-Symbolic
Finally, there is the question of grouping. Does a model trained on sector-
specific stocks perform better because it is able to grasp certain characteristics
of the field? For example, tech stocks tend to be more volatile when compared
to beverage stocks. The metrics tell us it might not matter if models are trained
on sector-specific datasets. It is true that the model with the highest accuracy
rate belongs to the sector-specific tech-based group, but so does the model with
the lowest accuracy rate. This indicates that specific stocks don’t necessarily
need to be grouped with similar ones in order to be accurately predicted, that
a model trained on a variety of stocks can still function just as well.
6
Conclusion
While this paper has been able to explore avenues such as useful modalities and
strategies for stock price prediction, there is still much more to be uncovered.
The model can’t accurately predict every stock trend, or infinitely into the
future, but it might indicate general, high-level trends, which can be useful
for investors as a sort of aid.
Investors can work without models like this,
and models like this can work without investors, but a combination of human
thought and machine learning might be able to strike a certain balance and
potentially outperform sole humans or models. For example, using models such
as ours that are generally accurate can be useful to help human investors make
decisions about whether to buy or sell a stock, but such models don’t always
necessarily need to determine the overall action. Further research might include
a further in-depth analysis of what specific modalities are necessary to accurately
predict the price of a stock. This can be found via more extensive trial-and-
error, with the addition of modalities such as average sector loss/gain on a given
11
date, total loss/gain for that particular stock on a given date, and cost of a given
stock relative to the average of stocks in the same sector. Further studies may
also explore integrating a raw price factor into the algorithm in order to see the
effect of that information.
References
[1] M. A. Istiake Sunny, M. M. S. Maswood, and A. G. Alharbi, “Deep learning-
based stock price prediction using lstm and bi-directional lstm model,”
in 2020 2nd Novel Intelligent and Leading Emerging Sciences Conference
(NILES), 2020, pp. 87–92.
[2] H. Li, Y. Shen, and Y. Zhu, “Stock price prediction using attention-based
multi-input lstm,” in Proceedings of The 10th Asian Conference on
Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Zhu
and I. Takeuchi, Eds., vol. 95.
PMLR, 14–16 Nov 2018, pp. 454–469.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v95/li18c.html
[3] K. J, H. E, M. S. Jacob, and D. R, “Stock price prediction based on lstm
deep learning model,” in 2021 International Conference on System, Com-
putation, Automation and Networking (ICSCAN), 2021, pp. 1–4.
[4] K. Chen, Y. Zhou, and F. Dai, “A lstm-based method for stock returns pre-
diction: A case study of china stock market,” in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2015, pp. 2823–2824.
[5] H. Ince and T. B. Trafalis, “Short term forecasting with support vector
machines and application to stock price prediction,” International Journal
of General Systems, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 677–687, 2008. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/03081070601068595
[6] Y. Lin, H. Guo, and J. Hu, “An svm-based approach for stock market
trend prediction,” in The 2013 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN), 2013, pp. 1–7.
[7] Z. Hu, J. Zhu, and K. Tse, “Stocks market prediction using support vector
machine,” in 2013 6th International Conference on Information Manage-
ment, Innovation Management and Industrial Engineering, vol. 2, 2013,
pp. 115–118.
[8] J. Kim, J. Seo, M. Lee, and J. Seok, “Stock price prediction through the
sentimental analysis of news articles,” in 2019 Eleventh International Con-
ference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), 2019, pp. 700–702.
[9] F.
Colasanto,
L.
Grilli,
D.
Santoro,
and
G.
Villani,
“Albertino
for stock price prediction:
a gibbs sampling approach,” Information
Sciences,
vol. 597,
pp. 341–357,
2022. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002002552200264X
12
[10] S. Mohan, S. Mullapudi, S. Sammeta, P. Vijayvergia, and D. C. Anastasiu,
“Stock price prediction using news sentiment analysis,” in 2019 IEEE Fifth
International Conference on Big Data Computing Service and Applications
(BigDataService), 2019, pp. 205–208.
[11] H. Huang and T. Zhao, “Stock market prediction by daily news via natural
language processing and machine learning,” in 2021 International Confer-
ence on Computer, Blockchain and Financial Development (CBFD), 2021,
pp. 190–196.
[12] L. Sayavong, Z. Wu, and S. Chalita, “Research on stock price prediction
method based on convolutional neural network,” in 2019 International Con-
ference on Virtual Reality and Intelligent Systems (ICVRIS), 2019, pp.
173–176.
[13] P. Bhargava, A. Drozd, and A. Rogers, “Generalization in nli: Ways (not)
to go beyond simple heuristics,” 2021.
[14] I. Turc, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Well-read students
learn
better:
The
impact
of
student
initialization
on
knowledge
distillation,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1908.08962,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08962
[15] Y. Guo, “Stock price prediction based on lstm neural network: the effec-
tiveness of news sentiment analysis,” in 2020 2nd International Conference
on Economic Management and Model Engineering (ICEMME), 2020, pp.
1018–1024.
13
