Title: Reasoning about Procedures with Natural Language Processing: A Tutorial
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.07455v1
--------------------------------------------------

Reasoning about Procedures with
Natural Language Processing: A Tutorial
Li Zhang
University of Pennsylvania
zharry@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
This tutorial provides a comprehensive and in-depth view of the research on proce-
dures, primarily in Natural Language Processing. A procedure is a sequence of steps
intended to achieve some goal. Understanding procedures in natural language has a
long history, with recent breakthroughs made possible by advances in technology. First,
we discuss established approaches to collect procedures, by human annotation or extrac-
tion from web resources. Then, we examine diﬀerent angles from which procedures can
be reasoned about, as well as ways to represent them. Finally, we enumerate scenarios
where procedural knowledge can be applied to the real world.
1
Introduction
Natural language is all about events. This is a not wild claim according to Oxford Languages1,
which deﬁnes an event as a thing that happens. When people use natural language, it almost
always describes something that happens, or events.
Events can be grand, like “glacier
movement”, “establishment of an empire”, or “world economic crisis”; they can also be tiny,
like “moving one’s ﬁngers”, “breath”, or “alarm clock ringing.” All events, great and small,
are a fundamental unit of how we describe and perceive the world.
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), the study of events is a trendy ﬁeld. From 2012 to
2021, the yearly number of papers published on ACL Anthology2 (the primary peer-reviewed
paper reserve for NLP) with substring “event” in their titles have tripled, from 53 to 154.
In comparison, the yearly number of papers with “translat(e)” in their titles has remained
stable, from 400 to 595. What gives? The importance of events in NLP has been ampliﬁed
by two factors. First, with the advance of other technologies, such as speech processing,
computer vision and computing hardware, more and more real life applications beneﬁt from
some knowledge about events. For example, a virtual assistant beneﬁts from knowing the
intentions of the user’s requests, an advertisement distribution system beneﬁts from modeling
user proﬁles based on users’ activities, ans so on. Second, with the advance of NLP tools
like large language models, analyzing constructs as abstract as events has become a lot more
tractable. Most past NLP work has focused on “what the texts say”, but now we can attend
1https://languages.oup.com/google-dictionary-en/
2https://aclanthology.org/
1
arXiv:2205.07455v1  [cs.CL]  16 May 2022
Figure 1: Number of published papers in NLP venues containing keywords of diﬀerent topics.
to “what is happenning”[Chen et al., 2021]. This is very exciting, because we have moved
one step towards machine understanding of meaning.
All events are not equal.
One special type of event is a procedure3.
A procedure
is a compound event, like “learn about NLP”, which can be broken down into multiple
events, like “read papers”, “take classes”, “attend seminars”, etc. What really distinguishes
a procedure from some generic event is that every procedure must consist of some goal
(or intent, motivation), and some steps to achieve this goal. As a counterexample, if an
individual considers three random things they habitually do in the morning, e.g., “get out of
bed”, “play tennis”, and “smoke cigaretts”, these are unlikely to form a meaningful procedure,
because a logical goal that these events share is missing. In contrast, “arrive at the airport”,
“go through securities”, and “wait at the boarding gate” are likely part of the procedure
“taking a ﬂight”. Similarly, events without a sentient perpetrator are unlikely to form a
procedure (e.g., “rain heavily”, “time elapse“), since they arguably do not have any goal.
Why do researchers care about procedures? The unique roles of events in a procedure,
namely, goals and steps, lead to fascinating interactions among the events. The unique chal-
lenges and opportunities brought by procedures are manifold compared to ordinary events.
For example, a whole class of common sense knowledge is almost exclusive to procedures.
Say, a person “jumps up and down”. There is no telling what they want to achieve. But if
this person also “does push-ups” and “stretch arms”, it is then safe to assume that they’re
“doing some sort of exercise.” Such ability to reason about goal not only is interesting in
itself with regard to the intelligence of machines, but also has many downstream applications.
I should also mention that the NLP community has been so zealous towards common sense
reasoning, such that papers with ”common” and ”sense” in their titles grew from 3 in 2012
to 66 in 2021. However, studying procedures has so much more to oﬀer, as we will see more
in this tutorial.
Procedures come in many forms, the most common of which is probably natural language
3The term “procedure”, like many other NLP terms, is overloaded in diﬀerent disciplines. We follow our
own precise deﬁnition throughout this tutorial.
2
instructions, such as recipes4, manual for assembly, how-to guide, navigation lines, etc.
An instruction can be seen as a procedure that should be carried out instead of one that is
carried out by someone, just like a recipe provides guidance but is open to interpretation.
The majority of past work on procedures has focused on instructions, for good reasons. First,
instructions are simple and structured in scope, wordings, presentation, etc., compared to,
say, a detailed diary of someone who actually carries out a procedure. Second and more
important, instructions can be easily found, on the web, from the books, and so on. In
addition, algorithms, programs, execution plans for machines can also be seen as procedures,
since they do contain steps for a predetermined goal. More loosely, so are scientiﬁc processes,
animal behavior, etc. However, let’s not attend to them in this tutorial as they are not
human activities. Our focus is indeed instructions, but let’s keep our sight within procedures
in general, since much learning can be shared.
Can you deal with procedural events the same way you would with general events? The
short answer is you could, but you would miss a lot of information. Take the example of
the temporal relation among events, which asks the question of which event should happen
earlier. For some general events, this can be obvious: Christmas-eve predates Christmas in
any calendar year. For procedural events, things get ambiguous. Should you ﬁrst “turn oﬀ
the lights” and then “close the door”? That depends on your goal: you should only if you’re
“leaving the house”, but not “entering the house”! It becomes evident that the temporal
relation between procedural events is usually conditioned on the goal. Also note that in this
example, you physically cannot ﬂip these two events, unless you have a ﬁst-sized hole on your
door and you have an arm of several meters. However, this is not always the case. If you’re
“meeting with your professor”, you should ﬁrst “make an appointment” and then “go to the
professor’s oﬃce”. You could theoretically ﬂip the steps, but your professor would probably
not be happy. In fact, procedural events require speciﬁc methodologies in their retrieval,
processing, reasoning, and applications, of which we will see more in the tutorial.
TLDR: events are one of the most important things to study in natural language; pro-
cedures are one of the most interesting events; instructions are the most common form of
procedures. In this tutorial, you will comprehensively learn about procedures from the point
of view of NLP. That is, you will ﬁrst see how past research has tackled procedures, where
to ﬁnd data, how can we reason about them, and what use they have in real life.
2
A Brief History of Procedures
Research on procedures has largely been driven by available techniques and applications of
interest. Hence, it is beneﬁcial to review eﬀorts on studying procedures chronologically to
understand the change of interest and methodology over time.
The earliest work on procedures in NLP is probably [Miller, 1976], which is unavailable
today. The earliest available work was [Momouchi, 1980], which aimed to convert a proce-
dure to a comprehensive ﬂowchart. The work formally deﬁned a procedure as “a sequence
of actions (steps) intended to achieve a goal.” It primarily focused on knowledge acqui-
sition, which means to extract various features from procedures.
A usual byproduct of
such extraction is some procedural representation. Many such features are still receiving
much attention today, such as pre- and post-conditions, temporal duration and relation, etc.
4Recipes are the most studied procedures in related work by a large margin.
3
Knowledge acquisition is a heavy focus in this tutorial, as it is the gateway to reasoning
about procedures; such knowledge can be applied to myriad of scenarios.
The procedures studied here were from recipes, a common kind of instructional texts that
we will later see used in many works.
Procedural understanding is closely related to planning in artiﬁcial intelligence [Schank,
1977]. Speciﬁcally, a substantial body at that time focused on natural language generation
from plans [Mellish and Evans, 1989, Wahlster et al., 1993]. It was not surprise that these
works had found instructional texts tractable [Kosseim and Lapalme, 1994, Paris et al.,
1995], which are structured and limited in scope. However, these works hardly attempted to
learn from procedures, until later when [Paris et al., 2002] created a human-in-the-loop tool
for procedural knowledge acquisition. Note that such knowledge extracted from procedural
texts can be transformed to plans (the reverse of “natural language generation from plans”
mentioned above), which is a substantial body of research [MacMahon et al., 2006, Branavan
et al., 2009, Chen and Mooney, 2011, Artzi and Zettlemoyer, 2013, Kiddon et al., 2015]. We
will go into more details later in this tutorial.
One primary use of such procedural language generation is to answer how-to questions,
the second most sought-after type of queries on the internet at that time [de Rijke et al.,
2005]. To that end, there were an array of eﬀorts to identify instructional texts on the
web [Takechi et al., 2003], automatically generate them [Paris et al., 2005], converting them
to executables [Gil et al., 2011, Fritz and Gil, 2011], study their linguistic idiosyncrasies
[Kosseim and Lapalme, 2000, Bielsa and Donnell, 2002, Aouladomar, 2005, Gil, 2015], and
extract components such as titles [Delpech and Saint-Dizier, 2008].
Procedural knowledge acquisition and representation continued to thrive [Lau et al., 2009,
Addis and Borrajo, 2011]. The next outstanding work on procedural knowledge acquisition
would be [Zhang et al., 2012], which proposed a standard representation of procedures.
Compared to [Momouchi, 1980], the proposed representation also stressed upon goals, steps,
pre- and post-conditions, but was much simpler and set the basis of procedural representation
in subsequent research. [Maeta et al., 2015, Kiddon et al., 2015] took a diﬀerent approach,
and focused on the relations among entities in procedures. Note that the entity-relation
view has a long history [Chen, 1976] and is a center piece in information extraction in NLP
[Doddington et al., 2004, Ellis et al., 2014]. We will see more about representing procedures
later in the tutorial.
Just want kind of procedures are on the web?
One most used source is wikiHow5
(previously eHow6), a website of how-to instructions for many tasks. As the structure and
writing style are consistent, wikiHow has been leveraged by NLP researchers since its incep-
tion [Perkowitz et al., 2004, Addis and Borrajo, 2011, Pareti et al., 2014a]. In recent years,
wikiHow has grown massively in size (now more than 110k articles), diversity (19 languages,
hundreds of categories) and quality (editorial process7).
As a result, it has fueled much
research on procedures from various aspects [Pareti, 2018], such as linking actions [Pareti
et al., 2014b, Chernov et al., 2016, Lin et al., 2020, Donatelli et al., 2021, Zhou et al., 2022],
what-if reasoning [Tandon et al., 2019, Rajagopal et al., 2020], entity tracking [Tandon et al.,
2020], next-event prediction [Nguyen et al., 2017, Zellers et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2020a],
intent reasoning [Dalvi et al., 2019], goal-step reasoning [Zhou et al., 2019b, Park and Mota-
hari Nezhad, 2018, Zhang et al., 2020b, Yang et al., 2021], procedure generation [Sakaguchi
5wikihow.com
6https://www.wikihow.com/wikiHow:History-of-wikiHow
7https://www.wikihow.com/wikiHow:Delivering-a-Trustworthy-Experience
4
Figure 2: An illustration of an article in wikiHow. Typically, an article contains a goal and
some methods, each containing some steps.
et al., 2021, Lyu et al., 2021], simulation [Puig et al., 2018], summarization [Koupaee and
Wang, 2018, Ladhak et al., 2020] and so on. Those are just some works that use procedures
from wikiHow, and there are plenty that use other data sources, that we will examine later.
Indeed, as more work has explored procedures [Mujtaba and Mahapatra, 2019], research
agendas become more diverse. With the advance of large language models [Devlin et al.,
2019, Brown et al., 2020a], researchers no longer ﬁxate on formally representing procedural
knowledge, but directly use procedural texts for an array of downstream tasks, as enumerated
above. It is truly a great time to study procedures.
3
Source of Procedures
Any work that studies procedures must ﬁrst obtain them. There are two prominent sources:
web resources and human annotation.
3.1
Web Resources
Extracting procedures from some resources such as cookbooks has to be one of the most
intuitive ways of obtaining procedural data. Nowadays, most such instructions can be found
online in the web.
As mentioned before, wikiHow is one prominent resource with many
general how-to instructions. Let’s look at a case study to extract procedural information
from wikiHow from one of my own work [Zhang et al., 2020b].
Scrape.
First, we need to scrape the entire wikiHow website using some web-crawler to
get the HTML for each wikiHow page. To that end we can use a Python package called
Beautiful Soup. To traverse all wikiHow pages, we can use breadth-ﬁrst search to expand
every link found in each page whose URL contains wikihow.com. After getting the HTML
for each wikiHow page, we ﬁlter ones corresponding to actual articles using some common
characteristics, such as speciﬁc formatting of the title, sections, etc.
Extract.
We must ﬁrst ascertain what information we would need for a procedure. Mini-
mally, a procedure might have a goal and some steps. The title of a wikiHow article naturally
5
Figure 3: An example of how we can extract a procedrue from a wikiHow article.
suﬃces as the goal. Alternatively, many wikiHow articles also have methods or parts, the
title of which could also be a more ﬁne-grained goal. Each step in a wikiHow article contains:
• a headline in bold, which is always the ﬁrst sentence,
• details, which are subsequent sentences,
• additional information, which is optionally listed in a bullet points.
See an example in Figure 2. One might decide what to include as goal and steps in a procedure
depends on their use cases. For now, let’s take a minimalist approach and treat the title as
the goal, and the headlines as the steps (Figure 3). Using some HTML parser like Beautiful
Soup, we can extract them easily.
The data we have at this point are noisy. For example, some HTML or texts might be
malformed. It is thus importantly to manually check some obtained procedures to conﬁrm
their quality. Alternatively, you can also use the processed wikiHow procedural data we
released8.
3.2
Human Annotation
Before instructions became widely available on the web, human annotation has been a viable
option to obtain procedural data. Usually, this is done by crowdsourcing, where many people
contribute to annotating the data. Compared to using web resources, crowdsourcing costs
money and requires careful design. One primary way of getting human annotations is via
Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk)9, as exempliﬁed by [Lau et al., 2009]. In essence, mTurk
is a marketplace where researchers pay people (namely, the crowd) to annotate data. To
collect procedures, they ask crowd workers to write down a task and provide its instructions.
In their case, they collected a total of 43 procedures with 300 steps, costing only 10 US
dollars!10
8https://github.com/zharry29/wikihow-goal-step
9https://www.mturk.com/
10It is important to pay annotators fairly. By a rough comparison, in 2009 the US minimal wage is $7.25.
To earn it, an annotator needs to annotate 29 procedures per hour, or 1 per 2 minutes.
6
Figure 4: The formal representation of a procedure, and an example instantiating of the
components from [Zhang et al., 2012].
With a reasonable budget, crowdsourcing can result in a great deal of annotations. More-
over, it oﬀers much freedom with regard to the type of annotations we want. For example,
[Regneri et al., 2010, Li et al., 2012, Wanzare et al., 2016] each collected data via crowd-
sourcing with diﬀerent topics and sizes.
4
Representation of Procedures
At this point we have a collection of procedures, each containing a goal and some steps written
in texts. At this simplest form, a procedure is be represented as a tree of depth 1, with the
goal as the root and the step as leaves. The edges thus represent “goal-step” relations. The
events are nodes and represented as plain texts. Such a procedural representation doesn’t
tell us or the models much, even compared to the ancestral work [Momouchi, 1980] who
converted procedures to comprehensive ﬂowcharts. Fortunately, there are much that can be
done to represent procedures.
4.1
Structure vs. Texts
Before we dive into more sophisticated representation of procedures, it’s worth brieﬂy covering
why we want to extract structured knowledge into knowledgebases, databases, or schemata
[Shapiro and Iw´anska, 2000], and whether doing so is necessary at all. Why aren’t we satisﬁed
of representing procedures as natural language sentences? The most obvious reason is that
for a long time, machines simply have been better at dealing with symbolic data than textual
data. Assume you want to devise a software that can tell you the ingredients of a dish, and
where you can buy them. If you are blessed with a knowledgebase with the ingredients of all
dishes and the location of all ingredients, you can trivially accomplish the task. Even if some
information is missing, you can use machine learning techniques such as K-nearest-neighbors
or even neuro-symbolic methods to infer the missing information. However, if all you have is
7
a collection of sentences describing similar information about the ingredients and locations,
such as “I just bought two bottles of milk at a grocery store yesterday,” machines struggle
at leveraging this information without ﬁrst extracting some structured knowledge. This is
strong evidence that structure representation of knowledge, e.g., procedures, is beneﬁcial.
No wonder much eﬀort has been put into representing all kinds of knowledge using a uniﬁed
structure, such as the Linked Data Cloud11 devised by the semantic web community.
On the ﬂip-side, structured representation can be brittle and inﬂexible. The knowledge-
base can have many potential ﬂaws. It might only cover a subset of information. It might
contain partial information12. It might contain errors. All these issues can easily render
machine inference faulty or impossible.
A surprising contender to structured knowledge representation is to not “represent” at all,
but instead maintain plain textual representation. In recent years, these natural language
sentences can be eﬀectively leveraged by large language models (LLMs) to make eﬀective
inferences. We will see more later that LLMs such as GPT-3 [Brown et al., 2020b] or T5
[Raﬀel et al., 2020] actually thrives in the void of structure of the data.
The key takeaway here is that structured representation of procedures is a valid, but not
the only approach to reasoning about them. Obviously, the quality of such representation
directly inﬂuences how well models can do. Let’s then check out a couple of ways to represent
procedures.
4.2
Structured Representation of Procedures
[Zhang et al., 2012] proposed a reasonable graph representation of procedures. See Figure 4
for an illustration. Speciﬁcally, a procedure consists of some steps, and of course, a goal.
Each step consists of an action verb and an actee. It may also have temporal, spatial or
quantitative information. A step is activated by some pre-condition, and completes with
some post-condition. A step may also require some instruments, and may fulﬁll some purpose
(sub-goal). Such formulation covers most of the important factors of a procedure.
Two major problems ensue. First of all, it is challenging to accurate extract all such
information from a textual representation of a procedure, such as a recipe from a cookbook.
The authors of [Zhang et al., 2012] employ rule-based systems such as parsers to extract the
components. However, even were they to use the state-of-the-art neural models as of 2022,
the extracted information might not be complete, since some information can be implicit.
For example, in the action “add salt to water and bring to a broil”, knowing “bring what to
a broil” requires co-reference reasoning. Further, features like pre- and post-conditions are
even trickier, and remains an open question to this day, that I also actively work on. Without
a means to accurately extract such information, it is challenging to apply the representation
to downstream tasks such as question answering for a wide variety of procedures.
[Kiddon et al., 2015] provides another representation of procedures, focusing on recipes.
Compared to the previous representation, their focus shifts to entities and relations in proce-
dures. Naturally, this representation is a boon for answering questions about these entities,
such as “where is the bacon” or “what is mixed with the ﬂour”. However, it hinges on the
relatively regular phrasings from recipes, and may not handle other types of procedures well.
11https://lod-cloud.net/
12For example, a knowledgebase can have an entry for “milk” but none for “oat milk,” and thus cannot
deal with the latter at all despite its high similarity to the former.
8
Figure 5: An example recipe and its representation from [Kiddon et al., 2015], denoting the
actions, ingredients, and their relations to one another.
4.3
Textual Representation of Procedures
Representing procedures as texts is quite trivial, and we have seen how we can achieve this.
With the advance of large language models, diverse expressions of procedures in free-form
texts can also be directly input into the models.
Free from the bottleneck of extracting
information to form a structured representation, researchers can harness the power of these
language models to learn from procedures and apply learned knowledge to downstream tasks
more ﬂexibly. For the recent years, this has been the dominant approach. In the next section,
we will go with the ﬂow and see many examples of working with only textual representation.
Just because language models work excellently with textual representation does not mean
that structured representations are in vain. They still remain a formidable force for proce-
dural reasoning, especially coupled with quickly advancing neural-symbolic methods [Huang
et al., 2021]. Moreover, structured representations are a step towards language grounding,
which is crucial to robots executing instructions [Puig et al., 2018, Huang et al., 2022, Ahn
et al., 2022]. This area is of course related to procedures and an extremely important front
of artiﬁcial intelligence, but we will not go into details in this tutorial.
5
Learning from Procedures
There are many world knowledge encapsulated in procedures, referred to as procedural knowl-
edge. Learning it not only helps with downstream applications, but also sheds light on model’s
capabilities. In this section, we will see how models can learn some common knowledge from
procedures.
5.1
Goal-Step Relations
At the core of a procedures are goals and steps. In practice, however, we might not have
the luxury of having all of them at hand. There are many cases where we need to infer the
goal from steps. For example, sociologists might be interested in people’s motivation of their
actions; advertisers might want to know what people want from their browsing activities;
9
Figure 6: Examples from the goal-step reasoning tasks from [Zhang et al., 2020b].
dialog systems might need to ﬁgure out the intent from utterances about user activities.
Conversely, inferring steps from a goal is equally useful. For example, a household assistant
might need to help user ﬁgure out how to accomplish tasks. Inferring goals or steps hinges
on understanding the goal-step relation between events. Moreover, the temporal relation
between two steps is equally important. While temporal relations among general events has
been well studied [Zhou et al., 2019a, Han et al., 2019, Vashishtha et al., 2020, Ma et al.,
2021], the ordering of steps additionally depends on the goal. For example, “go to the oﬃce”
and “buy food” in general do not have a habitual order, but if both events are step from the
procedure with the goal of “have an oﬃce potluck”, it becomes clear that “buy food” should
happen ﬁrst. Such is an illustrative example of procedural events’ idiosyncrasy.
Apart from the practical uses, the knowledge of goals and steps is a part of human
common-sense and might be a critical part of artiﬁcial general intelligence. Being able to
reason about goals and steps also has strong implication towards other NLP tasks such as
question answering, machine reading comprehension, etc. Let’s see how we can learn the
goal-step relations in wikiHow following one of our own work [Zhang et al., 2020b] (examples
shown in Figure 6).
5.1.1
Goal-Step Relation
The simplest way to formulate this task is that given two events, a model needs to predict
whether one can be the step while another can be the goal, logically. In previous sections, we
have extracted hundreds of thousands of procedures from wikiHow, each containing a goal
and some steps. A pair of such a goal and a step then forms a positive example, while a pair
of some goal and a step from another procedure likely forms a negative example. However,
directly judging the goal-step relation might be subject to ambiguity. For example, is “play
guitar” a logical goal of “stretch your arms”? It really can go both ways, since you realistically
can get cramps if you practice guitar for too long and your arms get sore. However, if we
consider another potential goal like “debate”, then the step “stretch your arms” is far more
unlikely. For this reason, we set up the task comparatively, using a multiple choice setting.
Namely, given a goal and a couple of potential steps, a model needs to choose the most likely
step. Vice versa for given a step and some goals. Consider this example of inferring the step
from a goal.
10
What is the most likely step of the goal “prevent viruses”?
A. Wash hands. B. Clap hands. C. Wash a cat. D. Sleep early.
The answer is unambiguously A, as B and C are irrelevant, and while D does help with
boosting one’s immunisation system, it’s less direct than A.
Now that we formulate the step-inference and goal-inference tasks as multiple choice, an
interesting and important consideration is how we should sample negative examples. Note
that sampling positive examples is trivial as we can just take a goal and a step from a wikiHow
procedure. Think about a multiple choice exam. If the “wrong options” are too obvious, the
exam becomes trivial. Conversely, all of us must have seen some frustrating “bad questions”
where there are multiple correct answers, which should not occur. In our case, given a step,
how do we sample some non-goals that are distracting enough for the models? One way is to
use semantic similarity search, which helps us ﬁnd sentences that have similar meaning. Let’s
consider the step “store your receipts in a binder” that comes from the wikiHow procedure
with the goal “organize receipt”. We then need to ﬁnd a couple of other goals similar to
“organize receipt”, but they cannot be the goal of “store your receipts in a binder”. If we
search for “organize receipt” using a search engine on wikiHow, we can ﬁnd “write a receipt”,
“print a uber receipt”, “create a donation receipt”, etc. All those are favorable, since they
each cannot be a logical goal of “store your receipts in a binder”. To implement such a search
engine, a typical way is to use Elasticsearch with the classical BM25 search algorithm, while
indexing the entire textual information from a wikiHow website.
An alternative to using search engines is to use a sentence embedding approach. First,
we use a sentence encoder such as sBERT [Reimers and Gurevych, 2019] to encode each step
and each goal from all wikiHow procedures as vector representations. Then, considering the
goal inference task, given a step, its corresponding goal, and this goal’s embedding, we can
search for K goals whose embeddings are the closest to the embedding of the given goal, by a
distance metric such as L2 or cosine distance. Though there are millions of goals and steps in
wikiHow, we can rely on a fast K-nearest-neighbor search algorithm such as FAISS [Johnson
et al., 2019] for eﬃciency.
At this point, we have found some highly distracting negative examples, but we still have
no guarantee that these negative examples are indeed negative. For the previous example
of the goal “organize receipt”, one of our negative examples could be “organize receipt for
a small business”, which can certainly be the goal of “store your receipts in a binder”. If
we include this case in a multiple-choice example, it would adversely aﬀect our evaluation
since the model predictions would have false negatives. There are no easy ways to eliminate
these bad distractors. One idea is to check for lexical overlap, and exclude negative examples
that are almost identical to the positive example. Another idea is to place more weights on
the verb or the object of a goal or a step while performing similarity search. None of these
methods are perfectly reliable.
Fortunately, the noise induced by bad negative examples is not deal-breaking, as we can
construct millions of examples from wikiHow, and most of them are good. Hence, models
can usually still learn a lot despite some occasional noise. For evaluation, we can be a bit
more cautious and run a human validation. For this we can resort to crowdsourcing using
Amazon Mechanical Turk. All we need to do is to have people answer our multiple choice
questions, and only keep those that most crowd workers answer correctly. In fact, having a
large but noisy training set and a small but clean evaluation set is typical in NLP tasks.
We now have a dataset of multiple choice questions for step and goal inference, but
11
we’re not done yet. We have to look out for dataset artifacts, which are spurious statistical
correlations that spawn during our data creation process. There are many kind of artifacts,
but one notorious kind common in multiple-choice questions comes from negative sampling.
Work such as [Zellers et al., 2019] has shown that language models can sometimes achieve high
performance in multiple-choice questions by only looking at the choices but not the question.
This is reminiscent of some badly designed exam questions, where all correct answers are the
third one or the longest one. Note that large neural networks work with manifold so that
they can pick up complex cues that we human do not intend nor notice, and thus achieve
deceptively high performance. Our dataset is no exception. If we mask out the given goal
or step but only provide the choices, our best model can achieve signiﬁcantly over chance
accuracy. To deal with this common issue of cues among choices, for each example, we further
randomly re-assign a choice as the correct answer. For instance, consider the example with
the goal of “stay healthy” and 4 candidate steps “work out”, “work long hours”, “try out
local restaurants”, and “eat a lot of food”. The correct answer is apparently “work out”. To
avoid models picking up cues, we then randomly decide that “try out local restaurants” is
the correct step, while switching the given goal to its corresponding one, “visit a new city”.
This way, if we again mask out the given goal or step but only provide the choices, all models
are destined to perform no better than randomly guessing, since all choices have an equal
chance of being correct.
What about the performance? For humans, my collaborator and I each did 100 questions
for goal inference and step inference, and we have around 97% accuracy. In contrast, state-
of-the-art language models like RoBERTa [Liu et al., 2019] can achieve about 85%. Since
it’s a 4-choose-1 format, the chance performance is 25%. This shows that models can quite
reliably learn procedural knowledge of goals and steps from our data, which is a good news.
5.1.2
Step-Step Temporal Relation
Another interesting relation of goals and steps is the step-step temporal relation, namely the
order in which steps happen in a procedure. Namely, given a goal and two of its steps, a
model needs to choose the one that should happen earlier. Consider this example.
For the goal “wash silverware”, which step should happen ﬁrst?
A. Rinse the silverware. B. Dry the silverware.
The answer is unambiguously A. Instead of multiple-choice, the task of step ordering should
be formatted as binary classiﬁcation, since both of the steps and the goal need to be accessible
to models. In this case, negative sampling is not an issue, since we can just ﬂip the two steps
to form an example with an opposite label.
For humans, we again did 100 questions for goal inference and step inference, and we
again have around 97% accuracy. In contrast, state-of-the-art language models can achieve
about 80%, with a chance performance of 25%.
5.2
State Tracking
While events are at the core of natural language, entities are at the core of events. Entities are
just things involved in events and they can move around, change form, or remain constant.
In procedures and especially instructions, entities are even more crucial, because here the
language is usually concise, and every entity mentioned likely plays some important role. For
12
Figure 7: An example of the data annotation in ProPara. Each ﬁlled row shows the existence
and location of participants between each step (“?” denotes “unknown”, “-” denotes “does
not exist”). For example in state0, water is located at the soil.
example, to drink bottled water, we can buy a bottle from the vending machine, unscrew
the cap, and take a sip. Every entity here is indispensable. Without the vending machine,
we would have to procure the water somewhere else; the bottle contains water, and has a
cap that must be removed prior to drinking. Hence, the knowledge of what happens to these
entities, referred to as their states, is an important knowledge to learn. Such knowledge has
plenty of practical uses. For example, it can be used to answer questions about the world
(e.g., where is the cap when I’m drinking the water?), or even provide concrete guidance to
robots (e.g., if a water-drinking robot knows that the cap is not on the bottle while drinking
and that a bottle containing water should be capped, it can infer that it should re-cap the
bottle). There are a handful of existing work on state tracking [Long et al., 2016, Bosselut
et al., 2017, Mysore et al., 2019]. We will go over some latest ones. We will focus on the task
deﬁnition and data instead of methods here.
5.2.1
Existence and Location in Scientiﬁc Processes
Let’s ﬁrst look at ProPara [Dalvi et al., 2018], one of the earliest attempts of state tracking
in procedures. The authors of this work focus on a speciﬁc kind of procedures: scientiﬁc
processes (e.g., photosynthesis), unlike the rest of this tutorial which focuses on instructions.
They track entity state changes for two attributes: existence and location. Namely, after
each step, they want to know if any entity of interest is created or destroyed, and where it is
if it exists. See Figure 7 for an example.
To create this dataset, they ﬁrst come up with a list of prompts of target scientiﬁc
processes, and then ask crowd workers to write down the steps of these procedures. Next,
another group of annotators are asked to write down the entities that have state changes
and mark the steps after which they are created or destroyed. Finally, a diﬀerent group of
annotators write down the location of these entities after each step. Thus, a dataset of 81,345
annotations over 488 paragraphs about 183 processes is created.
The ProPara dataset is great for tracking states. However, it only study two attributes.
13
Figure 8: An example of the data annotation in OpenPI. The input comprises a query and
a context (past sentences before this step in the paragraph). The output is a set of pre- and
post-conditions.
There are many attributes other than existence and location that have state changes to be
tracked (e.g., temperature, openness, color, etc.). Moreover, its domain is limited to scientiﬁc
processes.
5.2.2
Open State Tracking in Instructions
The next work we’re going to look at, OpenPI [Tandon et al., 2020], addresses the previous
issues by expanding the attribute set to an open vocabulary. Namely, in addition to existence
and location, other attributes like temperature, openness, and color are all fair game. Also,
OpenPI gets its data from wikiHow, falling into the line of work on instructions which cover
a wide variety of domains.
Similar to Propara, OpenPI also uses crowdsourcing to collect data. The authors ﬁrst
select a suitable subset of wikiHow articles, and then ask crowd workers to write down a
couple of state changes for each step. See an example in Figure 8. A model trained on this
dataset can then also predict some state changes given a step and its contexts.
This is great, because now a model knows about the entities in a procedure beyond their
existence and location. However, there is no guarantee that the state changes written down by
the annotators or predicted by the models are complete. For example, during the procedure
“fry ﬁsh”, once you “add the ﬁsh to the boiling oil”, many things will happen and many
states will change: the ﬁsh will become hard and brown, a crust will form on the surface, the
oil temperature will temporarily decrease, there will be a sizzling sound, and so much more.
14
Limited by the training data, a model trained on OpenPI is unlikely to predict all the state
changes. This will cause the model to fail when a query is made for a state that the model
does not predict.
5.2.3
Question Answering of State Tracking
The current project of myself and my colleagues takes state tracking in procedures to the
next level: what if a model needs to know every state change possible in a procedure?
Apparently, it is impossible to annotate all state changes. However, we might be able to
leverage the state-of-the-art language models’ strong few-shot learning ability to ﬁgure out
these state changes on the ﬂy. For instance, given the ﬁrst example in Figure 8, after the
step “apply insecticide to peonies” a natural question might be “are the peonies harmful to
human body?”
We manually create such a dataset consisting of questions and answers regarding entity
state changes, and our preliminary experiments show that a language model trained on
OpenPI is unable to answer almost all questions, due to its limit on the predicted state
changes.
Similarly, strong language models such as T5 also fails almost completely.
In
contrast, few-shot learners such as GPT3 is able to answer questions regarding entity state
changes reasonably. We are currently investigating ways to improve the model, as well as
other formulation of questions.
6
Applications of Procedures
Procedures are so ubiquitous in life that knowledge about them can be applied in many
scenarios. For example, the technique of reasoning about goals can be used in advertisement
to understand people’s wants and needs. The technique of reasoning about steps can be used
to help users ﬁgure out how to do tasks. Moreover, holistically understanding procedures has
even more implications. Stories and scripts can be broken down into procedures to be better
understood. Schema of procedures can enable comparison and clustering of procedures.
In this section, we will explore some highly practical applications of procedures.
6.1
Suggesting Steps
As humans, we are familiar with some but not all procedures. For example, as a PhD student
myself, I know “how to carry out a research project” all too well, whereas I struggle at “how
to ﬂy an airplane,” unlike some of my friends who have had aviation training. It would be
nice if someone can show me the steps of tasks that I don’t know how to do. Without such
someone, my best bet is to look up the tasks online. One major issue of doing so is that
there might not be instructions of my task. Moreover, I might require some personalization
of the task (e.g., “ﬂy an airplane while being disabled”). In such cases, it would be helpful if
a model can generate steps given a goal, even if it has never seen the goal or the task does
not previously exist. Let’s see how we can train such a model following [Lyu et al., 2021].
Let’s ﬁrst formally deﬁne our task. Given a goal (e.g., “write a song”), the model should
output a sequence of reasonable steps (e.g., “ﬁnd inspiration”, “determine a feel”, “choose a
chord progression”, etc.) that may or may not be ordered. As we will soon see, this task is
no easy feat. To do it well, we need holistic understanding of procedures.
15
We have some data at our disposal. From wikiHow, we have more than 100k procedures
that allow us to perform supervised learning. After splitting them into training and testing
sets Let’s consider two intuitive approaches for modeling.
Language Model Generation.
Now is the age for using large language model’s generation
ability to tackle a variety of tasks. Our task is no exception. Very simply, we can format
each procedure as a sequence of the goal and the steps, such as:
Sear a steak [SEP] Heat the pan [SEP] Pat dry the steak [SEP] ...
Using a generation model such as T5 or GPT-3, we can then use all the procedures in the
training set to ﬁnetune the model. During inference, given a goal, the ﬁnetuned model would
be able to output the steps in a similar format.
Here is an example of some generated steps for “icing an injured ankle” using T5:
1. Hang the ankle up in a large, open space.
2. Wrap the injured ankle up in a heated towel.
3. Put the ice pack against your leg for 15-20 minutes.
4. Elevate your legs above the level of irritation.
5. Take an over-the-counter pain reliever.
6. See a doctor if 2-3 days persist or worsen.
7. Keep your foot elevated to avoid further swelling.
8. Use an orthopedic shoes to trim your ankle.
9. Wear the right shoes and footware.
Are these suggested steps any good? At a quick glance, they may look coherent, but at
a closer look, almost all steps are problematic and are no way to really treat your injured
ankle. Here are some issues that are in fact representative of language model generation’s
common failures.
1. Illogical actions. In 1, you don’t need a large, open space to hang your ankle. In 8, you
probably don’t want to make things worse by “trimming” your ankle.
2. Irrelevant steps. In 2, heated towel has nothing to do with icing. In 4, it would be
strange to refer to an injury as “irritation”.
3. Grammatical issues. In 6 and 8, the grammar is incorrect.
While end-to-end language models are very straightforward to use, the ways that they can
be improved are limited. Naturally, we may adjust the language model’s hyperparameters or
conﬁgurations such as temperature. We may also try diﬀerent data format, or experiment
with data distillation, augmentation, or curriculum learning. However, I myself don’t see
these tweaks bring about large improvements. Most likely, some insights into the task of
suggesting steps is need to handle it better.
Inferring and then Ordering Steps.
Instead of the end-to-end approach above, we could
also reuse our model that infers steps given a goal, and the one that orders steps given a
goal. Recall that the step inference model is a transformer (such as RoBERTa) that takes in
two events and calculates a probability of a goal-step relation. To suggest steps given a goal,
16
we can then use this model to calculate the pairwise probability between the goal and every
single possible event, and keep the events with the highest probability of actually being the
step of the given goal. While we can’t possibly get all events, we can use all the steps from
all articles in wikiHow as a candidate pool. Using this approach, we have already eliminated
issue 1 and 3 of language model generation, given that wikiHow steps are grammatical and
sensical.
Suppose we now have the pairwise goal-step probability between the given goal and each
wikiHow step. We can then choose top K steps with the highest probability, where K is a
design choice and depends on how long we want the suggestion to be.
Next, we can order these K steps by running our step ordering model, a transformer that
takes in two steps and a goal and calculates the probability of the ﬁrst step preceding the
second. To use this model to order or rank more than 2 steps, we can ﬁrst order every pair of
steps, and then poll the number of times a step precedes any other step. This is reminiscent
of a sports tournament where every two players or teams play, and the ranking is determined
by the number of wins each player or team ends up with.
Before looking at some examples of model generation, let’s think about the pros and cons
of this approach. On the bright side, as mentioned before, since all steps come from wikiHow
which has an editorial process, most of them will be logical and well-formed. However, there
are also many possible failures. First, the step inference model is not perfect, and some non-
steps, perhaps irrelevant ones, might be mistakenly ranked high. Even if the step inference
model were perfect, the top-ranked steps are likely to contain duplicates. Consider the goal
“choose a laptop”, and a reasonable step “decide on a budget.” It is obvious that there could
be many steps in wikiHow about deciding on budgets from articles of buying diﬀerent things.
These steps might also have diﬀerent wordings, such as “choose a reasonable budget”, “set
a budget”, “decide on how much you want to spend”, etc. A perfect step inference model is
bound to score all of these steps high, so that after keeping the top K, we will end up with
many steps with the same meaning.
To ameliorate this issue, we can leverage a paraphrase detection module which was not
used in [Lyu et al., 2021]. There are many options. Simply, we can use a sentence embedding
model such as sBERT ﬁnetuned on some paraphrase corpus to calculate the embedding for
each candidate step. Then, we can use algorithms such as K-means to cluster the steps by
their meaning, before we choose one step from each cluster. Alternatively, we can also use
a dedicated paraphrase detection model such as [Nighojkar and Licato, 2021] to calculate
pairwise similarity among the candidate steps.
We have looked at possible failures during the phrase of inferring steps, and will now
look at those during step ordering.
Just like step inference, the step ordering model is
imperfect and would make erroneous predictions. Moreover, such errors can propagate via
the tournament ranking algorithm. For example, given 3 candidate steps A, B, and C, if
the step ordering model predicts that A precedes B, B precedes C, and C precedes A, an
uninformed tie-breaking mechanism (such as randomly choosing one) needs to be invoked.
One glaring weakness of our current temporal ordering approach is that we rely on ag-
gregating pairwise predictions. A more reasonable alternative may be to directly train a
generation model to re-order the entire sequence of steps. To the best of my knowledge, this
is only attempted by one piece of work [Byrne et al., 2021], which learns a denoising autoen-
coder with event sequences that have been shuﬄed. A minor diﬀerence between their work
and our task is that their model is designed for narrative events which do not necessarily
have a goal, like procedural events.
17
Let’s look at an example set of steps predicted by our approach, given the same goal as
above “ice an injured ankle”.
1. Place an ice pack on the injured ankle for 15-20 minutes.
2. Rest the injured ankle as much as possible for 48 hours.
3. Compress the injured ankle for 48 hours to prevent swelling.
4. Elevate the injured ankle above your heart to decrease any swelling.
5. Go to the emergency room if the injured ankle cannot bear weight.
6. Apply a compression bandage to a sprained ankle.
7. Consult with a doctor if the ankle does not improve after 2-3 days.
8. Ask a friend to grab your ankles from the bottom.
Looks pretty good! Here are some common failures.
1. Irrelevant steps. Step 8 may be irrelevant, but we don’t have enough information.
2. Duplicated steps. In this case, we do not observe much duplication within the steps.
3. Wrong ordering. Step 6 should happen as early as step 3, while step 5 should be the
very ﬁrst thing to do.
Until now, we have looked at some models to suggest steps given a goal and some of their
sample output but we haven’t discussed how we can systematically evaluate the suggested
steps.
Similar to many language generation tasks, faithful automatic evaluation is hard
to come by. The key issue is that there is no single right answer, and no straightforward
way to compute the similarity between steps suggested by a model and the reference steps.
According to [Lyu et al., 2021], common metrics such as BERTScore [Zhang et al., 2019]
have almost no correlation with human judgements.
For now, we’re better oﬀrelying on human judgement, designing which is non-trivial
either.
For procedures that most of us know about, we can perform human judgement
without a reference set of steps. One systematic way to score a sequence of suggested step
is to edit the steps, by either adding, removing, or re-ordering steps. The number of such
edit operations is called edit distance. Intuitively, well-suggested steps need few edits, thus
having a small edit distance, and vice versa. Note that such evaluation process has its share
of shortcomings. For example, it is quite subjective to add steps, as people may expect
diﬀerent level of details or granularity from procedures.
As a ﬁnal remark, suggesting steps given a goal is an important application of procedural
knowledge. While current models can do this to some extent, there is still a large room of
improvement.
6.2
Finding Sub-Steps
A procedure consists of a goal and some steps. In fact, each step can itself represent another
procedure. For example, the procedure “make a movie” may have a step “buy a camera”,
which in turn can be the goal of another procedure consisting of steps such as “set a budget”,
“decide use case”, “read reviews”, etc. By this logic, procedures are hierarchical, and steps
may have sub-steps. This is also the case for general, narrative events, and such hierarchical
relations have been studied [Bisk et al., 2019] in some but not much work.
18
Figure 9: Example of procedural hierarchies in wikiHow.
In the previous section we touched on the issue of event granularity in procedures. When
it comes to procedures, the level of details in the steps vary greatly. To teach an adept iPhone
user how to “ﬁx a frozen iPhone X”, you may just say “force restart it”, resulting in a 1-step
procedure. For general audience, you may say “press the volume up botton”, “press the
volume down botton”, and “hold the volume up botton”, resulting in a 3-step procedure. To
teach someone who has never used electronics, you might need to further explain how to hold
buttons and where they are. Having control over the granularity of procedures is important
in many ways. Not only does it give us control over the level of details in instructions, but
it also inﬂuences some downstream tasks as we will see later. Such granularity can be easily
accessed if we have a hierarchy of procedures, where abstractions are higher and details are
lower in the hierarchy.
Building a procedural hierarchy is equivalent to recursively ﬁnding sub-steps for steps,
which is in turn equivalent to linking steps to procedures. In wikiHow, there exists some
hyperlinks from a step to another article. For example, in “How to Make a YouTube Video”,
the step “Record content that is on your computer monitor” is linked to another wikiHow
article “How to Record Your Computer Screen”. Unfortunately, such hyperlinks are very
scarce.
If all steps were to have such links when applicable, we can then ﬁnd sub-steps
trivially, and thus a procedural hierarchy can be constructed. In fact, linking contents in
wikiHow has been attempted in previous years [Pareti et al., 2014a, Chernov et al., 2016].
Let’s see how we can use state-of-the-art NLP techniques to tackle this problem in one of my
own work [Zhou et al., 2022].
Our task is to link all steps in wikiHow to some new article or procedure when possible.
Sometimes, a step can be too speciﬁc (e.g., “whisk together two eggs and a cup of heavy
cream”) or too low-level (e.g., “breathe”) to have sub-steps, in which case we mark this
step as unlinkable. For now, let’s focus on linking whole steps in wikiHow, though it’s also
reasonable to link a part of the step, such as individual actions.
Our labeled data comes from wikiHow’s existing hyperlinks, which are provided by editors
and high-quality in general. We split this dataset into training and testing splits. Now,
given a step, how do we ﬁnd a corresponding wikiHow article? This is a typical information
19
retrieval or search problem, for which sentence embeddings and semantic similarity are typical
solutions. For now, let’s only try matching each step with the goals of the articles, ignoring
other information in the articles. We have two modeling options.
1. Unsupervised. We can directly use a pretrained sentence embedding model such as
sBERT to convert each wikiHow step and goal into a vector representation. Then, we
can use a fast K-nearest-neighbor (KNN) algorithm such as FAISS for ﬁnd the closest
goal of each step.
2. Supervised. We can train a network to take in a step and a goal, embed them using
sBERT, and predict whether they should be linked. In our training data of hyperlinks,
each training instance is a step and the goal of the article that the step is linked to.
This pair of step and goal should have the same meaning.
These two methods each have their pros and cons.
The unsupervised method is fast
thanks to the eﬃcient KNN search, but fails to leverage our training data, leading to lower
accuracy. The supervised method is slow because each step-goal pair needs to be computed,
but has better performance by learning from step-goal pairs that have the same meaning.
Fortunately we don’t have to choose. It is conventional in information retrieval tasks to
sequentially perform these two methods in a retrieve-then-rerank pipeline. First, we use
the unsupervised method to narrow down the candidate goals. Then, we use the supervised
method to re-score each pair of the step and a candidate goal, and re-rank the goals.
You can see a demo of the resulting procedural hierarchy at https://wikihow-hierarchy.
github.io/.
6.3
Guiding Dialogues
Procedural knowledge has seen use in commercial voice assistants such as Amazon Alexa.
At the time of writing, if you ask Alexa how to do something, it will guide you through a
corresponding wikiHow article or a Whole Foods Market recipe13 step by step. Navigating
through the steps itself is straightforward, but almost any other interesting interaction require
procedural knowledge. For example, if a user asks for clariﬁcation of a step, then the system
must know what article to redirect the user to given the contexts (Section 6.2). If a user asks
a question during the procedure, knowledge about entity states might be needed to provide an
answer (Section 5.2). If a user run into issues such as not having a certain tool or ingredient,
the system needs to invoke what-if reasoning. More futuristically, if a user’s desired task does
not have a good set of instructions available, the system can suggest some reasonable steps
(Section 6.1). In fact, our team at the University of Pennsylvania participated in the Alexa
Prize TaskBot Challenge14 from 2021 to 2022, and worked on most of the above aspects.
What we have touched upon are just a tip of the iceberg of what procedural knowledge
can be used to do in real life. I can’t prove this claim to you at this time, because most of
these potential applications remain ongoing or unexplored work. For example, procedural
knowledge can be used to generate texts, such as a story about going through a lawsuit, or
a ﬁctional narrative about scaling a castle wall. I’ll happily leave all those to future work.
13https://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/recipes
14https://www.amazon.science/alexa-prize
20
7
Procedure and Script
[Schank, 1977] introduced the concept of script as a way to unify knowledge of events,
reconciling distinctive conventions from psychology, cognitive science, and of course, artiﬁcial
intelligence. From the perspective of AI, script learning is an ambitious journey towards
artiﬁcial general intelligence, as it attempts to reduce arbitrarily complex human activities
into low-level, symbolic representations that machines can conceivably understand. Such
an attempt was tremendously diﬃcult, as there are myriad of exceptions and edge cases
that any intelligent system must account for. Thus, script learning culminated in popularity
around that time, but was thwarted by the limitation of technology. In recent years with
the advances in technology, it has been steadily picking up traction again. Procedures and
scripts share a lot of common grounds, since they are both semantic constructs that describe
events. In this section, we will juxtapose the two concepts and gain some interesting insights.
According to Schank,
A script is a structure that describes appropriate sequences of events in a partic-
ular context.
For example, the following is a script.
John went to a restaurant. He asked the waitress for coq au vin. He paid the
check and left.
The following is not a script.
John was walking on the street. He thought of cabbages. He picked up a shoe
horn.
An astute reader can immediately notice how a script is similar to a procedure. The only
diﬀerence is the emphasis on the “appropriateness” and the “context”, and the lack of the
emphasis on the “goal” as in a procedure. Indeed, a procedure can be seen as a special kind
of script: a much simpler one at that. In fact, Schank deﬁned a special type of script, called
instrumental script:
The crucial diﬀerences between instrumental and situational scripts are with re-
spect to the number of actors, and the overall intention or goal of the script.
This looks just like procedures15. Conversely, other types of scripts, such as situational
script containing sequences of actions in certain scenarios, are much more full-ﬂedged, with
many properties that are absent in procedures. Note again that the term “procedure” dis-
cussed here mainly points to what has been studied in NLP (e.g., natural language instruc-
tions).
Let’s compare some features of a script and a procedure.
A script can have multiple explicit actors.
A procedure usually has only one
implicit actor.
A script can involve more than one person, interacting with each other
in an arbitrarily complex fashion. Each person has diﬀerent viewpoints, and thus diﬀerent
scripts from diﬀerent perspectives. However, most procedures, especially those in the form
15There are still some diﬀerences. For example, Schank claims that instrumental scripts have “very rigid
ordering”, and “each action must be done.” While these are sometimes true, we have seen that steps in a
procedure often have ﬂexible local ordering, and varying degree of importance.
21
of instructions (e.g., recipes, how-to guide) do not have any explicit actor. The actor of the
steps is implied to be the reader or the person following these instructions. Nonetheless, it is
important to recall that instructions are merely a primary focus for research on procedures,
and procedures do not necessarily appear in the form of instructions. Conceivable, there
could be a procedure where two person collaborates to achieve some goal. In such case,
inter-actor interactions present in scripts can also be present in procedures.
A script can meaningfully contain multiple procedures.
First, it is crucial to note
that both scripts and procedures can be hierarchical. Namely, a script or procedure (e.g., eat
at a restaurant) can contain other scripts or procedures (e.g., order food, paying the check).
Since a procedure (as deﬁned in this tutorial) is centered around one goal, it is logical to
assert that its sub-procedures are thus centered around its sub-goals. However, a script can
involve no goal, one goal, or multiple goals. These goals can belong to diﬀerent actors, one
actor but at diﬀerent time stage, or one actor simultaneously. Naturally, the events in the
script that serve any particular goal would form a procedure. Thus, a script can meaningfully
contain multiple procedures. The reverse can also be true, though usually less meaningful.
For example, the procedure of “getting a college degree” might have a step “take classes”,
which could be represented by a script with all the complexities such as multiple actors,
sub-scripts, etc. However, since one would only care about events in this script that serves
the goal “take classes” or its sub-goals, it is much convenient to view the step “take classes”
as another procedure rather than a full-ﬂedged script.
A script is subject to interferences and distractions, while a procedure usually
is not.
One of the most important distinction between scripts and procedures is that
scripts often interact and intertwine with each other, while procedures often do not, barring
hierarchical relations. For example, during a script of “working at a computer at home”,
we inattentive mortals can easily be distracted by another script “watching some YouTube
videos”, or be interfered by another script “attend to the ringing doorbell”. When such
sidetracking happens, script learning becomes extremely complex. What will the actor do?
Do they switch to the other script and just forfeit the current script? Do they deal with the
other script and return? Are there inﬂuences or damages to the current script caused by
the sidetracking? How will the actor deal with that? All these are beyond our scope, since
working with procedures we opt to mostly not deal with them. For example, instructions
such as recipes rarely talk about what happens if things go wrong, or if you suddenly decide
to cook another dish. They are locked in onto the task at hand. However, interferences and
distractions deﬁnitely can happen in procedures. For example, what would happen if you
don’t have certain ingredients? Your produce goes bad? Your house catch ﬁre (god forbid)?
This research question remains largely unexplored.
The key takeaway here is that procedures are a speciﬁc type of scripts, with signiﬁcantly
lower complexity and variation. Scripts are challenging to learn; procedures are relatively
simpler.
8
Recipes
Just like procedures are simpler scripts, recipes are simpler procedures. A strand of work on
procedures focuses exclusively on recipes [Tasse and Smith, 2008, Hamada et al., 2000, Mori
et al., 2014, Kiddon et al., 2015, Yamakata et al., 2016, Zhou et al., 2018, Bisk et al., 2019, Lin
et al., 2020, Donatelli et al., 2021], for good reasons. A special subset of instructions, recipes
22
are abundant and well-structured. They also uses regular, clear, and concise language. They
have a small scope of topics (i.e., food) and involved actions and entities. In fact, much
previous work on recipes touch on the same aspects as we have seen in this tutorial regarding
general procedures. An interesting question is to what extent the data, methods, and ﬁndings
of these pieces of work apply to general procedures. In this section, we will examine several
more inﬂuential pieces of work.
[Mori et al., 2014] tries to represent recipes with a ﬂow graph, comparable to what we
have seen for general procedures in Section 4. The authors of this work obtain recipes from
a recipe site, while one can of course obtain other instructions from sites such as wikiHow.
They represent recipes as a graph, where vertices are food, tools, or actions. Naturally, this
can be generalized to any entities and events in general procedures. The edges stand for
relations between entities, such as equality, subset, application, etc. None of those are really
speciﬁc to recipes, and can likely apply to any procedure.
[Bisk et al., 2019] collects a dataset with hierarchical cooking actions with diﬀerent gran-
ularity. Concretely, the authors ask crowd worker to explain captions from cooking videos in
simple terms, resulting in lower-level sub-steps. The same methodology can be used for gen-
eral procedures using captions from datasets such as HowTo100M [Miech et al., 2019]. Then,
they propose a cloze task by having models predict some omitted actions. This naturally
applies to general procedures too.
[Lin et al., 2020] and [Donatelli et al., 2021] align related or equivalent actions between
two dish recipes of the same dish. Similar to the cases above, the authors’ choice of working
on recipes instead of general procedures is motivated the existing datasets. Their method of
alignment also only assumes linguistic features of instructional language, and not just recipes.
Without scrutinizing every single work on recipes, it does seem that most if not all of
these pieces of work can be easily generalized to general procedures, especially instructions
of non-cooking tasks. However, whether this is the case still requires investigation. Recipes
may oversimplify things. For example, in a recipe there is only one person involved (i.e., the
chef), while in other procedures there might be several (e.g., call the hotel representative to
ask for availability). Having multiple agents in a procedure might require knowledge about
interaction in diﬀerent scenarios. Also, most entities in recipes are either ingredients or tools,
while in general procedures they might vary a lot more (e.g., locales, institutions, etc.). The
ﬂow and expressions in recipes are usually more straightforward, while in other procedures
there might be more complexity (e.g., conditionals, explanations, background information,
etc.). In summary, I believe that future work should attempt consider general procedures
including but not limited to recipes, given the abundant existing web resources.
9
Recap
In this tutorial, we have gone through research on reasoning about procedures in the NLP
community.
We started by appreciating this trendy line of research and brieﬂy learning
its history. Next, we saw that procedural data used to come from human annotation, but
now can also be obtained to-scale from web resources. We then looked at some eﬀorts to
represent procedures. At the heart of each of these representations is granular knowledge
regarding components of procedures. We also studied some work on learning such knowledge.
Then, we examined some practical applications of procedures, with said knowledge equipped.
Finally, we compare procedures with scripts, a superset of procedures, and recipes, a subset of
23
procedures, both of which have also been receiving great attention from the NLP community.
References
[Addis and Borrajo, 2011] Addis, A. and Borrajo, D. (2011). From unstructured web knowledge to plan
descriptions. In Information Retrieval and Mining in Distributed Environments.
[Ahn et al., 2022] Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David, B., Finn, C., Gopalakr-
ishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., et al. (2022). Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in
robotic aﬀordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691.
[Aouladomar, 2005] Aouladomar, F. (2005). A preliminary analysis of the discursive and rhetorical structure
of procedural texts. In Symposium on the Exploration and Modeling of Meaning. Citeseer.
[Artzi and Zettlemoyer, 2013] Artzi, Y. and Zettlemoyer, L. (2013). Weakly supervised learning of semantic
parsers for mapping instructions to actions. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
1:49–62.
[Bielsa and Donnell, 2002] Bielsa, S. and Donnell, M. (2002). Semantic functions in instructional texts: A
comparison betw een english and spanish. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Contrastive Linguistics
Conference, pages 723–732.
[Bisk et al., 2019] Bisk, Y., Buys, J., Pichotta, K., and Choi, Y. (2019). Benchmarking hierarchical script
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4077–4085, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Bosselut et al., 2017] Bosselut, A., Levy, O., Holtzman, A., Ennis, C., Fox, D., and Choi, Y. (2017). Simu-
lating action dynamics with neural process networks. CoRR, abs/1711.05313.
[Branavan et al., 2009] Branavan, S., Chen, H., Zettlemoyer, L., and Barzilay, R. (2009). Reinforcement
learning for mapping instructions to actions. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual
Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of the
AFNLP, pages 82–90, Suntec, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Brown et al., 2020a] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakan-
tan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T.,
Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray,
S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. (2020a).
Language models are few-shot learners. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F., and
Lin, H., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran
Associates, Inc.
[Brown et al., 2020b] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakan-
tan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. (2020b). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901.
[Byrne et al., 2021] Byrne, B., Krishnamoorthi, K., Ganesh, S., and Kale, M. (2021). TicketTalk: Toward
human-level performance with end-to-end, transaction-based dialog systems. In Proceedings of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 671–680, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[Chen and Mooney, 2011] Chen, D. L. and Mooney, R. J. (2011). Learning to interpret natural language nav-
igation instructions from observations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, AAAI’11, page 859–865. AAAI Press.
[Chen et al., 2021] Chen, M., Zhang, H., Ning, Q., Li, M., Ji, H., McKeown, K., and Roth, D. (2021). Event-
centric natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing:
Tutorial Abstracts, pages 6–14, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Chen, 1976] Chen, P. P.-S. (1976). The entity-relationship model—toward a uniﬁed view of data. ACM
Trans. Database Syst., 1(1):9–36.
[Chernov et al., 2016] Chernov, A., Lagos, N., Gall´e, M., and S´andor, A. (2016). Enriching how-to guides
by linking actionable phrases. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on World
Wide Web, WWW ’16 Companion, page 939–944, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE. International
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
24
[Dalvi et al., 2018] Dalvi, B., Huang, L., Tandon, N., Yih, W.-t., and Clark, P. (2018).
Tracking state
changes in procedural text: a challenge dataset and models for process paragraph comprehension. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1595–1604, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Dalvi et al., 2019] Dalvi, B., Tandon, N., Bosselut, A., Yih, W.-t., and Clark, P. (2019). Everything happens
for a reason: Discovering the purpose of actions in procedural text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4496–4505, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[de Rijke et al., 2005] de Rijke, M., Bunt, H., Geertzen, J., and Thijsse, E. (2005). Question answering:
What’s next?
[Delpech and Saint-Dizier, 2008] Delpech, E. and Saint-Dizier, P. (2008).
Investigating the structure of
procedural texts for answering how-to questions. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08), Marrakech, Morocco. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).
[Devlin et al., 2019] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[Doddington et al., 2004] Doddington, G., Mitchell, A., Przybocki, M., Ramshaw, L., Strassel, S., and
Weischedel, R. (2004). The automatic content extraction (ACE) program – tasks, data, and evaluation.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’04),
Lisbon, Portugal. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
[Donatelli et al., 2021] Donatelli, L., Schmidt, T., Biswas, D., K¨ohn, A., Zhai, F., and Koller, A. (2021).
Aligning actions across recipe graphs. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 6930–6942, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[Ellis et al., 2014] Ellis, J., Getman, J., and Strassel, S. M. (2014). Overview of linguistic resources for the
tac kbp 2014 evaluations: Planning, execution, and results. In Proceedings of TAC KBP 2014 Workshop,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, pages 17–18.
[Fritz and Gil, 2011] Fritz, C. and Gil, Y. (2011). A formal framework for combining natural instruction and
demonstration for end-user programming. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on intelligent
user interfaces, pages 237–246.
[Gil, 2015] Gil, Y. (2015). Human tutorial instruction in the raw. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., 5(1).
[Gil et al., 2011] Gil, Y., Ratnakar, V., and Frtiz, C. (2011). Tellme: Learning procedures from tutorial
instruction. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on intelligent user interfaces, pages 227–
236.
[Hamada et al., 2000] Hamada, R., Ide, I., Sakai, S., and Tanaka, H. (2000). Structural analysis of cooking
preparation steps in japanese.
In Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on on Information
Retrieval with Asian Languages, IRAL ’00, page 157–164, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[Han et al., 2019] Han, R., Ning, Q., and Peng, N. (2019). Joint event and temporal relation extraction with
shared representations and structured prediction. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 434–444, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
[Huang et al., 2021] Huang, J., Li, Z., Chen, B., Samel, K., Naik, M., Song, L., and Si, X. (2021). Scallop:
From probabilistic deductive databases to scalable diﬀerentiable reasoning. In Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer,
A., Dauphin, Y., Liang, P., and Vaughan, J. W., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 34, pages 25134–25145. Curran Associates, Inc.
[Huang et al., 2022] Huang, W., Abbeel, P., Pathak, D., and Mordatch, I. (2022). Language models as zero-
shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07207.
[Johnson et al., 2019] Johnson, J., Douze, M., and J´egou, H. (2019). Billion-scale similarity search with
GPUs. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547.
[Kiddon et al., 2015] Kiddon, C., Ponnuraj, G. T., Zettlemoyer, L., and Choi, Y. (2015). Mise en place:
Unsupervised interpretation of instructional recipes. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
25
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 982–992, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Kosseim and Lapalme, 1994] Kosseim, L. and Lapalme, G. (1994). Content and rhetorical status selection in
instructional texts. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural Language Generation.
[Kosseim and Lapalme, 2000] Kosseim, L. and Lapalme, G. (2000). Choosing rhetorical structures to plan
instructional texts. Computational Intelligence, 16(3):408–445.
[Koupaee and Wang, 2018] Koupaee, M. and Wang, W. Y. (2018). Wikihow: A large scale text summariza-
tion dataset. CoRR, abs/1810.09305.
[Ladhak et al., 2020] Ladhak, F., Durmus, E., Cardie, C., and McKeown, K. (2020). WikiLingua: A new
benchmark dataset for cross-lingual abstractive summarization. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 4034–4048, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Lau et al., 2009] Lau, T. A., Drews, C., and Nichols, J. (2009). Interpreting written how-to instructions. In
IJCAI, pages 1433–1438.
[Li et al., 2012] Li, B., Lee-Urban, S., Appling, D. S., and Riedl, M. O. (2012). Crowdsourcing narrative
intelligence. Advances in Cognitive systems, 2(1).
[Lin et al., 2020] Lin, A., Rao, S., Celikyilmaz, A., Nouri, E., Brockett, C., Dey, D., and Dolan, B. (2020).
A recipe for creating multimodal aligned datasets for sequential tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4871–4884, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[Liu et al., 2019] Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer,
L., and Stoyanov, V. (2019). Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692.
[Long et al., 2016] Long, R., Pasupat, P., and Liang, P. (2016). Simpler context-dependent logical forms
via model projections. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1456–1465, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Lyu et al., 2021] Lyu, Q., Zhang, L., and Callison-Burch, C. (2021).
Goal-oriented script construction.
In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Natural Language Generation, pages 184–200,
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Ma et al., 2021] Ma, M. D., Sun, J., Yang, M., Huang, K.-H., Wen, N., Singh, S., Han, R., and Peng, N.
(2021). EventPlus: A temporal event understanding pipeline. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies:
Demonstrations, pages 56–65, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[MacMahon et al., 2006] MacMahon, M., Stankiewicz, B., and Kuipers, B. (2006). Walk the talk: Connecting
language, knowledge, and action in route instructions. Def, 2(6):4.
[Maeta et al., 2015] Maeta, H., Sasada, T., and Mori, S. (2015). A framework for procedural text understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Parsing Technologies, pages 50–60, Bilbao,
Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Mellish and Evans, 1989] Mellish, C. and Evans, R. (1989). Natural language generation from plans. Com-
putational Linguistics, 15(4):233–249.
[Miech et al., 2019] Miech, A., Zhukov, D., Alayrac, J.-B., Tapaswi, M., Laptev, I., and Sivic, J. (2019).
Howto100m: Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million narrated video clips.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2630–2640.
[Miller, 1976] Miller, L. (1976). Natural language procedures: Guides for programming language design. In
International Ergonomics Association Meeting, University of Maryland, volume 1, page 76.
[Momouchi, 1980] Momouchi, Y. (1980). Control structures for actions in procedural texts and PT-chart.
In COLING 1980 Volume 1: The 8th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
[Mori et al., 2014] Mori, S., Maeta, H., Yamakata, Y., and Sasada, T. (2014).
Flow graph corpus from
recipe texts. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), pages 2370–2377, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
[Mujtaba and Mahapatra, 2019] Mujtaba, D. and Mahapatra, N. (2019). Recent trends in natural language
understanding for procedural knowledge. In 2019 International Conference on Computational Science and
Computational Intelligence (CSCI), pages 420–424.
[Mysore et al., 2019] Mysore, S., Jensen, Z., Kim, E., Huang, K., Chang, H.-S., Strubell, E., Flanigan, J.,
McCallum, A., and Olivetti, E. (2019). The materials science procedural text corpus: Annotating materials
synthesis procedures with shallow semantic structures. In Proceedings of the 13th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop, pages 56–64, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
26
[Nguyen et al., 2017] Nguyen, D. Q., Nguyen, D. Q., Chu, C. X., Thater, S., and Pinkal, M. (2017). Sequence
to sequence learning for event prediction. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 37–42, Taipei, Taiwan. Asian Federation of
Natural Language Processing.
[Nighojkar and Licato, 2021] Nighojkar, A. and Licato, J. (2021).
Improving paraphrase detection with
the adversarial paraphrasing task.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7106–7116, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Pareti, 2018] Pareti, P. (2018). Representation and execution of human know-how on the web.
[Pareti et al., 2014a] Pareti, P., Klein, E., and Barker, A. (2014a). A semantic web of know-how: Linked data
for community-centric tasks. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’14 Companion, page 1011–1016, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Pareti et al., 2014b] Pareti, P., Testu, B., Ichise, R., Klein, E., and Barker, A. (2014b). Integrating know-
how into the linked data cloud. In International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge
Management, pages 385–396. Springer.
[Paris et al., 2005] Paris, C., Colineau, N., Shijian, L., and Linden, K. V. (2005). Automatically generating
eﬀective online help.
[Paris et al., 2002] Paris, C., Linden, K. V., and Lu, S. (2002). Automated knowledge acquisition for in-
structional text generation. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference on Computer
Documentation, SIGDOC ’02, page 142–151, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Paris et al., 1995] Paris, C., Vander Linden, K., Fischer, M., Hartley, A., Pemberton, L., Power, R., and
Scott, D. (1995). A support tool for writing multilingual instructions. In International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 14, pages 1398–1404. LAWRENCE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES LTD.
[Park and Motahari Nezhad, 2018] Park, H. and Motahari Nezhad, H. R. (2018). Learning procedures from
text: Codifying how-to procedures in deep neural networks. In Companion Proceedings of the The Web
Conference 2018, pages 351–358.
[Perkowitz et al., 2004] Perkowitz, M., Philipose, M., Fishkin, K., and Patterson, D. J. (2004).
Mining
models of human activities from the web. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on World
Wide Web, WWW ’04, page 573–582, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Puig et al., 2018] Puig, X., Ra, K., Boben, M., Li, J., Wang, T., Fidler, S., and Torralba, A. (2018).
Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8494–8502.
[Raﬀel et al., 2020] Raﬀel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W.,
and Liu, P. J. (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67.
[Rajagopal et al., 2020] Rajagopal, D., Tandon, N., Clark, P., Dalvi, B., and Hovy, E. (2020). What-if I ask
you to explain: Explaining the eﬀects of perturbations in procedural text. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3345–3355, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Regneri et al., 2010] Regneri, M., Koller, A., and Pinkal, M. (2010). Learning script knowledge with web
experiments. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 979–988, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Reimers and Gurevych, 2019] Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings
using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Sakaguchi et al., 2021] Sakaguchi, K., Bhagavatula, C., Le Bras, R., Tandon, N., Clark, P., and Choi, Y.
(2021).
proScript: Partially ordered scripts generation.
In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 2138–2149, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[Schank, 1977] Schank, R. C. (1977).
Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding : an inquiry into human
knowledge structures /. L. Erlbaum Associates ;, Hillsdale, N.J. :.
[Shapiro and Iw´anska, 2000] Shapiro, S. C. and Iw´anska, L. M. (2000). Natural language processing and
knowledge representation: language for knowledge and knowledge for language. Citeseer.
[Takechi et al., 2003] Takechi, M., Tokunaga, T., Matsumoto, Y., and Tanaka, H. (2003). Feature selection
in categorizing procedural expressions. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Information
Retrieval with Asian Languages, pages 49–56, Sapporo, Japan. Association for Computational Linguistics.
27
[Tandon et al., 2019] Tandon, N., Dalvi, B., Sakaguchi, K., Clark, P., and Bosselut, A. (2019). WIQA: A
dataset for “what if...” reasoning over procedural text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 6076–6085, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
[Tandon et al., 2020] Tandon, N., Sakaguchi, K., Dalvi, B., Rajagopal, D., Clark, P., Guerquin, M., Richard-
son, K., and Hovy, E. (2020). A dataset for tracking entities in open domain procedural text. In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 6408–6417,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Tasse and Smith, 2008] Tasse, D. and Smith, N. A. (2008). Sour cream: Toward semantic processing of
recipes. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Tech. Rep. CMU-LTI-08-005.
[Vashishtha et al., 2020] Vashishtha, S., Poliak, A., Lal, Y. K., Van Durme, B., and White, A. S. (2020).
Temporal reasoning in natural language inference.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 4070–4078, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Wahlster et al., 1993] Wahlster, W., Andr´e, E., Finkler, W., Proﬁtlich, H.-J., and Rist, T. (1993). Plan-
based integration of natural language and graphics generation. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 63(1-2):387–427.
[Wanzare et al., 2016] Wanzare, L. D. A., Zarcone, A., Thater, S., and Pinkal, M. (2016). A crowdsourced
database of event sequence descriptions for the acquisition of high-quality script knowledge. In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 3494–
3501, Portoroˇz, Slovenia. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
[Yamakata et al., 2016] Yamakata, Y., Imahori, S., Maeta, H., and Mori, S. (2016). A method for extracting
major workﬂow composed of ingredients, tools, and actions from cooking procedural text. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia Expo Workshops (ICMEW), pages 1–6.
[Yang et al., 2021] Yang, Y., Panagopoulou, A., Lyu, Q., Zhang, L., Yatskar, M., and Callison-Burch, C.
(2021). Visual goal-step inference using wikiHow. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2167–2179, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Zellers et al., 2019] Zellers, R., Holtzman, A., Bisk, Y., Farhadi, A., and Choi, Y. (2019). HellaSwag: Can
a machine really ﬁnish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 4791–4800, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Zhang et al., 2020a] Zhang, H., Chen, M., Wang, H., Song, Y., and Roth, D. (2020a). Analogous process
structure induction for sub-event sequence prediction. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1541–1550, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
[Zhang et al., 2020b] Zhang, L., Lyu, Q., and Callison-Burch, C. (2020b). Reasoning about goals, steps, and
temporal ordering with WikiHow. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 4630–4639, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Zhang et al., 2019] Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K. Q., and Artzi, Y. (2019). Bertscore:
Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675.
[Zhang et al., 2012] Zhang, Z., Webster, P., Uren, V., Varga, A., and Ciravegna, F. (2012). Automatically
extracting procedural knowledge from instructional texts using natural language processing. In Proceedings
of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 520–527,
Istanbul, Turkey. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
[Zhou et al., 2019a] Zhou, B., Khashabi, D., Ning, Q., and Roth, D. (2019a). “going on a vacation” takes
longer than “going for a walk”: A study of temporal commonsense understanding. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3363–3369, Hong Kong, China.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Zhou et al., 2018] Zhou, L., Xu, C., and Corso, J. J. (2018). Towards automatic learning of procedures from
web instructional videos. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
[Zhou et al., 2022] Zhou, S., Zhang, L., Yang, Y., Lyu, Q., Yin, P., Callison-Burch, C., and Neubig, G.
(2022). Show me more details: Discovering hierarchies of procedures from semi-structured web data. In
Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Zhou et al., 2019b] Zhou, Y., Shah, J., and Schockaert, S. (2019b). Learning household task knowledge from
WikiHow descriptions. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Semantic Deep Learning (SemDeep-5), pages
50–56, Macau, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
28
