Title: A Common Evaluation Setting for Just.Ask, Open Ephyra and Aranea QA systems
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1205.1779v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Common Evaluation Setting for Just.Ask,
Open Ephyra and Aranea QA systems
Ricardo Pires
IST - Instituto Superior T´ecnico
rmpp@ist.utl.pt
Abstract. Question Answering (QA) is not a new research ﬁeld in Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP). However in recent years, QA has been
a subject of growing study. Nowadays, most of the QA systems have a
similar pipelined architecture and each system use a set of unique tech-
niques to accomplish its state of the art results. However, many things
are not clear in the QA processing. It is not clear the extend of the impact
of tasks performed in earlier stages in following stages of the pipelining
process. It is not clear, if techniques used in a QA system can be used in
another QA system to improve its results. And ﬁnally, it is not clear in
what setting should be these systems tested in order to properly analyze
their results.
1
Introduction
Evaluating complex systems like QA systems is a very diﬃcult task. Although
QA systems have a similar architecture they use very diﬀerent methods to ac-
complish their goals. As a consequence, it is hard to have a good evaluation
setting for these diﬀerent QA systems. In the last decade several competitions
(TREC and CLEF for example) have been organized year after year to test dif-
ferent systems on the same task. These competitions only evaluate QA systems
extrinsically, e.g., by its overall results. Although these informations are useful,
they cannot be used to evaluate the relevance of the criteria that the diﬀerent
systems use, neither the contribution of each component. The main goal of this
work is to establish a evaluation setting where three QA systems - Just.Ask,
Aranea and Open Ephyra - can be properly evaluated both extrinsically and
intrinsically. Regarding the elaboration of this evaluation setting is important
to know: what types of questions should be used; how do the systems process
their input; what are the important characteristics that the corpora must pos-
sess; what evaluation measures should be used etc. A depth understanding of
the systems at hand is needed in order to recognize the relevant characteristics
for the evaluation process.
The organization of this work is as follows: ﬁrst, Section 2 gives a little ex-
planation about the terminology that will be used throughout the work. The
description of Just.Ask, Aranea and Open Ephyra architectures will presented
in Sections 3, 4, and 5 respectively. Section 6 presents the preliminary evaluation
arXiv:1205.1779v1  [cs.IR]  8 May 2012
of these systems which identiﬁes the most important characteristics to take into
account for a proper future evaluation of these systems. The rationale for the
choose of the best evaluation setting is given in Section 7. Section 8 describes
some problems that occurred in adapting the systems to this setting. Sections
9, 10 and 11 describe respectively, the evaluation of Aranea and extrinsic and
intrinsic evaluation of Open-Ephyra and Just.Ask. Section 12 discusses the fea-
sibility of improvements discovered throughout this work and ﬁnally Section 13
summarizes the topics discussed in this work.
2
Standard QA Architecture
The generalized architecture of a QA system has become standardized [1], con-
sisting of a pipeline with 3 processing stages: Question Interpretation, Passage
Retrieval and Answer Extraction. Question Interpretation module receives the
user question and has two main goals: to formulate queries based in information
extracted from the question - Query Formulation - and to classify the question
by its expected answer type - Question Classiﬁcation.Passage Retrieval module
The formulated queries are next used In the following sections ﬁgures that dis-
play the architectures of Just.Ask, Aranea and Open Ephyra systems may have
diﬀerent names for these three processing stages of the standard QA pipeline.
In order to use the same terminology throughout this work, the standard QA
pipeline terminology will be used in describing those architectures.
3
Just.Ask Architecture
Just.Ask is a traditional ontology-driven system that utilizes the standard QA
pipelined architecture (as showed in Figure 1).
Fig. 1: Just.Ask Architecture
3.1
Question Interpretation
The Question Interpretation module is responsible for understanding the ques-
tion. It receives as input a question from the user, expressed in natural language
and outputs an interpreted question. The interpreted question includes the orig-
inal user question and useful information for the Passage Retrieval module. This
module performs two main tasks: question analysis and question classiﬁcation.
3.1.1
Question Analysis The goal of question analysis is to gather useful
information about the question for the Passage Retrieval module, more con-
cretely: question tokens, token Part-of-speech (POS) tags, headword/compound
headword, headword/compound headword synonyms and the headword lexicon
target (headword category). For this purpose several NLP tools are used. A to-
kenizer is used to identify the various tokens that are in the question. The parse
tree of the question is obtained using the Berkeley Parser [2] trained on the
QuestionBank [3]. The POS tags are also obtained by this method.
As for the question headword, its extraction method consists of traversing
the parse tree of the question top-down using a set of predeﬁned rules.
Regarding compound headword (combination of the question headword with
more words that constitute a single unit of meaning), its method of extraction
consist of identifying a compound word that includes the headword of the ques-
tion. The compound headword helps to classify the question into a ﬁner grained
category.
For questions without headword which are harder to classify properly a set
of lexical and syntactic patterns are used assign to a category to these questions.
The headword category is obtained using a set of hand-written rules to map the
headword to a category.
3.1.2
Question Classiﬁcation Question classiﬁcation purpose is to assign a
predeﬁned semantic category that represents the expected semantic type of the
answer. Just.Ask utilizes the Li and Roth [4] two-layer question taxonomy and
to classify questions uses three types of features: lexical, morpho-syntactic and
semantic features.
For lexical features n-grams and stems are used. Just.Ask uses Unigrams,
Bigrams and Trigrams and each word level n-gram is used as binary feature, in-
dicating that the question contains the n-gram or not. A stem is the grammatical
root of a certain word. Stemming is therefore, a technique that reduces words
to their correspondent stems (for example, after stemming playing and played
would become play). Just.Ask uses stemming after representing the question us-
ing n-grams, to transform each word of a n-gram into its corresponding stem.
Stemming is used in combination with the removal of stop words, to reduce the
total number of features that have to be considered by the classiﬁer.
Regarding morpho-syntactic features, POS tags and the question headword
are used. The process of extraction and use of these features was already de-
scribed in the previous section.
Named entities and semantic headword are used as the main semantic fea-
tures. Just.Ask takes advantage of a Hidden Markov Model based entity rec-
ognizer provided by LingPipe, to extract named entities from questions. After
the extraction, the recognized named entities can be added as features to the
classiﬁer (feature enrichment) or can replace the identiﬁed named entities with
the correspondent entity category (feature reduction). The semantic headword
consists of a improving the headword feature by enriching it semantics. For that
purpose Just.Ask utilizes Wordnet [5] lexical hierarchy to associate a higher-level
semantic concept to a question headword.
As for the classiﬁcation itself, it can be modeled according to two types of
techniques: hand-built rules or machine learning techniques like Support Vector
Machines (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and Naive Bayes.
3.2
Passage Retrieval
The Passage Retrieval module receives an interpreted question from Question
Interpretation Module and outputs the relevant passages (passages which are
more likely to contain an answer) for that question. Based on the question cat-
egory, Just.Ask uses diﬀerent information sources (like Google and Wikipedia)
and diﬀerent query formulation techniques (according to the type of information
source being used). Google and Yahoo web search engines are used to answer
factoid-type questions, while Wikipedia and DBpedia are utilized for answer
non-factoid type questions. After receiving the query results from an informa-
tion source their metadata, such as the rank (importance of each search result)
is locally store for future use.
3.3
Answer Extraction
The Answer Extraction module receives the interpreted question and the relevant
passages from the Interpretation and Passage Retrieval Modules respectively,
and returns the answer to the user question. This module performs two main
tasks: candidate answer extraction and answer selection.
Candidate answer extraction uses diﬀerent extraction techniques accord-
ing to the question type taxonomy utilized in the question classiﬁcation step.
Regular expressions are utilized as an extraction method for NUMERIC type
questions. A machine learning-based named entity recognizer is used for HU-
MAN:INDIVIDUAL type questions. There are questions like “Which animal is
the slowest?”, in which the answer is not an instance of animal but a type of
animal. To extract candidate answers from this type-of questions Just.Ask uses
WordNets hyponymy relations, since the candidate answers for these questions
are often hyponyms of the question headword. For LOCATION:COUNTRY and
LOCATION:CITY type questions it is used a gazetteer (a geographical dictio-
nary) to help extract the candidate answers.
Regarding answer selection, this process is done in three steps. First one is
Candidate Answer Normalization, as the name says, consists of reducing to a
canonical representation answers that belong to the categories NUMERIC:COUNT
and NUMERIC:DATE. The next step is Clustering, which consist of grouping
similar answers together according to some similarity criteria (the overlap dis-
tance or the Levenshtein distance). Each cluster has a score assigned to it, in
which in the most of the cases corresponds to number of members in the cluster.
Also each cluster has a answer representative that is deﬁned as the longest an-
swer in the cluster. The ﬁnal step is Filtering, as the name seems to indicate, it
consists in removing undesired answers according to a certain ﬁltering criteria.
In this case, if any of the answers present in any of the clusters is contained in the
original question, than the whole cluster is discarded. After this ﬁltering process
the representative answer of the cluster with the highest score is returned.
4
Aranea Architecture
Although some modules names are diﬀerent (but at the functional level their
responsibilities are the same), the Aranea system possesses the same pipelined
architecture as Just.Ask (as showed in Figure 2). Aranea is a system based on
two diﬀerent approaches, one searches answers in structured resources and the
other uses data redundancy of unstructured informations sources (like the Web)
to do so. The data redundancy approach is the main approach used in Aranea
and his most known feature.
Fig. 2: Aranea Architecture
4.1
Question Interpretation
Its main purpose is to formulate the queries that will be sent to the Passage
Retrieval module. Besides the baseline query (the question in natural language
submitted by the user) Aranea uses two types of queries: exact and inexact
queries.
An exact query is a reformulation of the baseline query that anticipates the
speciﬁc location of an answer and tries to extract it. Exact queries are gen-
erated using pattern matching rules based on question terms and their POS
tags (matches are done at the morpho-lexical level). For instance, the answer to
the question “Where is The Grand Canyon?” will probably appear next to the
phrase “The Grand Canyon is located in”. Therefore, the correspondent exact
query of that question is ‘‘The Grand Canyon alto is located in ?y”, where ?y
indicates the location of the anticipated answer.
An inexact query is also a reformulation of the baseline query and it is gen-
erated by the same pattern matching rules of exact queries. Thus, each time
a pattern is matched at the morpho-lexical level exact and inexact queries are
generated. Inexact queries are identical to exact queries without the unbound
variable but the query terms are treated as a bag of words. Due to the latter
property inexact queries present the beneﬁt of a broader coverage since an exact
match of the inexact query is not required. The inexact query for the above
example would be ‘‘The Grand Canyon is located”.
To extract answers to questions Aranea uses two methods based on the data
redundancy approach: exploiting the statistical associations between question
and answer terms and extracting answer using reformulation patterns. The ﬁrst
is accomplished by the use of baseline and inexact queries, and the second is
accomplished by the utilization of exact queries.
4.2
Passage Retrieval
The goal of this module is to retrieve passages that are likely to contain an
answer to the user question. For that purpose, the queries created in the previous
module are translated by Aranea into valid Google and Teoma queries, and are
sent to these search engines. Aranea operates only on the snippets returned by
the search engines, since these small text segments represent relevant passages
extracted from the retrieval pages. An amount of 100 snippets are obtained
(when possible) for each query, and a score is attributed to these snippets based
on type of the query (exact queries are given ﬁve times more weight than the
other types).
4.3
Answer Extraction
Its main purpose is to give the user the ﬁnal answer to his question. This mod-
ule has several tasks that are performed by various sub-modules that will be
described in the following sections.
4.3.1
Generating n-grams The system uses n-grams to serve as initial can-
didate answers. Aranea generates Unigrams, Bigrams, Trigrams and Tetragrams
from the snippets obtained by the Document and Passage Retrieval module. To
these n-grams are assigned a score that is equal to the score of the query that
originated them.
4.3.2
Voting A new score is attributed to each n-gram (candidate answer) in
which the new score is the sum of the scores of all occurrences of that n-gram in
the snippet. So n-grams that occur more frequently have higher scores and have
higher chances of being correct answers. However, some of top-scoring candidate
answers are stop-words which are not decent candidate answers.
4.3.3
Filtering In order to deal with previous mentioned problem, Aranea
applies three types of ﬁlters: type-neutral, type-speciﬁc and closed-class. This is
not a perfect ﬁltering process, since the ﬁltering does not eliminate all of the
wrong candidate answers (these will be eliminated in future steps).
The neutral type ﬁlter implements two heuristics that are neutral to the
question type. The ﬁrst one discards candidate answers that begin or end with
stopwords. The second one discards candidate answers that contain words that
are found in the user question. This heuristic is not applied for questions in
which question focus words are likely to appear in the respective answer.
The speciﬁc type ﬁlter as the name suggests implements several rules that
are speciﬁc with respect of the question type. For example, “How old?”, “How
long?”, “How hot?” type questions have a numeric component (in the form of
numeric digits or written numbers), therefore answers that do not contain this
numeric component are discarded.
The closed-class ﬁlter is applied to questions whose possible answers can be
enumerated because they are part of a restricted domain. For instance “What na-
tionality has Conan Obrien?” must be answer with a nationality, so answer can-
didates that are not known nationalities are discarded. Aranea implements ﬁlters
for 17 diﬀerent answer types. Some of these answer types are capitals/population
of countries, the meaning of a certain acronym and the symbol of a certain chem-
ical element. Answer types may also include speciﬁc information about states
of the U.S.A (like area, mottoes, creation date etc) and presidents of the U.S.A
(like when the respective presidency term began, the order in the list of U.S.A
presidents a certain president is etc).
4.3.4
Combining As a consequence of the n-gram generation shorter fre-
quent candidates tend to be favored. In order to diminish this eﬀect unigrams
are used to increase the score of longer answer candidates. More speciﬁcally, the
score of a candidate answer is incremented by sum of the scores of its unigram
components.
Three techniques are used to prevent the increase of score for long answer
candidates that contain words that have no importance to the answer. One of
them consists of adjusting the score of a candidate based on the frequency of
his occurrence (less frequent candidates will have lower scores). The remaining
two are the ﬁltering techniques already described and the inclusion of inverse
document frequency in the formula that calculates a candidate answer score.
4.3.5
Scoring Answer candidates with less common terms should be preferred
over answer candidates with more common terms (since in the Web terms do
not have the same occurrence frequency).
Based in this fact, in order to improve the quality of candidate answers,
Aranea incorporates the inverse document frequency in the score calculation
formula. Statistics collected from the AQUAINT collection are used as “distribu-
tion model” for the distribution of the terms on the Web. The following formula
represents the ﬁnal formula for calculating the score of an answer candidate.
Sc = Sc × 1
|c|
X
w∈c
log
 N
Wcnt

The variable c denotes the set of terms in the candidate answer; N is the total
number of documents in retrieved collection and Wcnt is the number documents
where word w appears.
4.3.6
Reranking The functional purpose of this step is similar to the one of
the type-speciﬁc ﬁlter described earlier. A set of heuristics are used to detect
likely correct answer for speciﬁc question types. The recognized answer forms
will be promoted to the top of the ranked list of answers. Before giving the
ﬁnal answers, Aranea counts the number of snippets that contain the answer
candidates and discards answer candidates which are not contain by at least
two snippets. If all candidate answers are discarded by this process the system
returns “dont know”.
5
Open Ephyra
Opeh Ephyra also shares the same high-level architecture as the previous sys-
tems. However, the main modules use many diﬀerent techniques from the ones
previously described in the last two sections to accomplish their purposes (as it
is shown in Figure 3). The main characteristic of Opeh Ephyra is the utilization
of Patterns Learning techniques to interpret questions and to extract answers.
Also the system is easily extended and highly adaptable to other languages. This
last property was achieved by performing a separation of language-speciﬁc from
language-independent code and by deﬁning patterns that are speciﬁc for the
English language in separate resource ﬁles.
5.1
Question Interpretation
This module receives the user question as input and outputs queries that will
sent to Google and Yahoo search engines. The Question Normalizer sub-module
generates two question representations: one is used in question analysis and the
other is utilized in the generation of queries for the Passage Retrieval phase.
In the ﬁrst representation all verbs are replaced by their inﬁnity form and all
nouns are reduced to the singular form. In the second representation the verb
Fig. 3: Open Ephyra Architecture
constructions are replaced by the verb construction that is expected to appear
in the answer (for example “When did Shakespeare write Hamlet?” is trans-
formed in “Shakespeare wrote Hamlet ?”). In both representations unnecessary
punctuations marks and words/phrases are eliminated.
The ﬁrst question representation is utilized by the Question Analysis sub-
module to obtain an interpretation of a question. This interpretation is extracted
using a set of manually deﬁned question patterns and allows formulating a query
that preserves the question semantics. The extraction patterns are based on
the assumption that the interpretation of a question can be reduce to three
components - A question ask for a property of a target in a speciﬁc context.
After the extraction of these components the Question Interpretation Generator
then transforms the interpretation into a query string.
The Question Analysis sub-module is also responsible for the question clas-
siﬁcation. Ephyra uses a set of 154 answer types arranged in a hierarchy with 44
top-level categories, which can be consulted in [6]. Like Just.Ask, Ephyra uses
lexical, syntactic and semantic features for question classiﬁcation. Unigrams and
bigrams are the only lexical features utilized. As syntactic features are used: the
focus adjective or adverb of the question (only applicable for “How” questions),
the main verb of the question, the question word and another feature that in-
dicates whether the question word serves as determiner of the focus word. The
semantic type of the question focus word (only applicable to“What” or “Which”
questions), is the only semantic features utilized. The focus word is identiﬁed
with a set of manual syntactic patterns. The semantic type of focus word is de-
termined using the Wordnet. As for the classiﬁcation itself, it Ephyra possesses
three diﬀerent type classiﬁers: rule-based, model-based and hybrid (combines
the outputs of the previous classiﬁers using their associated conﬁdence scores).
Using the second question representation, four types of queries are generated.
The Bag of Words sub-module creates queries based on the most important con-
tent words of the question - Keyword queries. The Question Reformulator sub-
module generates queries that correspond to possible formulations of what the
answer sentence might be (like Aranea does with inexact queries) - Reformulation
queries. Although not depicted in Figure 3, Predicate queries are formed from the
predicate verb and its arguments by the Predicate submodule and Term queries
which consist of the question terms (single tokens or expressions) expanded with
semantically related concepts are created by the Term sub-module.
5.2
Passage Retrieval
For factoid and list type questions Ephyra can use Google or Yahoo as sources of
information to retrieve relevant passages. All the previous described query types
are sent either Google or Yahoo to accomplish that goal.
5.3
Answer Extraction
According to the diﬀerent types of questions, diﬀerent strategies for answer ex-
traction and selection are utilized.
5.3.1
Factoid, Deﬁnition and List Questions Two approaches can be
used for extracting candidate answers from these question types: Answer Type
and Answer Pattern. Each one of these approaches is implemented by the cor-
responding ﬁlter presented in Figure 3. The Answer Type Filter applies a NE
tagger to extract candidate answers of all the possible answer types. The Stand-
ford NE recognizer [7] extracts answers of the types person, organization and
location, rule- and list-based taggers extract answers of the remaining types.
The extracted NEs are tokenized and stemmed to identify similar NEs. For each
cluster of similar entities, one representative is chosen and it is assigned to it a
score equal to the number of entities in the cluster. As we can see this approach
is much similar to the one approach used in Just.Ask for the same purpose.
The Answer Pattern Filter uses a set of patterns to extract answers from
text snippets that possess both the target object and the desired property of the
target. These patterns can be hand-built or can be automatically learned using
question-answer pairs as training data. Each question is interpreted and a query
string with the interpretation of the question and its answer is formed. The query
string allows to fetch text snippets that contain answer patterns for a speciﬁc
property. An answer pattern contains the target, the property, an arbitrary string
in between these objects and one token preceding or following the property (to
indicate where it starts or ends). For instance, for the property profession the
following answer pattern could be found: <Target>works as <Property>. The
score of the candidate answers is calculated using a statistical approach that
cumulate the conﬁdence measures of the answer patterns used to extract them
(a detailed description can be found in [8]).
Answer selection is performed by applying consecutively a set of ﬁlters to
the candidate answers to improve their quality (by eliminating worse candidates
answers according to a certain criteria). This ﬁltering process works as follows:
First, the Sorter Filter arranges the extracted candidate answers according to
their score. After this, the Duplicate Filter compares the answers pairwise. When
it detects two similar answers, it drops the lower ranked answer and adds its score
to the score of the higher ranked one. Answers are considered similar, if they
contain content words that have the same stem. The Stopword Filter discards
answers that are not in the correct format. The Result Length Filter ensures
that the list of answers does not exceed the maximum number of 7000 non-
whitespace characters. Also, all answers having scores below a deﬁned threshold
are discarded. If the ﬁnal list of answers is empty, NIL is returned to indicate
that the system could not ﬁnd an answer.
5.3.2
Other Questions Open Ephyra can also deal with questions who are
not of the factoid and list type. However, due to the motives that are going to
be discussed in Section 7 the processing pipeline for this type of questions is
not in the scope of this work and thus will not be described in this section. The
processing pipelining for these type of questions can be consulted in [6].
6
Preliminary Evaluation
6.1
Just.Ask Characteristics
Just.Ask can only receive as input factoid, deﬁnition and explicative questions.
As output the system returns the three best answers to the question at hand.
For each answer it also returns part of the snippet where that answer was found
and the web-address of that snippet.
6.1.1
Corpus Just.Ask was evaluated using a corpus with 200 questions and
the respective correct answers for those questions, the gold-QA corpus. This
corpus is an extended version of the Multisix corpus that suﬀered some manual
modiﬁcations in order to: assure that all questions are valid, there is a good vari-
ety of questions and classify all questions according to the Li and Roth question
type taxonomy. Table 1 shows the number of questions in the corpus according
to the question word.Questions in this corpus have the following format:
Question 1. Q:What is the capital of Somalia - {Mogadishu Somalia} {Mogadishu}
- LOCATION CITY.
So questions are composed of: a question Id, the question itself, a set of pos-
sible answers (each answer is between brackets) and the question classiﬁcation.
Just.Ask uses search engines to search the web for answers to questions,
in order to protect the validity of the answers, these are searched in a local
corpus the Web Corpus. This corpus contains passages that were collect from
Question word Who When Where What Which How Name Other
# Questions
36
25
22
50
8
29
8
22
Table 1: Number of questions in our test corpus per question word.
queries sent to Google for each question present in the gold-QA corpus. The
possible answers for each question in gold-QA were updated in order to match
the answer possibilities conveyed by the Web Corpus. The format of passages is
too extensive to put a concrete example here, however they contain: the question
Id, the question, the URL of passage, the title that is showed in that URL, a short
description of the content of that URL, the passage rank by the system, and a
ﬂag that indicates if the passage were retrieved from Wikipedia of DBpedia.
6.1.2
Baseline Results Using this setting an extrinsically evaluation was
performed. The best results were achieved using only 32 passages from the ones
that were collected from Google. Table 2 presents the overall system results
according to several measures.
# Questions
Correct Wrong No Answer
200
88
87
25
Accuracy Precision Recall
MRR Precision@1
44%
50.3%
87.5%
0.37
35.4%
Table 2: Just.Ask best results.
Question word Correct Incorrect No answer Accuracy
Who
23
13
0
63.89%
When
15
10
0
60.00%
Where
10
12
0
45.50%
What
19
16
15
38.00%
Which
3
4
1
37.50%
How
8
18
3
27.59%
Name
3
2
3
37.50%
Other
7
12
3
31.82%
Total
88
87
25
44.00%
Table 3: Just.Ask results according to the diﬀerent question words.
Table 3 presents the systems results according to the diﬀerent question words.
As can be seen by the last table, Just.Ask has a good performance in questions
that typically involves the name or deﬁnition of a person (What and Who ques-
tions). How questions seem to be challenging for the system since they possess
the worst results.
6.2
Aranea Characteristics
As stated in [9], Aranea can only deal with factoid type questions. As output the
systems returns N possible answers according to the criteria discussed in Section
4.3.6.
6.2.1
Corpus Aranea was evaluated by running the system in the TREC-
9, TREC-10, TREC-11 and TREC-12 questions data sets, respectively. These
questions sets were manually modiﬁed in order to contain only factoid questions.
The question format1 is very simple and only contains the question id, the type
of the question and the question itself. Evaluations of TREC-9 and TREC-10
questions sets use the TIPSTER2 collection as corpus. The documents of that
collection were tagged using SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language).
Evaluations of TREC-11 and TREC-12 use the AQUAINT2 collection as cor-
pora. Its documents were also tagged using SGML. Besides the local corpus, the
web is also utilized as corpus in all evaluations. But since Aranea implements
a caching mechanism that allows the reuse of previously fetched Web pages, all
runs can be replicated (without the issue of obtaining diﬀerent results in each
run).
6.2.2
Baseline Results The Aranea default conﬁguration in which he uses
all query types and retrieves at most 100 snippets per query, was evaluated in set-
ting previously described. Three evaluation measures are used: Mean-Reciprocal-
Rank (MRR), the fraction of questions with correct answers at rank one (C@1)
and the fraction of questions for which a correct answer was found in top ﬁve
returned answers (C@5). The evaluation results can be consulted in Table 4 .
The use of both Google and Teoma engine searches outperforms the use of either
one of the engines individually.
MRR C@1 C@5
Both
0.537 0.477 0.630
Teoma 0.508 0.454 0.591
Google 0.495 0.441 0.581
Table 4: Average of Aranea’s performance in all TREC data sets
1 http://trec.nist.gov/data/qa/T9_QAdata/qa_questions_201-893
2 http://www.nist.gov/tac/data/data_desc.html
6.3
Open Ephyra Characteristics
Like Just.Ask Open Ephyra can receive as input factoid, list and deﬁnition ques-
tion types. As output the systems returns N possible answers according to the
criteria discussed in Section 5.3.1.
6.3.1
Corpus Open Ephyra was evaluated by running the system in the
TREC-2007 question data set. Although the question data set ﬁle is written
in XML the questions have the format as the questions that Aranea uses. This
evaluation uses both the AQUAINT2 and BLOG06 collection3 as local corpus.
AQUAINT2 documents were tagged using XML and BLOG06 documents pos-
sess the raw HTML content from blogs all over the Web wrapped between a
<DOC >...</DOC >pair. Besides these collections the web is also utilized as
corpus in the evaluation. For answering factoids and list questions answers are
extracted from the Web and then are projected onto the local corpus.
6.3.2
Baseline Results Two runs of the system were executed in the de-
scribed evaluation setting with slightly modiﬁcations. Run1 used only the AQUAINT2
corpus, while Run2 combined the AQUAINT2 and BLOG06 corpora and treated
them as unique source of information. Both Run1 and Run2 use the statistical
approach for selecting answers from answer candidates. Regarding the evalua-
tion measures utilized, the F1 measure can be interpreted as an equally weighted
average of precision and recall. The F3 measure in its turn weights recall higher
than precision. The results of these evaluations are described in Table 5. Ana-
lyzing the results the use of both AQUAINT2 and BLOG06 corpus leads to the
best results for list and factoids questions. Also recall is higher when only using
AQUAINT2 as corpus.
Run1
Run1
Corpora
AQUAINT2 AQUAINT2, BLOG06
Unsupported (U)
28
23
Inexact (X)
18
23
Locally Correct (L)
1
1
Factoid Accuracy
0.206
0.208
F1 measure
0.140
0.144
F3 measure
0.189
0.156
Average per-series score
0.181
0.172
Table 5: Results of Open Ephyra evaluation
3 http://www.nist.gov/tac/data/data_desc.html
7
A Common Evaluation Setting
The previous section discussed for each QA system in study, the most impor-
tant characteristics to take into account in their evaluation type of processed
questions, the corpus utilized, evaluation measures used. Based on these charac-
teristics a common evaluation setting can be devised to evaluate all systems in
equal terms.
The ﬁrst aspect that has to be taken in consideration for that purpose, is
that the systems can only be evaluated in equal terms for question types that
all systems process. Aranea is the most restrictive system since it only processes
factoid questions, so all systems can only be evaluated in the processing of this
question type. Based on this assessment, gold-QA seems to be the best option as
question corpora for the common evaluation setting. This decision is motivated
by the fact that gold-QA is composed in its majority by factoid questions and
has a smaller set of other question types (that have to be manually removed
later) compared to the question corpus of Aranea and Open-Ephyra.
Since gold-QA is going to be utilized as question corpus, choosing Web Cor-
pus as the corpus for answers would probably be the best option due to the
fact that Web Corpus is highly adapted to the contents of gold-QA, possess-
ing an average of 3.89 answers per question. Unfortunately this is not a viable
option, since it would not allow to do proper evaluation of the three systems
at hand. For understanding this assertion, it must be remembered that Web
corpus was built with passages obtained from Just.Ask keyword queries sent to
Google. So in order to study the contribution of the several query types used
by Aranea and Open-Ephyra for the QA performance, the passages obtained by
these query types must be utilized. Passages contained in Web Corpus cannot
be used for that purpose since they do not represent faithfully the passages re-
trieved by those query types. Due to this fact, the Web will be used as the corpus
for answers. This decision has some drawbacks, namely the non reproducibility
of obtained results (in other words, the execution of a test in two diﬀerent pe-
riods of time is likely to produce diﬀerent results). To reduce this “inaccuracy”
in results to a minimum, each test that will be conducted is going to be run 5
times and the ﬁnal results of that test are the average of the results obtained in
all runs.
Regarding the evaluation measures, part of the Just.Ask evaluation measures
will be used for that purpose. These measures are the following:
Accuracy, deﬁned as the number of correctly judged items, divided by the
total number of items in the test corpus i.e,
Accuracy = #Correctly judged items
#Items in the test corpus
Precision, deﬁned as the number of relevant items retrieved, divided by the
total number of items retrieved, i.e,
Precision = #Relevant items retrieved
#Items retrieved
Recall, deﬁned as the number of relevant items retrieved, divided by the
total number of relevant items in the test corpus, i.e,
Accuracy =
#Relevant terms retrieved
#Relevant items in the test corpus
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), used to evaluate systems that return
ranked lists of items to a query. The reciprocal rank of an individual query is
deﬁned to be the multiplicative inverse of the rank of the ﬁrst relevant item,
or zero if no relevant items are returned. Thus, the mean reciprocal rank is the
average of the reciprocal rank of every query in a test corpus. More formally, for
a test collection of N queries, the MRR is given by:
MRR = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
ranki
Number of Positive Passages, deﬁned as the number of passages that
contain the answer to a certain question.
Summarizing the contents of this section, the evaluation setting where all
three system will be compared has gold-QA as the question corpus, the Web
as answer corpus and the previously described evaluation measures are used for
evaluate the performance of the systems.
The next section will explain the rationale beyond the decision of evaluation
Aranea apart from Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra, and why the scope of the evalu-
ation of Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra will also include the evaluation of deﬁnition
questions (this will be the setting used in the evaluations perfomed in Sections10
and 11).
8
Adaptation to the Common Evaluation Setting
The necessary changes in all systems were made in order for the systems to be
evaluated in the deﬁned evaluation setting, more speciﬁcally, the systems had to
be adapted to process gold-QA corpus and the evaluation measures had to be
implemented in each one of the systems. After these adaptations were made, a
few preliminary tests that were conducted to assure that the systems could be
evaluated in the deﬁned setting showed some problems with Aranea and with
Open-Ephyra.
Regarding Aranea, although the system seemed completely operational it
only gave answers to a few speciﬁc question types (described in Section 9).
Besides this fact, questions that according to system documentation should pro-
duce a correct answer, produced no answer at all. A depth analysis of the system
code was performed to understand the source of this problem that causes a se-
vere deterioration in system performance, however, with no success. The system
authors were also consulted to provide advice in solving this problem. Unfortu-
nately, no piece of advice was provided by the authors since they stopped doing
research with Aranea ﬁve years ago. Due to the incapability of solving this issue,
Aranea produces much worse overall results when compared to Just.Ask and
Open-Ephyra. For that reason, the evaluation of Aranea will be described in a
diﬀerent section from the evaluation of the remaining systems. Since Aranea will
be evaluated in a more “restricted setting” the evaluation of Just.Ask and Open-
Ephyra no longer needs to be restricted to the evaluation of factoid questions.
So the evaluation of these two systems will have has scope factoid and deﬁnition
questions.
As for Open-Ephyra, although the system is described as capable of using
Google as information source, in practice that is not possible. Every time query is
sent to Google a error occurs related with the type of arguments that are passed
to the Google API. This fact seems to indicate that the error occurs due to an
update in Google’s API to which the necessary modiﬁcations were not made in
Open-Ephyra to work with the new API. Nevertheless this incapability of using
Google it is not restrictive to the evaluation of Open-Ephyra and Just.Ask, since
they both can be evaluated in equal terms if Yahoo is used as information source.
9
Aranea Evaluation
The best results of Aranea were achieved using the system default setting -
Google is used as information source and the system tries to obtain a 100 passages
per query. Table 6 presents the system overall results. In a total of 200 questions,
Aranea only attempted to answer 7 questions. From these, 4 were correct and 3
were wrong. Being so, the system attained 43% of precision in those 7 questions
and 2% of accuracy regarding all the questions in the question corpus.
Measures
Results
Correct Questions
4
Wrong Questions
3
No Answer
193
Accuracy
2%
Precision
43%
Recall
3.5%
Table 6: Aranea extrinsic evaluation
The 7 questions that Aranea attempted to answer are:
– “What is the capital of Somalia?”;
– “What is the capital of Alaska?”;
– “What is the capital of Chechnya?”;
– “Who was the third U.S. President?”;
– “When did Alaska become a state?”;
– “What does the acronym ”PERS” stand for?”;
– “What is the capital of Madagascar?”;
As it can be seen these questions ask information regarding: a president of
the U.S.A, capitals of several countries, creation date of an American state and
the meaning of a certain acronym. Aranea uses the closed-class ﬁlter(described in
sub-section 4.3.3) to ﬁlter answer candidates for these question types. In order
to see if this ﬁlter can be used in Just.Ast and Open-Ephyra to improve the
results to these question types, these 7 questions were submitted to the systems.
In this experiment, Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra use the same setting as Aranea,
except they used Yahoo as information source (due to the problem described in
the previous section). Table 7 shows the comparison of the performance of the
three systems for those questions.
Aranea Just.Ask Open-Ephyra
Correct Questions
4
7
7
Wrong Questions
3
0
0
Table 7: Comparison between Aranea, Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra
Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra clearly outperform Aranea for these questions by
answering them all correctly. Based on these results it can be concluded that
techniques used by Just.Ask or Open-Ephyra answer to these types of questions
could be used in Aranea to improve the system performance. However it is
hard to specify which techniques from these two systems could be useful for
Aranea, since both systems do not have a speciﬁc approach towards these types
of questions.
As a ﬁnal remark of this section, it is important to say that no intrinsic
evaluation and comparison of Aranea’s modules with the respective modules of
the remaining systems is performed, due to problems in obtaining important data
to do those tasks (namely, passages retrieved and candidate answers selected by
the system).
10
Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra Extrinsic Evaluation
This section evaluates and compares the overall results of Open-Ephyra and
Just.Ask according to diﬀerent parametrizations in the number of retrieved pas-
sages and the utilization/non-utilization of features of the systems. All these
evaluations and comparisons will be performed using the setting deﬁned in Sec-
tion 7 and will use Yahoo as information source (due to the reasons mentioned
in Section 8).
10.1
Best Performance
In their default setting4 Open-Ephyra retrieves up to 800 passages per query,
while Just.Ask needs a speciﬁc parametrization of the maximum number of
passages that a query can retrieve. Previous evaluations of Just.Ask performed
in [10] indicate that Just.Ask performs best when using 64 as the maximum
number of passages to retrieve. Experiments were conducted in order to verify if
this assessment is valid for the present evaluation setting. Since the assessment is
valid in the current evaluation setting in this and following sub-sections Just.Ask
is going to be evaluated using 64 passages as the maximum number of passages
to retrieve.
Several experiments were conducted to perceive if the default setting of Open-
Ephyra (the 800 passages per query) attains the system best results. When in-
creasing the number of passages retrieved, no improvement of the results were
veriﬁed. The decreasing of the number of passages retrieved led to some interest-
ing results. When using more than 100 passages per query the default settings
results remain unchanged, while when using less that 50 passages the results
suﬀered a major degradation. Additional experiments led to the conclusion that
64 passages is the lowest number of passages that can be utilized to achieve
the system best results. Since both Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra attain their best
results using 64 passages, they can be evaluated and compared under the exact
same conditions. The results of the evaluation are depicted in Table 8.
64 Passages
Measures
Just.Ask Open-Ephyra
Correct Questions
73
79
Wrong Questions
103
107
No Answer
24
14
Accuracy
36.5%
39.5%
Precision
41.5%
42.4%
Recall
88%
93%
Table 8: Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra extrinsic evaluations
It can be seen by the table that Open-Ephyra has slightly better performance
than Just.Ask. Only in the number of wrong questions answered Just.Ask attains
the best performance since Open-Ephyra have 4 more additional wrong questions
relatively to number of wrong questions answered by Just.Ask. We can conclude
that in overall Open-Ephyra is the best QA system from the analyzed systems
(since it is able to answer more questions correctly which is the “main” goal of
a QA system).
4 We understand by default setting, the set of parametrizations that a system possesses
when it is obtained from the respective authors.
10.2
Overall Impact of Open-Ephyra Answer Extraction Techniques
As it was described in sub-section 5.3.1 Open-Ephyra can use two approaches -
Answer Type and Answer Pattern - to extract from obtained passages candidate
answers, from which the ﬁnal answer is going to be selected. To understand the
impact of each approach to the performance of the system, the system was
evaluated using only one approach to extract answers. Table 9 presents the
results of this evaluation.
Open-Ephyra - 64 passages
Measures
Answer Type Pattern Type
Correct Questions
73
50
Wrong Questions
104
64
No Answer
23
86
Accuracy
36.5%
25%
Precision
41%
44%
Recall
88.5%
57%
Table 9: Open-Ephyra extrinsic evaluation using each one of the answer extraction
approaches
Analyzing the table it becomes clear that the Answer Type approach has a
major impact in the performance of Open-Ephyra. When solely used this ap-
proach attains slightly worse results when compared to the results of the system
depicted in Table 8, where both approaches are used to obtain those results.
More speciﬁcally less 6 correct answers and less 3 wrong answers which consec-
utively results in lower accuracy, precision and recall. Another interesting fact
is that the use of the Answer Type approach produces almost identical results
as the Just.Ask evaluation (Table 8). This is probably due to the high similar-
ity between the approaches used in both systems to extract candidate answers.
So since the use of both Answer Type and Pattern Type approaches leads to a
better performance of Open-Ephyra over Just.Ask, the following hypothesis can
be formulated:
Hypothesis 1 - Just.Ask performance can be improved by the utilization of the
Pattern Type approach.
10.3
Overall Impact of Open-Ephyra Query-Types
Section 5.1 describes the several types of queries that Open-Ephyra uses. Since
both systems only have have one query type in common - Keyword Queries - it
is interesting to see from an overall perspective what is the impact of only using
Keyword Queries in Open-Ephyra results, and if these results are similar to the
one obtained by Just.Ask. Table 10 shows the results of the evaluation of Open
Ephyra using only Keyword Queries and the results of Just.Ask from Table 8.
64 Passages
Measures
Just.Ask Open-Ephyra - Keyword Queries
Correct Questions
73
72
Wrong Questions
103
113
No Answer
24
15
Accuracy
36.5%
36%
Precision
41.5%
39%
Recall
88%
92.5%
Table 10: Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra extrinsic evaluation using the only query type
in common - Keyword Queries
As it was expected, the solely usage of Keyword Queries led to slightly worse
results compared to the ones where all query types were used (Table 8). More
speciﬁcally less 7 correct answers and more 6 wrong answers which consecutively
results in lower accuracy, precision and recall. When comparing both columns of
the table we can see that the performance of both systems is similar, although
Just.Ask attains in overall better results. More speciﬁcally Just.Ask has a higher
accuracy and precision (due to more correct questions and less wrong questions)
however, Open-Ephyra has a higher recall (due to the high number of wrong
questions). Since by using several types of queries Open-Ephyra obtains better
results than Just.Ask we can formulate the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2 - Just.Ask performance can be improved by the utilization of
one or more of the following query types used by Open-Ephyra: Term Queries,
Reformulation Queries, Predicate Queries and Interpretation Queries.
11
Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra Intrinsic Evaluation
This section performs an evaluation of the 3 processing steps of the QA pipeline -
Question Interpretation, Passage Retrieval and Answer Extraction - of Just.Ask
and Open-Ephyra. The detailed analysis of these steps will allow to validate the
hypotheses formulated in the previous section. All evaluations performed in this
section use the setting deﬁned in Section 7, Yahoo as information source and 64
as the number of maximum passages to be retrieved.
11.1
Question Interpretation
In this step the only thing that could be evaluated is the Question Classiﬁcation
task. However this evaluation is not going to be performed due to the follow-
ing reason: Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra use diﬀerent taxonomies for classifying
questions. This fact do not allow the evaluation of both systems under the same
conditions, so improvement strategies discovered from this evaluation cannot be
applied to the systems. Detailed information about Just.Ask Question Classiﬁ-
cation performance can be found in [11], while a simple analysis of Open-Ephyra
Question Classiﬁcation performance can be found in [6].
11.2
Passage Retrieval
The analysis of this step is performed in order to have a speciﬁc of idea of:
the number of relevant passages retrieved by each system, the ranking5) of the
passages retrieved and what can be done to improve these results.
Table 11 presents for each query performed by each system method the num-
ber of questions for each there is at least one positive passage (#Question1+P osP assage),
the mean reciprocal rank of the ﬁrst positive passage for all questions (MRRALLQ)
and the mean reciprocal rank of the ﬁrst positive passage only for the questions
for which at least one positive passage exists (MRRQP OSP ASSAGES).
64 Passages
QA System #Question1+P osP assage MRRALLQ MRRQP OSP ASSAGES
Just.Ask
157 (78.5%)
0.36
0.46
Open-Ephyra
171 (85.5%)
0.56
0.66
Table 11: Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra passage retrieval results
Through inspection of the table it is clearly that Open-Ephyra outperforms
Just.Ask in this step. Open-Ephyra obtains more 7% of positive passages and
both MRRALLQ and MRRQP OSP ASSAGES values indicate that Open-Ephyra
obtains passages with an higher ranks relatively to Just.Ask’s passages. The
diﬀerence in the obtained results seems to be related with the several query
types used by Open-Ephyra.
In order to determine the veracity of the last statement another evaluation
as performed where Just.Ask parametrization remains the same as above, and
Open-Ephyra only uses Keyword Queries. Table 12 depicts the results of this
evaluation.
64 Passages
QA System
#Question1+P osP assage MRRALLQ MRRQP OSP ASSAGES
Just.Ask
157 (78.5%)
0.36
0.46
Open-Ephyra - Keyword Query
157 (78.5%)
0.33
0.42
Table 12: Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra (using only Keyword Queries) passage retrieval
results
We can see that in this parametrization both systems obtain the same number
of positive passages and Just.Ask obtains passages with slightly higher ranks
5 The ranking of a passage is a measure of the “quality” of the passage, since it
indicates the reliability of the source from which the passage was extracted. So a
high rank indicates high source reliability.
relatively to Open-Ephyra’s passages. These results conﬁrm that the results in
Table 11, are indeed obtained obtained due to the several query types used by
Open-Ephyra. This fact allows us to state that Hypothesis 2 is valid.
Since we established that Just.Ask can be improved by the the use of Open-
Ephyra’s query types, it would be useful to understand which query types have
more impact on the performance. Table 13 help us in this endeavor, by showing
for the 171 positive passages retrieved in Table 11 what were the query types
that originated them. The query types are organized by a decreasing order of
their impact on the performance.
171 Positive Passages
Query Types
Positive Passages Obtained
Reformulation Queries
60
Keyword Queries
43
Interpretation Queries
40
Term Queries
28
Predicate Queries
0
Table 13: Query types of the positive passages retrieved in Table 11
As we can see Reformulation, Interpretation and Term Queries are impor-
tant for Open-Ephyra passage retrieval performance, so the implementation of
these query types in Just.Ask should lead to similar results to the ones ob-
tained by Open-Ephyra. With this information Hypothesis 2 is transformed in
the following conclusion: Conclusion 1 -Just.Ask performance can be improved
by the utilization of Reformulation, Interpretation and Term queries used by
Open-Ephyra.
11.3
Answer Extraction
The analysis of this step is performed in order to have a speciﬁc of idea of
the performance of the main two stages in this process - Candidate Answer
Extraction(CAE) ans Answer Selection(AS) - and what can be done to improve
their results.
Table 14 and 15 present for Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra respectively, the num-
ber of questions for which a certain amount of answers was extracted. For those
questions, the tables show the amount in which the CAE stage was successful,
and the amount in which the AS stage was successful. We consider the CAE
stage as being successful when it extracts at least one correct answer. Similarly,
the AS stage is successful when one of the extracted correct answers is selected
as ﬁnal answer.
Regarding Table 14 we can see that the ratio CAE Success/AS Success in-
creases with the increasing of extracted answers. Performing a more detalied
Just.Ask
Extracted Answers #Question CAE Success AS Success
0
25
-
-
1 to 10
22
1
1
11 to 20
15
5
4
21 to 40
58
37
27
41 to 60
21
15
14
61 to 100
36
36
30
100 to 150
16
13
11
151 to 230
7
7
6
All
200
114
93
Table 14: Just.Ask answer extraction results
Open-Ephyra
Extracted Answers #Question CAE Success AS Success
0
15
-
-
10 to 50
68
45
30
51 to 80
36
26
16
81 to 100
17
10
6
101 to 120
15
13
11
121 to 140
10
7
7
141 to 160
12
11
10
161 to 200
12
10
10
201 to 220
5
2
2
221 to 250
5
3
3
251 to 270
1
1
1
271 to 300
3
2
2
301 to 380
1
1
1
All
200
131
99
Table 15: Open-Ephyra answer extraction results
analysis the results, when the number of extracted candidate answers is low (be-
tween 1 and 10) if it happens to contain the correct answer (that is, the CAE
stage was successful), then the AS stage chooses it as ﬁnal answer. When the
number of candidate answers is between 41 and 60 or above 100, if the CAE stage
is successful the AS stage also tends do be successful. The remaining results do
not show any particular relationship between the CAE and AS stages.
As for Table 15 like Just.Ask, we can see that the ratio CAE Success/AS
Success increases with the increasing of extracted answers. Performing a more
detalied analysis the results, when the number of candidate answers is between
161 and 380, if the CAE stage is successful the AS stage is also successful. When
the number of candidate answers is between 101 and 160, if the CAE stage is
successful the AS stage also tends do be successful. The remaining results do not
show any particular relationship between the CAE and AS stages.
When comparing both tables two main considerations come to mind. First, it
can be clearly seen that Open-Ephyra extracts a larger number of answers (up to
380 answers) when compared to Just.Ask (which extracts only up to 230). Second
and most important, Open-Ephyra outperforms Just.Ask both in the CAE step
by extracting 17 more candidate answers and in the AS step by selecting 6
more ﬁnal answers. This fact seems to corroborate the validity of Hypothesis
1 and also allows to draw a new conclusion: Conclusion 2 - Just.Ask answer
selection approach can be improved by using the answer selection approach of
Open-Ephyra.
The better performance of Open-Ephyra CAE step seems to indicate that
Hypothesis 1 is a valid hypothesis. To conﬁrm this “validity” the extraction
methods that Open-Ephyra used for achieving the results presented in the “CAE
Success” column in Table 15, were analyzed. Table 16 presents the results of this
analysis.
Open-Ephyra - Candidate Answer Extraction
Extracted Answers #Question Pattern Approach Answer Type Approach Both Approaches
0
15
-
-
-
10 to 50
68
7
35
3
51 to 80
36
4
17
5
81 to 100
17
2
7
1
101 to 120
15
2
11
10
121 to 140
10
1
1
5
141 to 160
12
2
0
9
161 to 200
12
1
1
8
201 to 220
5
0
1
1
221 to 250
5
0
0
3
251 to 270
1
0
1
0
271 to 300
3
0
0
2
301 to 380
1
0
1
0
All
200
19
65
47
Table 16: Results of the diﬀerent Open-Ephyra approaches in the CAE step
The table conﬁrms the results found in Section 10.2, i.e, the Answer Type
approach is the approach that leads to the extraction of more candidate answers
(65 candidate answers). Regarding the Pattern approach, when its solely used it
leads to the extraction of 19 candidate answers and when its used in combination
with the Answer Type approach it enables the system to extract 47 candidates
answers. The use of the Pattern approach (both solely and in conjunction with
the Answer Type approach) allows the system to extract 66 candidates, which
practically the same amount of answers extract by the Answer Type approach.
At this moment we can state that the use of the Pattern Approach con-
tributes signiﬁcantly to the results obtained by Open-Ephyra in the CAE step,
and therefore we can say that Hypothesis 1 is a valid hypothesis. With this
another conclusion can be made: Conclusion 3 - Just.Ask performance can be
improved by the utilization of the Pattern Type approach (solely and in conjunc-
tion with the Question Classiﬁcation approach).
12
Feasibility Study of Suggested Improvements
Throughout the last section three improvement strategies for Just.Ask were dis-
covered based on strategies used by Open-Ephyra. This section provides a high
level assessment of “how hard” is to implement those improvements in Just.Ask.
For the following discussing it must be kept in mind that both Open-Ephyra
and Just.Ask are written in Java.
The three improvements that were suggested in the last section are:
– Improvement 1 - Just.Ask performance can be improved by the utilization
of Reformulation, Interpretation and Term queries used by Open-Ephyra.
– Improvement 2 - Just.Ask answer selection approach can be improved by
using the answer selection approach of Open-Ephyra.
– Improvement 3 - Just.Ask performance can be improved by the utilization
of the Pattern Type approach (solely and in conjunction with the Question
Classiﬁcation approach).
12.1
Improvement 1
The implementation of Reformulation queries is not that hard and could be
achieved exactly like Open-Ephyra implemented them. Three classes would be
necessary for that: QuestionReformulation (the class that represents the ques-
tion reformulation); Question Reformulator (the class that deals with the actual
creation of question reformulations from a set of deﬁned patterns) and QueryRe-
formulatorGenerator (the class that knows how to make queries for formulations
of a question). The ﬁrst two classes could easily copied and pasted from Open-
Ephyra into the package where are the classes that deal with the interpretation of
the user question (some modiﬁcations would have to be made in order for them
to work properly). The QueryReformulatorGenerator could also be copied and
paste from Open-Ephyra although some major modiﬁcations would have to be
made so that the class could work using Just.Ask’s QueryFormulator interface.
The implementation of Interpretation queries follows the same reasoning as
Reformulation queries, so it will not be described.
The implementation of Term queries also fallows the same reasoning as Re-
formulation queries, but deserves a special mention. In Open-Ephyra The class
TermExtractor (which extract the terms of a question) uses a set of NLP tools
for that purpose that Just.Ask do not possess. The class could be implemented
in Just.Ask trough regular copy/paste, but the libraries corresponding to the
NLP tools used by Open-Ephyra would have to copied and integrated as well.
12.2
Improvement 2
The implementations of the several ﬁlters that Open-Ephyra use to select the
ﬁnal answer can be implemented in Just.Ask using a “copy/paste” approach. The
way how candidate answers in Just.Ask are represented would have to be changed
to the expected representation type that those ﬁlters receive as argument. In its
turn, the way how the ﬁlters return their output would have to be changed so
that Just.Ask could continue to presents the results in the same manner.
12.3
Improvement 3
The Pattern Type approach is probably the easiest improvement to implement
since, it can be achieved by a direct copy/paste with minor modiﬁcations in
order for the class work properly in Just.Ask.
13
Conclusions
In this work were introduced three QA systems - Just.Ask, Aranea and Open
Ephyra. Just.Ask is an ontology driven system that uses and combines a lot of
state or the art strategies. In Just.Ask questions are interpreted with the help
of NLP tools and its classiﬁcation is performed using rule- or machine learning
based- techniques. Answers can be obtained using diﬀerent information sources
(as Google and Wikipedia) and diﬀerent query formulation techniques. Correct
answers are extracted using a named entity recognizer.
Aranea is a system based on two diﬀerent approaches, one searches answers
in structured resources and the other uses data redundancy of unstructured
information sources (like the Web) to do so. In the later, several types of queries
are formulated to exploit the redundancy factor. Relevant passages are retrieved
by using the previous queries, and n-grams are generated for these passages.
Answer candidates then go through a ﬁltering process in order to improve their
quality, and ﬁnally, several heuristics are utilized to extracted answers from
answer candidates.
Open Ephyra is a system based on two diﬀerent approaches for answer ex-
traction. Pattern learning techniques are used to learn patterns about ques-
tions/answers, which facilitates the extraction of correct answers for patterns
that are recognized. This is the most notable feature of Open Ephyra. Answer
type extraction is used in the same fashion as Question Classiﬁcation is utilized
in Just.Ask, e.g., answers are extracted based on the type of answer that is
expected.
A preliminary evaluation of these three systems allowed to identify the most
important characteristics to take into account for a proper evaluation of these
systems. These characteristics are: the type of processed questions, the corpus
utilized and the evaluation measures used. Based on these characteristics it was
concluded that all systems would be evaluated regarding factoid questions and
the best setting for doing so was composed by: gold-QA as the question corpus,
the Web as answer corpus and Just.Ask’s evaluation measures for evaluate the
performance of the systems. Diﬃculties in adapting Aranea to this setting led to
the decision of performing Aranea’s evaluation apart form the evaluation of the
other systems. This decision allowed that the evaluation of both Open-Ephyra
and Just.Ask could be extended to deﬁnition type questions.
Regarding Aranea’s evaluation, some problems occurred when trying to put
Aranea working properly. These problems resulted in a degradation of the sys-
tems performance since the system only gave answers to a very short number of
questions. For these questions both Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra obtained better
performance relatively to Aranea.
The extrinsic and intrinsic evaluation of Just.Ask and Open-Ephyra identiﬁed
Open-Ephyra as the best QA system evaluated in this work. Some ideas for im-
provement of Just.Ask - new query types, new answer extraction approaches and
new answer selection approaches - were also obtained in this process.Although
these improvement ideas were determined for Just.Ask they can be applied to
other QA systems that have similarities with Just.Ask. More speciﬁcally, QA
systems that only use Keyword Type queries and QA systems that extract can-
didate answers with the Question Classiﬁcation approach.
References
1. Jurafsky, D., Martin, J.H.: Speech and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (Pren-
tice Hall Series in Artiﬁcial Intelligence). 2 edn. Prentice Hall (May 2008)
2. Petrov, S., Klein, D.: Improved inference for unlexicalized parsing. In: Human
Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics; Proceedings of the Main Conference,
Rochester, New York, Association for Computational Linguistics (April 2007) 404–
411
3. Judge, J., Cahill, A., van Genabith, J.: Questionbank: creating a corpus of parse-
annotated questions. In: ACL-44: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, USA, Association for Computational
Linguistics (2006) 497–504
4. Li, X., Roth, D.: Learning question classiﬁers. In: Proceedings of the 19th interna-
tional conference on Computational linguistics, Morristown, NJ, USA, Association
for Computational Linguistics (2002) 1–7
5. Fellbaum, C., ed.: WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press (1998)
6. Schlaefer, N., Ko, J., Betteridge, J., Pathak, M.A., Nyberg, E., Sautter, G.: Se-
mantic extensions of the ephyra qa system for trec 2007. In: In Proceedings of
TREC. 2007. (2007) 4–5
7. Finkel, J.R., Grenager, T., Manning, C.: Incorporating non-local information into
information extraction systems by gibbs sampling. In: Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA, Association for Computational Linguistics (2005) 363–370
8. Schlaefer, N., Gieselman, P., Sautter, G.: The ephyra qa system at trec 2006. In:
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC). (2006) 2–4
9. Lin, J.:
An exploration of the principles underlying redundancy-based factoid
question answering. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 25 (April 2007) 1–15
10. Silva, J., Coheur, L., Mendes, A.: Just.ask - a multi-pronged approach to question
answering. Paper submitted to the Internacional Journal on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Tools in October 2010
11. Silva, J., Coheur, L., Mendes, A., Wichert, A.: From symbolic to sub-symbolic
information in question classiﬁcation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review (2010)
