Title: Comprehensive Implementation of TextCNN for Enhanced Collaboration between Natural Language Processing and System Recommendation
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.09718v1
--------------------------------------------------

SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
Comprehensive Implementation of TextCNN for Enhanced Collaboration between 
Natural Language Processing and System Recommendation 
 
Xiaonan Xu1,* Zheng Xu2, Zhipeng Ling3, Zhengyu Jin4, ShuQian Du5 
1*Independent  Researcher,Northern Arizona University,Flagstaff, USA 
2Computer Engineering,Stevens Institute of Technology,hoboken, NJ,USA 
3Computer Science,University of Sydney,Sydney, Australia 
4Informatics,Univeristy of California, Irvine,Irvine ,CA,USA 
5Information Studies, Trine University, Phoenix, Arizona, AZ,USA 
*Corresponding author :xiaonanxu5@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT Natural Language Processing (NLP) is an important branch of artificial intelligence 
that studies how to enable computers to understand, process, and generate human language. Text 
classification is a fundamental task in NLP, which aims to classify text into different predefined 
categories. Text classification is the most basic and classic task in natural language processing, and most 
of the tasks in natural language processing can be regarded as classification tasks. In recent years, deep 
learning has achieved great success in many research fields, and today, it has also become a standard 
technology in the field of NLP, which is widely integrated into text classification tasks. Unlike numbers 
and images, text processing emphasizes fine-grained processing ability. Traditional text classification 
methods generally require preprocessing the input model's text data. Additionally, they also need to 
obtain good sample features through manual annotation and then use classical machine learning 
algorithms for classification. Therefore, this paper analyzes the application status of deep learning in the 
three core tasks of NLP (including text representation, word order modeling, and knowledge 
representation). This content explores the improvement and synergy achieved through natural language 
processing in the context of text classification, while also taking into account the challenges posed by 
adversarial techniques in text generation, text classification, and semantic parsing. An empirical study on 
text classification tasks demonstrates the effectiveness of interactive integration training, particularly in 
conjunction with TextCNN, highlighting the significance of these advancements in text classification 
augmentation and enhancement. 
 
Keyword list Natural Language Processing (NLP);Text classification-CNN;Deep learning;Semantic 
parsing 
 
Introduction 
Natural language processing (NLP), an important branch of artificial intelligence, has 
developed rapidly in recent years, driven by deep learning. Deep neural networks, such as 
recurrent neural networks (RNNS) and convolutional neural networks (CNNS), have 
demonstrated excellent performance in semantic understanding, speech recognition and machine 
translation, but they also face security risks such as anti-sample and poison attacks. In many 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
cases, the diversity, complexity and distribution of information in text form makes traditional 
manual analysis methods ineffective, forcing people to look for new solutions. Intelligence texts 
cover a wide range of media and sources, including news reports, spy reports, battlefield reports, 
government documents, social media posts and more. These texts can contain information from 
all parts of the world and at all times, making them highly timely and valuable. However, this 
diversity also presents significant challenges, as texts from different sources may use different 
formats, languages and phrases, leading to fragmentation of information and increased difficulty 
in analysis. In addition, intelligence texts themselves are often highly specialised, containing a 
large number of technical terms, acronyms and domain-specific languages, which places higher 
professional demands on analysts and therefore requires a more intelligent and efficient approach 
to this problem. 
Traditional text classification methods generally need to pre-process the text data of the 
input model, in addition to obtaining good sample features through manual annotation, and then 
use classical machine learning algorithms to classify them. Similar methods include Naive Bayes 
(NB), K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), etc. The level of feature 
extraction has an even greater impact on text classification than on image classification, and 
feature engineering in text classification is often time consuming and computationally expensive. 
After 2010, the method of text classification gradually shifted to deep learning model. Deep 
learning applied to text classification maps feature engineering directly to the output by learning 
a series of nonlinear transformation patterns, thus integrating feature engineering into the process 
of model fitting, and has achieved great success once applied. Therefore, this paper delves into 
the current state of applying deep learning to the fundamental tasks of Natural Language 
Processing (NLP), which encompass text representation, word order modeling, and knowledge 
representation. It further explores strategies for enhancing natural language processing 
technology, specifically through the utilization of text classification algorithms, in response to 
the challenges posed by attack methodologies in text generation, text classification, and semantic 
parsing. The effectiveness of an integrated interactive training approach is corroborated through 
empirical studies conducted on text classification tasks. This comprehensive analysis integrates 
insights from "Classification Augmentation and Synergy through TextCNN and Natural 
Language Processing," underscoring the significance of these advancements in the NLP field. 
2. Application of Deep Learning in Natural Language Processing 
With the continuous development of computer and artificial intelligence, Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) technology, as one of the research directions, has been applied in more and 
more fields, including text processing, speech recognition and translation, semantic 
understanding and knowledge-based text mining. 
2.1 Natural language processing concepts 
In September 2019, the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2) released a computer 
program called Aristo that correctly answered more than 90 per cent of the questions on an 
eighth-grade science test. Passing a high school exam may sound trivial, but it's complicated for 
a computer. Aristo used natural language processing (NLP) to find answers from billions of 
documents. NLP is a branch of computer science and artificial intelligence that enables computer 
systems to extract meaning from unstructured text. While computers are still a long way from 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
being able to understand and use human language, NLP is already key to many applications we 
use every day, including digital assistants, web search, email and machine translation. 
2.2 Natural language - text preprocessing 
Text preprocessing is a very important step in NLP, its goal is to convert raw text into a 
form that a computer can process. Common preprocessing operations include word segmentation, 
stop and stop words, part-of-speech tagging and so on. Word segmentation refers to the division 
of sentences into single words, the elimination of words that have a high frequency in the text but 
have no meaning, such as "the", "a", etc., part of speech tagging refers to the assignment of each 
word to a part of speech, such as nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc. These actions can help the 
computer better process text data. 
Pre-trained language models can effectively learn global semantic representation and 
significantly improve the effectiveness of NLP tasks, including text classification. It typically 
uses an unsupervised approach to automatically mine semantic knowledge and then builds pre-
trained targets that allow the machine to learn to understand the semantics. As shown in Figure 1, 
it is assumed that the differences between Embeddingfrom Language Model (ELMo), OpenAI 
GPT, and BERT are given. ELMo is a deeply contextualized word representation model that can 
be easily integrated into models. 
 
Figure 1: Classification of natural language processing models 
Among them, preprocessed text can model the complex features of words and learn 
different representations for various linguistic environments. It learns the embeddings of each 
word based on the context of the bidirectional LSTM. GPT employs supervised fine-tuning and 
unsupervised pre-training to learn general representations that transfer to many NLP tasks with 
limited adaptations. In addition, the domain of the target dataset does not need to be similar to 
the domain of the unlabeled dataset. The training process of GPT algorithm usually includes two 
stages. First, the initial parameters of the neural network model are learned by modeling 
objectives on an unlabeled data set. 
2.3 Text classification-CNN 
Text classification is an important problem in NLP, where the goal is to classify a given text 
into predefined categories. Common algorithms include naive Bayes, support vector machines, 
deep learning, and so on. Naive Bayes is a classification algorithm based on probability statistics, 
which assumes that features are independent of each other; support vector machine is a 
classification algorithm based on maximum boundary separation, which can map nonlinear 
separable data to high-dimensional space for classification; Deep learning is a classification 
algorithm based on neural networks, which can automatically extract features and classify them. 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
TextCNN is an algorithm that uses Convolutional Neural Networks to classify text. It was 
proposed by Yoon Kim in 2014 in the article Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence 
Classification. The detailed schematic diagram is as follows. 
 
Figure 2: Schematic diagram of text-CNN Text classification model 
The input dimensions are: [batch_size, seq_len, emb_dim]. In the example above, batch_size=1, 
seq_len=7, emb_dim=5; 
In the convolution, it is actually a single channel, the width of the convolution kernel is the same 
as the dimension of the word vector, which is emb_dim, and the height of the convolution kernel 
is specified by itself; 
Because the width is emb_dim, the convolution can only move up and down, not left and right. 
In the figure above, there are two convolution kernels of high dimension 4, two convolution 
kernels of high dimension 3, and two convolution kernels of height 2. 
The feature map after each convolution is downsampled with maximum pooling. 
In the example above, it is equivalent to having 3 convolution layers, each of which has 2 
convolution nuclei, then the convolution layers with sizes 2, 3 and 4 have the following 
dimensions: [batch_size, 2, seq_len-1, 1], [batch_size, 2, seq_len-2, 1], [batch_size, 2, seq_len-3, 
1]; 
The dimensionality of each layer after convolution pooling is: [batch_size, 2], where 2 is the 
number of convolution nuclei; 
The results after maximum pooling are splicing in the following dimensions: [batch_size, 
len(filter_sizes) * num_filters], and fed into the full connection for classification. 
filter_sizes are the heights of the convolution cores and num_filters are the number of 
convolution cores. 
2.3 Bi-LSTM text classification application 
LSTM: Long-term short-term memory network (LSTM) can remember the information 
before and after long sentences, solving the problem of RNN (when the time interval is large, the 
network will forget the previous information, resulting in the problem of gradient disappearance, 
which will form a long-term dependency problem) and avoiding long-term dependency problems. 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
Therefore, the combination of Bi-LSTM and TextCNN has several advantages for 
emotional text classification. First, Bi-LSTM (Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory) can 
effectively capture contextual information in the text because it considers both forward and 
backward sequences of the text to better understand the relationship and context between words 
in the text. The ability of the model to capture the long-range dependency relationship is 
improved. Compared to traditional recurrent neural networks (RNN), Bi-LSTM mitigates the 
gradient disappearance problem and makes the model easier to train. 
(1) 
Where :ω and is the weight coefficient; b is a biased value. Compared with a single LSTM 
model, the Bi-LSTM model not only takes into account the forward correlation information 
between the time series data, but also takes into account the reverse correlation information 
between the time series data, so it shows superior performance in the classification of sequence 
data. 
In this paper, TextCNN is used to embed words, which are then fed into the Bi-LSTM 
network for fine tuning to complete parameter optimisation for text classification tasks. Bi-
LSTM reads the text sequence X from both directions and computes the hidden state of each 
word, then concatenates the hidden states in both directions to obtain the final hidden 
representation of the ith word: 
(2) 
Therefore, the process by which the Bi-LSTM network obtains the final feature vector 
output by learning BERT input data can be expressed as: 
(3) 
Where: indicates the mapping relationship; s represents the text sentences, TextCNN and 
parameters of the Bi-LSTM network :D represents the dimensions of the hidden layer in the Bi-
LSTM network. 
Therefore, TextCNN (Convolutional Neural Network for Text) has the ability to perform 
convolutional operations on different window sizes, allowing the model to capture features at 
different scales in the text, from local to global. This helps to extract key information and 
features from the text, making the model more robust and able to adapt to text of different 
lengths and structures. 
In summary, by combining Bi-LSTM and TextCNN, we can take full advantage of their 
respective strengths and effectively tackle emotional text classification tasks. Bi-LSTM is 
responsible for capturing the contextual information of the text, and TextCNN is responsible for 
extracting features at different scales. The two complement each other, improving the 
performance and generalisation ability of the model to achieve better results in emotional text 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
classification. This combined approach has already achieved remarkable success in several 
natural language processing tasks. 
2.4 TextCNN Procedure 
According to the TextCNN principle architecture in Figure 2, it can be seen, 
(1) 
The first layer is input layer.  
(4) 
In the formula, it is assumed that the dimension of the input data is 1, the length is 8, the number 
of channels is 1, and the dimension and number of filter are 1 and the length is 5.The input layer 
is an n× k matrix where n is the number of words in a sentence and k is the dimension of the 
word vector corresponding to each word. That is, each row of the input layer is the K-
dimensional word vector corresponding to a word. In addition, padding is applied to the original 
sentence to make the length of the vectors consistent. 
(2) The second layer is the convolution layer, and the third layer is the pooling layer. First, we 
should note the differences between convolution operations in computer vision (CV) and 
NLP. In CV, the convolution kernel is usually square, such as the 3×3 convolution kernel, 
and then the convolution kernel moves along the height and width of the entire image to 
carry out the convolution operation. Different from CV, the "image" of the input layer in 
NLP is a word matrix composed of word vectors, and the width of the convolution kernel is 
the same as the width of the word matrix, which is the size of the word vector, and the 
convolution kernel only moves in the height direction.  
(5) 
(6) 
Therefore, the position that the convolution kernel slides through each time is a complete word, 
and the one-minute "vector" of several words is not convolved. 
(3) Finally, there is the pooling layer. The network shown in the figure adopts 1-Max pooling, 
that is, a maximum feature is selected from the feature vectors generated by each sliding 
window, and then these features are spliced together to form a vector representation. You can 
also choose K-MAX pooling (select the largest K features in each feature vector), or average 
pooling (average each dimension in the feature vector), etc., the effect is to obtain a fixed-
length vector representation of sentences of different lengths through pooling. 
In summary, TextCNN (Convolutional Neural Network for Text Classification) has 
significant advantages in natural language processing, which are mainly reflected in the 
following aspects: First, TextCNN can effectively capture local features and patterns in text and 
automatically extract key information through convolutional operations, which makes it perform 
well in text classification tasks.  
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
3. Methodology 
Sentiment analysis has become particularly important in the age of social media and the 
Internet, allowing us to gain insight into the emotions, opinions and attitudes of the public in 
order to better understand social trends and public opinion. Tweets on social media platforms, as 
one of the main ways for users to express their emotions and opinions, contain a lot of valuable 
information. As a result, sentiment analysis of tweets has become an area of intense research, 
helping governments, businesses and research institutions to better understand the public's 
emotional leanings on specific issues. 
3.1 Experimental introduction 
In this context, this study aims to use TextCNN (Convolutional Neural Networks for Text 
Classification) for sentiment analysis of tweets. Our research question is: How can the TextCNN 
model be used effectively to analyse sentiment in tweets and how well does it perform? To 
answer this question, we will use a massive tweet dataset containing tweets from different social 
media platforms, covering a variety of topics and emotional categories. 
TextCNN is a deep learning model known for its excellent performance in text 
classification tasks. It can capture local features and patterns in text, has a shallow network 
structure, is easy to train and deploy, and is suitable for processing text data of unlimited length. 
In this study, TextCNN is chosen as the main model to efficiently analyse the emotional 
tendency in large-scale tweet data. 
In the following sections, we will detail key steps such as experimental design, data pre-
processing, model training, and evaluation indicators to demonstrate our research methods and 
results. Our experimental hypothesis is that TextCNN can accurately analyse tweet sentiment, 
thus providing valuable insights for further research and application in the field of sentiment 
analysis. 
3.2 Data preprocessing 
Labeled sentiment analysis tasks can be treated as text subtasks. The dataset came from a 
course assignment SI650-Sentiment Classification at the University of Michigan and a dataset of 
tweets collected by Niek Sanders, with a total of about 157W tweets with a target variable of 0 or 
1 indicating negative and positive emotions, and was a binary classification task for a large 
dataset. The paper mentioned that the naive Bayes classifier could achieve 75% accuracy. To 
verify this, I tested all the datasets using NB and SVM models respectively, and the accuracy of 
NB was 77.5% and that of SVM was 73%. 
Code：from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import CountVectorizer 
from sklearn.feature_selection import SelectKBest, chi2 
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegressionCV 
from sklearn.pipeline import Pipeline 
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
3.4 Text model building 
Steps: 
① Use two layers of convolution 
② Use more convolution nuclei, more scale convolution nuclei 
③ BatchNorm is used 
④ Two layers of full connection are used in the classification 
 
 
Table : Model data set 
Concat 
MaxPool 
 
 
MaxPool 
 
 
MaxPool 
 
 
MaxPool 
 
 
MaxPool 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
conv(1) 
conv(2) 
conv(3) 
conv(4) 
conv(5) 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
ReLU 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
BatchNorm 
conv(1) 
conv(2) 
conv(3) 
conv(4) 
conv(5) 
 
Code：model.compile(loss=‘binary_crossentropy’, 
optimizer=‘adam’, 
metrics=[‘accuracy’]) 
history = model.fit(x_train_padded_seqs, y_train, 
batch_size=32, 
epochs=5, 
validation_data=(x_test_padded_seqs, y_test)) 
 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
Figure 3: TextCNN result ROC curve 
 
3.4 LSTM text model 
RNN models can handle sequence problems, and LSTM is better at capturing long sequence 
relationships. Because of the existence of gate, LSTM can learn and grasp the dependencies in 
sequence well, so it is more suitable for dealing with long sequence NLP problems. The model 
structure is as follows: 
 
Figure 4: LATM text classification architecture diagram 
Among them, the sentence is first word embedding, passed into the LSTM sequence for 
training, the last hidden state of LSTM is taken out, and the final output is obtained by adding the 
full connection layer. 
When analyzing text classification under the LSTM model, it should be noted that in 
embeddings, unlike word vector summation in DNN, LSTM does not need to sum word vectors, 
but directly learns word vectors themselves. Whether it is summing or averaging, the convergent 
operation will lose some information 
In the model, we first construct the LSTM unit and add dropout to prevent overfitting; After 
executing dynamic_rnn, we will get the final state of lstm, which is a tuple structure containing 
the cell state and hidden state (the result of passing through the output gate), we will only take 
the hidden state output here. lstm_state.h, concatenates this vector, and finally produces the 
output result. 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5： ROC curve of LATM text classification results 
3.5 Experimental result 
So far, we have completed the task of handling sentence classification using RNNS and 
CNNS respectively. Among them, the accuracy of DNN and RNN on test is almost the same, 
while the accuracy of CNN on test is 1%~2% higher, and the accuracy of multi-channels CNN 
on test is as high as 76.93%, and the training times are also less. 
Our models are relatively simple, but generally speaking, these models have achieved good 
accuracy, which is largely due to the pre-trained word embedding, which shows the importance 
of word embedding in NLP models. The accuracy of multi-channels CNN is improved by adding 
task-specific information. 
Conclusion 
This paper discusses in detail the application of deep learning in natural language 
processing, especially in the field of text classification. Through the application of TextCNN and 
other models, it successfully realises the efficient processing of core tasks such as sentiment 
analysis. Deep learning has brought significant improvements to NLP technology, making the 
task of processing text data more flexible and efficient. The experimental results show that 
TextCNN and other models perform well in text classification tasks, especially under the pre-
trained word embeddedness, and achieve satisfactory performance. In addition, this paper also 
focuses on the technical challenges of text generation, text classification and semantic parsing, 
and proposes an integrated interactive training method to effectively address these challenges, 
which provides an important reference for further research and application in the field of NLP. 
As one of the most important tasks in natural language processing, text classification is 
constantly evolving and expanding. In the future, with the continuous development and 
improvement of deep learning technology, text classification will bring more opportunities and 
challenges. Some of these future directions are 
1. Multimodal text classification: Combining text with multimodal information such as 
images and audio for classification, so that text classification can better meet the processing 
needs of multimedia content. 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
2. Cross-lingual text classification: Develop a text classification model that can handle 
multiple languages, and promote the analysis of multilingual social media and international 
information. 
3. Continuous learning: Develop text classification models that can continuously learn and 
adapt to new data and domains to cope with the changing information environment. 
4. Privacy protection: Strengthen the protection of user privacy in text classification to 
prevent the misuse of personal information. 
In summary, text classification has a wide range of application prospects in natural language 
processing, which is not only of great value in public opinion analysis, information retrieval and 
other fields, but also plays an important role in everyday life, such as social media and intelligent 
assistants. As technology continues to advance, we can expect text classification to play a greater 
role in improving natural language processing techniques and solving practical problems. 
Reference 
[1] BRA P D, HOUBEN G J,KORNATZKY Y,et al. Information retrieval indistributed 
hypertexts [C ]// 4th International Conference on IntelligentMultimedia Information 
RetrievalSystems and Management,1994:481-493. 
[2] Yu, Liqiang, et al. “Research on Machine Learning With Algorithms and 
Development”. Journal of Theory and Practice of Engineering Science, vol. 3, no. 12, 
Dec. 2023, pp. 7-14, doi:10.53469/jtpes.2023.03(12).02. 
[3] Liu, Bo, et al. "Integration and Performance Analysis of Artificial Intelligence and 
Computer Vision Based on Deep Learning Algorithms." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2312.12872 (2023). 
[4] MIKOLOV T,SUTSKEVER I,CHEN K,et al. Distributed representa-tions of words 
and phrases and their compositionality[C //Proceedings ofthe 26th International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,2013:3111-3119. 
[5] Yu, L., Liu, B., Lin, Q., Zhao, X., & Che, C. (2024). Semantic Similarity Matching for 
Patent Documents Using Ensemble BERT-related Model and Novel Text Processing 
Method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06782. 
[6] Huang, J., Zhao, X., Che, C., Lin, Q., & Liu, B. (2024). Enhancing Essay Scoring with 
Adversarial Weights Perturbation and Metric-specific AttentionPooling. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2401.05433. 
[7] CHOUDHARY K,BENIWAL R. Xplore word embedding using CBOWmodel and 
skip-gram model[C ]//2021 7th International Conference onSignal Processing and 
Communication ,2021 :267-270.YAN X, GUO J, LAN Y, et al. A biterm topic model 
for short texts[C ]//Proceedings of the 22nd linternational Conference on World Wide 
Web,2013:1445-1456 
[8] Tianbo, Song, Hu Weijun, Cai Jiangfeng, Liu Weijia, Yuan Quan, and He Kun. "Bio-
inspired Swarm Intelligence: a Flocking Project With Group Object Recognition." In 
2023 3rd International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer 
Engineering (ICCECE), pp. 834-837. IEEE, 2023.DOI: 10.1109/mce.2022.3206678 
[9] Liu, B., Zhao, X., Hu, H., Lin, Q., & Huang, J. (2023). Detection of Esophageal Cancer 
Lesions Based on CBAM Faster R-CNN. Journal of Theory and Practice of 
Engineering Science, 3(12), 36–42. https://doi.org/10.53469/jtpes.2023.03(12).06 
SPIE Proceedings Publications 
 
 
 
[10] Liu, Bo, et al. "Integration and Performance Analysis of Artificial Intelligence and 
Computer Vision Based on Deep Learning Algorithms." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2312.12872 (2023). 
 
 
