Title: Racial Disparity in Natural Language Processing: A Case Study of Social Media African-American English
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.00061v1
--------------------------------------------------

Racial Disparity in Natural Language Processing:
A Case Study of Social Media African-American English
Su Lin Blodget
University of Massachusets Amherst
Amherst, MA
blodget@cs.umass.edu
Brendan O’Connor
University of Massachusets Amherst
Amherst, MA
brenocon@cs.umass.edu
ABSTRACT
We highlight an important frontier in algorithmic fairness: dispar-
ity in the quality of natural language processing algorithms when
applied to language from authors of diﬀerent social groups. For
example, current systems sometimes analyze the language of fe-
males and minorities more poorly than they do of whites and males.
We conduct an empirical analysis of racial disparity in language
identiﬁcation for tweets writen in African-American English, and
discuss implications of disparity in NLP.
1
INTRODUCTION: DISPARITY IN NLP
As machine learned algorithms govern more and more real-world
outcomes, how to make them fair—and what that should mean—is
of increasing concern. One strand of research, heavily represented
at the FAT-ML series of workshops,1 considers scenarios where
a learning algorithm must make decisions about people, such as
approving prospective applicants for employment, or deciding who
should be the targets of police actions [5], and seeks to develop
learners or algorithms whose decisions have only small diﬀerences
in behavior between persons from diﬀerent groups [4] or that satisfy
other notions of fairness (e.g. [12, 13]).
Another recent strand of research has examined a complemen-
tary aspect of bias and fairness: disparate accuracy in language anal-
ysis. Linguistic production is a critically important form of human
behavior, and a major class of artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms—
natural language processing, or language technologies—may or
may not fairly analyze language produced by diﬀerent types of
authors [7]. For example, Tatman [20] ﬁnds that YouTube autocap-
tioning has a higher word error rate for female speakers than for
male speakers in videos. Tis has implications for downstream uses
of language technology:
• Viewing: users who rely on autocaptioning have a harder
time understanding what women are saying in videos, rel-
ative to what men are saying.
• Access: search systems are necessary for people to access
information online, and for videos they may depend on
indexing text recognized from the audio. Tatman’s results
[20] imply that such a search system will fail to ﬁnd infor-
mation produced by female speakers more ofen than for
male speakers.
Tis bias aﬀects interests of the speakers—it is more diﬃcult for
their voices to be communicated to the world—as well as other
users, who are deprived of information or opinions from females,
or more generally, any social group whose language experiences
lower accuracy of analysis by language technologies.
1htp://www.fatml.org/
Gender and dialect are well-known confounds in speech recogni-
tion, since they can implicate pitch, timbre, and the pronunciation
of words (the phonetic level of language); domain adaptation is
always a challenge and research continues on how to apply do-
main transfer to speech recognizers across dialects [15]. And more
broadly, decades of research in the ﬁeld of sociolinguistics has doc-
umented an extensive array of both social factors that aﬀect how
people produce language (e.g. community, geography, ethnicity),
and how speciﬁcally language is aﬀected (e.g. the lexicon, syntax,
semantics). We might expect a minority teenager in school as well
as a white middle-aged sofware engineer to both speak English,
but they may exhibit variation in their pronunciation, word choice,
slang, or even syntactic structures. Dialect communities ofen align
with geographic and sociological factors, as language variation
emerges within distinct social networks, or is aﬃrmed as a marker
of social identity.
Dialects pose a challenge to fairness in NLP, because they en-
tail language variation that is correlated to social factors, and we
believe there needs to be greater awareness of dialects among tech-
nologists using and building language technologies. In the rest of
this paper, we focus on the dialect of African-American English
as used on Twiter, which previous work [3, 9, 11] has established
is very prevalent and sometimes quite diﬀerent than mainstream
American English. We analyze an African-American English Twit-
ter corpus (from Blodget et al. [3], described in §3), and analyze
racial disparity in language identiﬁcation, a crucial ﬁrst step in any
NLP application. Our previous work found that oﬀ-the-shelf tools
display racial disparity—they tend to erroneously classify messages
from African-Americans as non-English more ofen than those from
whites. We extend this analysis from 200 to 20,000 tweets, ﬁnding
that the disparity persists when controlling for message length (§4),
and evaluate the racial disparity for several black-box commercial
services. We conclude with a brief discussion (§5).
2
AFRICAN-AMERICAN ENGLISH AND
SOCIAL MEDIA
We focus on language in social media, which is ofen informal and
conversational. Social media NLP tools may be used for, say, senti-
ment analysis applications, which seek to measure opinions from
online communities. But current NLP tools are typically trained
on traditional writen sources, which are quite diﬀerent from so-
cial media language, and even more so from dialectal social media
language. Not only does this imply social media NLP may be of
lower accuracy, but since language can vary across social groups,
any such measurements may be biased—incorrectly representing
ideas and opinions from people who use non-standard language.
arXiv:1707.00061v1  [cs.CY]  30 Jun 2017
Speciﬁcally, we investigate dialectal language in publicly avail-
able Twiter data, focusing on African-American English (AAE), a
dialect of American English spoken by millions of people across the
United States [6, 14, 18]. AAE is a linguistic variety with deﬁned
syntactic-semantic, phonological, and lexical features, which have
been the subject of a rich body of sociolinguistic literature. In addi-
tion to the linguistic characterization, reference to its speakers and
their geographical location or speech communities is important,
especially in light of the historical development of the dialect. Not
all African-Americans speak AAE, and not all speakers of AAE are
African-American; nevertheless, speakers of this variety have close
ties with speciﬁc communities of African-Americans [6].
Te phenomenon of “BlackTwiter” has been noted anecdotally;
indeed, African-American and Hispanic minorities were markedly
over-represented in the early years of the Twiter service (as well
as younger people) relative to their representation in the American
general population.2 It is easy to ﬁnd examples of non-Standard
American English (SAE) language use, such as:
(1) he woke af smart af educated af daddy af coconut oil af
GOALS AF & shares food af
(2) Bored af den my phone ﬁnna die‼!
Te ﬁrst example has low punctuation usage (there is an uterance
boundary afer every “af”), but more importantly, it displays a key
syntactic feature of the AAE dialect, a null copula: “he woke” would
be writen, in Standard American English, as “he is woke” (meaning,
politically aware). “af” is an online-speciﬁc term meaning “as f—.”
Te second example displays two more traditional AAE features:
“den” is a spelling of “then” which follows a common phonological
transform in AAE (initial “th” changing to a “d” sound: “dat,” “dis,”
etc. are also common), and the word “ﬁnna” is an auxiliary verb,
short for “ﬁxing to,” which indicates an immediate future tense (“my
phone is going to die very soon”); it is part of AAE’s rich verbal
auxiliary system capable of encoding diﬀerent temporal semantics
than mainstream English [6].
3
DEMOGRAPHIC MIXED MEMBERSHIP
MODEL FOR SOCIAL MEDIA
In order to test racial disparity in social media NLP, [3] collects a
large-scale AAE corpus from Twiter, inferring sof demographic
labels with a mixed-membership probabilistic model; we use this
same corpus and method, brieﬂy repeating the earlier description of
the method. Tis approach to identifying AAE-like text makes use
of the connection between speakers of AAE and African-American
neighborhoods; we harvest a set of messages from Twiter, cross-
referenced against U.S. Census demographics, and then analyze
words against demographics with a mixed-membership probabilis-
tic model. Te data is a sample of millions of publicly posted geo-
located Twiter messages (from the Decahose/Gardenhose stream
[17]), most of which are sent on mobile phones, by authors in the
U.S. in 2013.
For each message, we look up the U.S. Census blockgroup geo-
graphic area that the message was sent in, and use race and ethnicity
information for each blockgroup from the Census’ 2013 American
Community Survey, deﬁning four covariates: percentages of the
2htp://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/social-media/
population that are non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, His-
panics (of any race), and (non-Hispanic) Asians. Finally, for each
user u, we average the demographic values of all their messages in
our dataset into a length-four vector π(census)
u
.
Given this set of messages and author-associated demograph-
ics, we infer statistical associations between language and demo-
graphics with a mixed membership probabilistic model. It directly
associates each of the demographic variables with a topic; i.e. a
unigram language model over the vocabulary. Te model assumes
an author’s mixture over the topics tends to be similar to their
Census-associated demographic weights, and that every message
has its own topic distribution. Tis allows for a single author to use
diﬀerent types of language in diﬀerent messages, accommodating
multidialectal authors. Te message-level topic probabilities θm
are drawn from an asymmetric Dirichlet centered on π(census)
u
,
whose scalar concentration parameter α controls whether authors’
language is very similar to the demographic prior, or can have some
deviation. A token t’s latent topic zt is drawn from θm, and the
word itself is drawn from ϕzt , the language model for the topic.
Tus, the model learns demographically-aligned language models
for each demographic category. Our previous work [3] veriﬁes that
its African-American language model learns linguistic atributes
known in the sociolinguistics literature to be characteristic of AAE,
in line with other work that has also veriﬁed the correspondence of
geographical AA prevalence to AAE linguistic features on Twiter
[10, 19].
Tis publicly available corpus contains 59.2 million tweets. We
ﬁlter its messages to ones strongly associated with demographic
groups; for example, for each message we infer the posterior pro-
portion of its tokens that came from the African-American language
model, which can be high either due to demographic prior, or from
a message that uses many words exclusive to the AA language
model (topic); these proportions are available in the released cor-
pus. When we ﬁlter to messages with AA proportion greater than
0.8, this results in AAE-like text. We call these AA-aligned messages
and we also select a set of white-aligned messages in the same way.3
4
BIAS IN NLP TOOLS
4.1
Language identiﬁcation
Language identiﬁcation, the task of classifying the major world
language in which a message is writen, is a crucial ﬁrst step in al-
most any web or social media text processing pipeline. For example,
in order to analyze the opinions of U.S. Twiter users, one might
throw away all non-English messages before running an English
sentiment analyzer. (Some of the coauthors of this paper have done
this as a simple expedient step in the past.)
A variety of methods for language identiﬁcation exist [8]; so-
cial media language identiﬁcation is particularly challenging since
messages are short and also use non-standard language [1]. In
3While Blodget et al. veriﬁed that the AA-aligned tweets contain well-known features
of AAE, we hesitate to call these “AAE” and “SAE” corpora, since technically speaking
they are simply demographically correlated language models. Te Census refers to the
categories as “Black or African-American” and “White” (codes B03002E4 and B03002E3
in ACS 2013). And, while Hispanic- and Asian-associated language models of Blodget
et al.’s model are also of interest, we focus our analysis here on the African-American
and White language models.
2
fact, a popular language identiﬁcation system, langid.py [16], clas-
siﬁes both example messages in §2 as Danish with more than 99.9%
conﬁdence.
We take the perspective that since AAE is a dialect of American
English, it ought to be classiﬁed as English for the task of major
world language identiﬁcation. We hypothesize that if a language
identiﬁcation tool is trained on standard English data, it may exhibit
disparate performance on AA- versus white-aligned tweets. In
particular, we wish to assess the racial disparity accuracy diﬀerence:
p(correct | Wh) −p(correct | AA)
(1)
From manual inspection of a sample of hundreds of messages, it
appears that nearly all white-aligned and AA-aligned tweets are
actually English, so accuracy is the same as proportion of English
predictions by the classiﬁer. A disparity of 0 indicates a language
identiﬁer that is fair across these classes. (An alternative measure is
the ratio of accuracies, corresponding to Feldman et al.’s disparate
impact measure [4].)
4.2
Experiments
We conduct an evaluation of four diﬀerent oﬀ-the-shelf language
identiﬁers, which are popular and straightforward for engineers to
use when building applications:
• langid.py (sofware): One of the most popular open source
language identiﬁcation tools, langid.py was originally trained
on over 97 languages and evaluated on both traditional
corpora and Twiter messages [16].
• IBM Watson (API): Te Watson Developer Cloud’s Lan-
guage Translator service supports language identiﬁcation
of 62 languages.4
• Microsof Azure (API): Microsof Azure’s Cognitive Ser-
vices supports language identiﬁcation of 120 languages.5
• Twitter (metadata): Te output of Twiter’s in-house
identiﬁer, whose predictions are included in a tweet’s meta-
data (from 2013, the time of data collection), which Twiter
intends to “help developers more easily work with targeted
subsets of Tweet collections.”6
• Google (API, excluded): We atempted to test Google’s
language detection service,7 but it returned a server error
for every message we gave it to classify.
We queried the remote API systems in May 2017.
From manual inspection, we observed that longer tweets are sig-
niﬁcantly more likely to be correctly classiﬁed, which is a potential
confound for a race disparity analysis, since the length distribution
is diﬀerent for each demographic group. To minimize this eﬀect
in our comparisons, we group messages into four bins (shown in
Table 1) according to the number of words in the message. For each
bin, we sampled 2,500 AA-aligned tweets and 2,500 white-aligned
tweets, yielding a total of 20,000 messages across the two categories
4htps://www.ibm.com/watson/developercloud/doc/language-translator/index.html
5htps://docs.microsof.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/text-analytics/
overview#language-detection
6htps://blog.twiter.com/developer/en us/a/2013/introducing-new-metadata-for-tweets.
html
7htps://cloud.google.com/translate/docs/detecting-language
and four bins.8 We limited pre-processing of the messages to ﬁxing
of HTML escape characters and removal of URLs, keeping “noisy”
features of social media text such as @-mentions, emojis, and hash-
tags. We then calculated, for each bin in each category, the number
of messages predicted to be in English by each classiﬁer. Accuracy
results are shown in Table 1.9
As predicted, classiﬁer accuracy does increase as message lengths
increase; classiﬁer accuracy is generally excellent for all messages
containing at least 10 tokens. Tis result agrees with previous work
ﬁnding short texts to be challenging to classify (e.g. [2]), since there
are fewer features (e.g. character n-grams) to give evidence for the
language used.10
However, the classiﬁer results display a disparity in performance
among messages of similar length; for all but one length bin under
one classiﬁer, accuracy on the white-aligned sample is higher than
on the AA-aligned sample. Te disparity in performance between
AA- and white-aligned messages is greatest when messages are
short; the gaps in performance for extremely short messages ranges
across classiﬁers from 6.6% to 19.7%. Tis gap in performance is
particularly critical as 41.7% of all AA-aligned messages in the
corpus as a whole have 5 or fewer tokens.11
5
DISCUSSION
Are these disparities substantively signiﬁcant? It is easy to see
how statistical bias could arise in downstream applications. For
example, consider an analyst trying to look at major opinions about
a product or political ﬁgure, with a sentiment analysis system that
only gathers opinions from messages classiﬁed as English by Twiter.
For messages length 5 or less, opinions from African-American
speakers will be shown to be 1−54.0/73.7 = 27% less frequent than
they really are, relative to white opinions. Fortunately, the accuracy
disparities are ofen only a few percentage points; nevertheless, it
is important for practitioners to keep potential biases like these in
mind.
One way forward to create less disparate NLP systems will be
to use domain adaptation and other methods to extend algorithms
to work on diﬀerent distributions of data; for example, our demo-
graphic model’s predictions can be used to improve a language
identiﬁer, since the demographic language model’s posteriors accu-
rately identify some cases of dialectal English [3]. In the context
of speech recognition, Lehr et al. [15] pursue a joint modeling ap-
proach, learning pronunciation model parameters for AAE and SAE
simultaneously.
One important issue may be the limitation of perspective of
technologists versus users. In striking contrast to Twiter’s (histor-
ically) minority-heavy demographics, major U.S. tech companies
are notorious for their low representation of African-Americans
and Hispanics; for example, Facebook and Google report only 1%
8Due to a data processing error, there are 5 duplicates (19,995 unique tweets); we
report on all 20,000 messages for simplicity.
9We have made the 20,000 messages publicly available at: htp://slanglab.cs.umass.
edu/TwiterAAE/
10A reviewer asked if length is used as a feature; we know that the open-source
langid.py system does not (explicitly) use it.
11For most (system,length) combinations, the accuracy diﬀerence is signiﬁcant under
a two-sided t-test (p < .01) except for two rows (t ≤5, langid.py, p = .03) and
(10 < t ≤15, Twiter, p = 0.5). Accuracy rate standard errors range from 0.04% to
0.9% (≈
p
acc(1 −acc)/2500).
3
AA Acc.
WH Acc.
Diﬀ.
langid.py
t ≤5
68.0
70.8
2.8
5 < t ≤10
84.6
91.6
7.0
10 < t ≤15
93.0
98.0
5.0
t > 15
96.2
99.8
3.6
IBM Watson
t ≤5
62.8
77.9
15.1
5 < t ≤10
91.9
95.7
3.8
10 < t ≤15
96.4
99.0
2.6
t > 15
98.0
99.6
1.6
Microsof Azure
t ≤5
87.6
94.2
6.6
5 < t ≤10
98.5
99.6
1.1
10 < t ≤15
99.6
99.9
0.3
t > 15
99.5
99.9
0.4
Twiter
t ≤5
54.0
73.7
19.7
5 < t ≤10
87.5
91.5
4.0
10 < t ≤15
95.7
96.0
0.3
t > 15
98.5
95.1
-3.0
Table 1: Percent of the 2,500 tweets in each bin classiﬁed as English by each classiﬁer; Diﬀ. is the diﬀerence (disparity on an
absolute scale) between the classiﬁer accuracy on the AA-aligned and white-aligned samples. t is the message length for the
bin.
of their tech employees are African-American,12 as opposed to
13.3% in the overall U.S. population,13 and the population of com-
puter science researchers in the U.S. has similarly low minority
representation. It is of course one example of the ever-present
challenge of sofware designers understanding how users use their
sofware; in the context of language processing algorithms, such
understanding must be grounded in an understanding of dialects
and sociolinguistics.
REFERENCES
[1] Timothy Baldwin, Paul Cook, Marco Lui, Andrew MacKinlay, and Li Wang.
2013. How Noisy Social Media Text, How Diﬀrnt Social Media Sources?. In
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. 356–364.
[2] Timothy Baldwin and Marco Lui. 2010. Language identiﬁcation: Te long and the
short of the mater. In Human Language Technologies: Te 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 229–237.
[3] Su Lin Blodget, Lisa Green, and Brendan O’Connor. 2016. Demographic Dialectal
Variation in Social Media: A Case Study of African-American English. Proceedings
of EMNLP (2016).
[4] Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and
Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2015. Certifying and removing disparate impact.
In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 259–268.
[5] Sharad Goel, Maya Perelman, Ravi Shroﬀ, and David Alan Sklansky. 2017. Com-
bating police discrimination in the age of big data. New Criminal Law Review:
In International and Interdisciplinary Journal 20, 2 (2017), 181–232.
[6] Lisa J. Green. 2002. African American English: A Linguistic Introduction. Cam-
bridge University Press.
[7] Dirk Hovy and L. Shannon Spruit. 2016. Te Social Impact of Natural Language
Processing. In Proceedings of ACL.
[8] Baden Hughes, Timothy Baldwin, Steven Bird, Jeremy Nicholson, and Andrew
MacKinlay. 2006. Reconsidering Language Identiﬁcation for Writen Language
Resources. In Proceedings of the Fifh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’06). European Language Resources Association
(ELRA). htp://aclweb.org/anthology/L06-1274
[9] Taylor Jones. 2015. Toward a Description of African American Vernacular
English Dialect Regions Using “Black Twiter”. American Speech 90, 4 (2015),
403–440.
12htps://newsroom.f.com/news/2016/07/facebook-diversity-update-positive-hiring-trends-show-progress/
htps://www.google.com/diversity/
13htps://www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/RHI225215/00
[10] Anna Jørgensen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard. 2016. Learning a POS tagger
for AAVE-like language. In Proceedings of NAACL. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[11] Anna Katrine Jørgensen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard. 2015. Challenges of
studying and processing dialects in social media. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Noisy User-generated Text. 9–18.
[12] Mathew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Seth Neel, and Aaron Roth.
2016. Rawlsian fairness for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.09559
(2016).
[13] Mathew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie H Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. 2016.
Fairness in Learning: Classic and Contextual Bandits. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 29, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
and R. Garnet (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 325–333. htp://papers.nips.cc/
paper/6355-fairness-in-learning-classic-and-contextual-bandits.pdf
[14] William Labov. 1972. Language in the inner city: Studies in the Black English
vernacular. Vol. 3. University of Pennsylvania Press.
[15] Maider Lehr, Kyle Gorman, and Izhak Shafran. 2014. Discriminative pronuncia-
tion modeling for dialectal speech recognition. In Proc. Interspeech.
[16] M. Lui and T. Baldwin. 2012. langid. py: An Oﬀ-the-shelf Language Identiﬁ-
cation Tool. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2012), Demo Session, Jeju, Republic of Korea.
htp://www.aclweb.org/anthology-new/P/P12/P12-3005.pdf
[17] Fred Morstater, Jrgen Pfeﬀer, Huan Liu, and Kathleen Carley. 2013. Is the
Sample Good Enough? Comparing Data from Twiter’s Streaming API with
Twiter’s Firehose. In International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
htp://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM13/paper/view/6071
[18] John Russell Rickford. 1999. African American vernacular English: Features,
evolution, educational implications. Wiley-Blackwell.
[19] Ian Stewart. 2014. Now We Stronger than Ever: African-American English
Syntax in Twiter. In Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop at the 14th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Gothenburg, Sweden, 31–37.
htp://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E14-3004
[20] Rachael Tatman. 2017. Gender and Dialect Bias in YouTube’s Automatic Captions.
In Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain, 53–59. htp://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/W/W17/W17-1606
4
