Title: Predicting Digital Asset Prices using Natural Language Processing: a survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00726v1
--------------------------------------------------

Predicting Digital Asset Prices
using Natural Language Processing: a survey
Trang Tran
Cornell University, USA
tmt59@cornell.edu
Abstract
The introduction of blockchain technology has changed the way people think about how they
used to store and trade their assets, as it introduced us to a whole new way to transact: using
digital currencies. One of the major innovations of blockchain technology is decentralization,
meaning that traditional ﬁnancial intermediaries, such as asset-backed security issuers and
banks, are eliminated in the process.
Even though the blockchain technology has been
utilized in a wide range of industries, its most prominent application is still cryptocurrencies,
with Bitcoin being the ﬁrst one proposed. At its peak in 2021, the market cap for Bitcoin
once surpassed 1 trillion US dollars. The open nature of the crypto market poses various
challenges and concerns for both potential retail investors and institutional investors, as the
price of the investment is highly volatile and its ﬂuctuations are unpredictable. The rise
of Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing, in particular, has shed some light
on monitoring and predicting the price behaviors of cryptocurrencies. This paper aims to
review and analyze the recent eﬀorts in applying Machine Learning and Natural Language
Processing methods to predict the prices and analyze the behaviors of digital assets such as
Bitcoin and Ethereum.
Keywords: blockchain; cryptocurrency, natural language processing; price prediction
1
Introduction
In recent years, blockchain technology and its desirable characteristics, such as decentralization and
anonymity, have motivated the industry and academia. Even though the concept of using cryptograph-
1
arXiv:2212.00726v1  [cs.CY]  28 Nov 2022
ically secured chain of blocks was ﬁrst described by Haber and Stornetta (1990) in their paper ”How
to Time-Stamp a Digital Document”, the term blockchain started to attract signiﬁcant attention after
the group of developers who go by the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto described the blockchain model
their white paper (Nakamoto, 2008) and implemented the peer-to-peer electronic cash system in 2009.
The open and anonymous nature of the market has facilitated new opportunities while introducing new
risks never seen before with established ﬁnancial institutions, such as trust, unpredicted ﬂuctuations, and
fraudulent crowdfunding schemes.
The digital age also sees the rise of social media platforms such as Twitter and Reddit, where users
can easily and conveniently express their opinions at any time and from anywhere, in the form of a simple
post or a ”tweet.” Investment advice and opinions are among the most popular topics discussed online
because of its real-time nature. While Twitter has implemented some forms of veriﬁcations to encourage
people to use their real identities, such as asking for phone numbers or emails, Reddit has done little
to ensure the users’ identities are traceable. As a result, the world has witnessed the infamous case of
Reddit’s subforum ”WallstreeBets” in January 2021, where the explosive power of Internet users and
their speculative investment research can manipulate the investment prices, leading to the short squeeze
of Gamestop’s stock (GME) (Boylston, Palacios, Tassev, & Bruckman, 2021). In an open space with less
regulation and more freedom like cryptocurrency, we see a clear opportunity to utilize textual data from
social media posts helping investors make informed investment decisions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy covered the background
and terminologies behind blockchain. In Section 3, we similarly presented a brief literature review of the
recent developments in the Natural Language Processing space. We dived deep into the recent works
that use Natural Language Processing to predict the price and behaviours of cryptocurrencies in Section
4, and concluded the paper in Section 5.
2
Background on Blockchain technology
At a high level, a blockchain is a distributed ledger where all transactions are recorded in a chain of
blocks. As new transactions are committed, new blocks will be appended to the chain (Zheng, Xie, Dai,
Chen, & Wang, 2018). A distributed ledger is a public database where all participants can contribute
and maintains a synchronized copy of the data.
2.1
Key characteristics
• Decentralization. A key innovation of blockchain technology is the elimination of traditional in-
termediaries (central banks). Cost and ﬂow time can be massively reduced since transactions can
2
happen peer-to-peer (P2P). There are no single points of failure, as every network participant has
the same copy of the data.
• Persistency. blockchain is built to be an immutable ledger, meaning it is impossible to alter or
delete the data already recorded in the blocks.
• Anonymity. In the blockchain network, users are not identiﬁed by real names but by a randomly
generated address, which will be liked to each user’s transaction. Even though the transactions
and the user’s address (or wallet address) are public, the keys to prove ownership is private to each
user.
• Auditability. Since all participants have a copy of the data; it is possible to verify and trace the
transactions based on the public wallet address and the digital timestamp.
2.2
Types of blockchain network
There are three major types of blockchain networks: Public, Private and Hybrid.
• Public (Permissionless) blockchain. In this network, users can join and leave at any time without
obtaining prior permission.
• Private (Permissioned) blockchain. In this network, only a limited number of users with permissions
can read and write.
• Hybrid blockchain. This is a combination of both public and private blockchains. Transactions and
private information are kept inside the network but can still be veriﬁed.
2.3
Bitcoin (BTC) and Ether (ETC) and other crytocurrencies
Bitcoin, proposed by Nakamoto (2008), is a digital currency using blockchain technology to facilitate
transactions.
It is still the most popular general-purpose cryptocurrency and is considered the ﬁrst
cryptocurrency ever created. There are 21 million bitcoins in total, and each bitcoin consists of 100
million smaller units (satoshis). Bitcoin is an example of public blockchain.
Since Bitcoin launched, other alternative cryptocurrencies based on blockchain technology have been
introduced, including Ethereum - developed by Buterin (2014).
Its focus is providing a protocol for
building decentralized applications (dApps) deployed on Ethereum virtual machines (EVMs). Users can
create smart contracts to perform various tasks using a built-in Turing-complete programming language
to be executed on the blockchain. Turing complete (or computationally universal) refers to the idea that
a system needs to have the capacity to implement arbitrary computer algorithms. In other words, it needs
3
Figure 1: An example system to predict the price of bitcoin by Pant et al. (2018). The Recurrent
Neural Networks (Section 3.2) take into account two inputs: a sentiment score from a tweet,
and the historical price of bitcoin to predict the next price
to be able to stimulate a Turing machine. Ether (ETH) is the native cryptocurrency on the Ethereum
network. Other popular cryptocurrencies by market capitalization include Tether (USDT), USD Coin
(USDC), Binance Coin (BNB), etc. Both Tether, USD Coin, and Binance Coin were initially built on
the Ethereum network.
2.4
Predicting Prices and Trends of Cryptocurrency
As cryptocurrencies are considered valuable digital assets, various studies have been done to analyze
and protect cryptocurrencies, just like any other type of investment. Past works have used Machine
Learning methods extensively, alongside classical time-series variables (i.e., closing prices), to predict
prices of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, etc. Popular choices for model architecture include
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) (Garg et al., 2018; Roy, Nanjiba, & Chakrabarty,
2018), Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Poongodi et al., 2020).
In recent years, with the advancement in Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing, we have
seen broad adoption of language models to support past works in predicting the Prices and Trends of an
investment. Prior research suggested that peers’ inﬂuence and public moods in the form of unstructured
texts have been found to play an important role in investment decisions and market predictions (Farimani,
Jahan, Fard, & Haﬀari, 2021; Farrell, Green, Jame, & Markov, 2022; Vo, Nguyen, & Ock, 2019). As a
result, it is common to see an architecture in recent literature comprising two parts: a sentiment analyzer
(to process the textual data such as Tweets from Twitter) and a prediction model (to predict the prices).
4
Figure 2: A biological neuron (left) and its simpliﬁed mathematical model (right)1
3
Background on Natural Language Processing
To tackle a large amount of textual data, earlier works in the area have focused on gauging the general
sentiment or the polarity of the text and quantifying it using manual labels (i.e., ”positive,” ”neutral,”
and ”negative” that are associated with a numeric value). This is generally considered the lexicon-based
approach, in which a sentence will be transformed into a vector via a simple method such as a token
count matrix (S¸a¸smaz & Tek, 2021). After that, a simple classiﬁcation model such as Logistic Regression,
Support Vector Machine (SVM), or Naive Bayes classiﬁer. Latest developments in the Natural Language
Processing ﬁeld have pushed the frontier in improving the performance of sentiment classiﬁcation system
by allowing the vector representation of a word to have a context. Various recent state-of-the-arts language
models introduced recently include BERT (Devlin, Chang, Lee, & Toutanova, 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et
al., 2019), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), and ELECTRA (Clark, Luong, Le, & Manning, 2020).
3.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)
An artiﬁcial neural network, or a neural network for short, is a mathematical model primarily inspired
by the structure and functionalities of the biological neural system in the brain. Figure 2 showed the
connection between a biological neuron on the left and its mathematical model on the right. At a high
level, they work by taking input signals from their dendrites and output signals along its axon. These
axons eventually connect to the dendrites of other neurons, creating the entire network. Another name
for ANNs is Feed-Forward Neural network because the input information will only be processed in the
forward direction, as seen in Figure 3.
1https://cs231n.github.io/neural-networks-1/
2https://cs231n.github.io/neural-networks-1/
5
Figure 3: Example architecture of a simple 3-layer neural network2
3.2
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are models for data that involve times or sequences, such as sound,
video, or language. They addressed a few limitations of Feed-Forward Neural networks, such as keeping
track of or ”memorizing” some of the inputs to make predictions in a situation where context and historical
information plays an important role.
3.3
Long short-term memory Networks (LSTMs)
Long Short-Term Memory networks or LSTMs are a type of RNN introduced by Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber (1997) to address the long-term dependency problem in the original RNN architecture.
The
original RNN cannot make an accurate prediction as the gap between the point containing the relevant
information and the point where the relevant information increases. As a result, LSTMs have become
the popular model architecture with signiﬁcant use cases in Image captioning, Language Translation,
Algorithmic trading, and Text Generation.
4
Applications of NLPs in price prediction
We can categorize the works in this space into two major groups: Corpus-based, and Advanced methods.
4.1
Corpus-based methods
Corpus-based methods are based on the actual, real, and authentic words as they showed up in the
document (Almutairi, 2016). By comparing and contrasting raw words from a document with a dictionary
like the Harvard-IV dictionary (Dictionary with a list of positive and negative words), researchers can
quickly sense the overarching sentiment of a post by aggregating the number of times that a positive
or negative word shows up. Sul, Dennis, and Yuan (2017) utilized this method to show that a trading
strategy incorporating Twitter postings’ sentiments could generate an annual return between 10 and 15%.
6
4.2
Advanced NLP methods
Advanced NLP techniques attempt to go beyond relying purely on the count of the words as they occur
in a sentence. These methods gears towards language understanding, as they allow the context to be
incorporated into the vector representation of a word, as discussed in Section 3.
Vo et al. (2019) built a price prediction system using both news data and historical prices of Ethereum
(ETH) to generate a prediction for future prices (Figure 4). The authors created semantic vectors of the
news document using a classic n-gram language model and syntactic vectors utilizing a set of NLP
methods such as Dependency Parser, Coreference Resolution, and Named Entity Recognition. These two
vectors are combined to predict the sentiment score. Eventually, the sentiment score and the historical
cryptocurrency price are used to predict the future price. The text data used in this work is crypto-
related, obtained from NewsNow3, and manually labeled. A label of 1 indicates a positive sentiment
before a rise in the historical price and vice versa. Otherwise, the news will be labeled as 0 (neutral) as
there is no change in the price. Figure 5 showed that the proposed architecture achieved relatively better
performance than the SVM baseline when predicting ETH prices between July 2017 and October 2018.
To leverage the power of transfer learning, Cheuque Cerda (2021) used the pretrained ULMFiT and
BERT model in predicting the stance of a tweet from crypto-inﬂuencers and used these insights in building
price prediction models using XGBoost and LSTM. The author showed that while there might be a weak
relationship between the asset price and crypto-inﬂuencers’ opinion, this eﬀect was much stronger and
more causal in the short term.
Huang et al. (2021) proposed using news articles and social media platforms such as Sina-Weibo,
WeChat, and QQ groups to build a crypto-speciﬁc sentiment analysis model based on the Long short-
term memory (LSTM) Recurrent Network Structure (Figure 6). The data used in the training process
was manually labeled as positive (1), neutral (0), and negative (-1). The social media posts were tokenized
using the manually-created crypto word vocabulary speciﬁc for Chinese words and used as the input to
the LSTM Sentiment Analyzer.
Ortu, Vacca, Destefanis, and Conversano (2022) showed via various empirical analyses that the price
of Bitcoin is highly correlated with the sentiment from the discussions on social media forums such as
Reddit. Using dynamic topic modeling and Hawkes models, they were able to explain how public opinions
on social media chatter can inﬂuence each other and cause price ﬂuctuations.
Ortu, Uras, Conversano, Bartolucci, and Destefanis (2022) compared the performance of four diﬀerent
deep learning models (Multi-Layer Perceptron, Multivariate Attention Long Short Term Memory Fully
Convolutional Network, Convolutional Neural Network, and Long Short Term Memory in predicting
3https://newsnow.co.uk
7
Figure 4: Proposed system to predict the price of Ethereum (Vo et al., 2019)
Figure 5: Result of predicting Ethereum (ETH) prices using diﬀerent approaches (Vo et al.,
2019)
8
Figure 6: Cryptocurrency sentiment analysis and price movement prediction (Huang et al., 2021)
the price movements of Ethereum and Bitcoin between 2017 and 2020, utilizing BERT to extract the
emotions from social media posts. The competitive results showed a lot of promise in detecting the price
movements of Bitcoin and Ethereum.
5
Conclusion
The eﬀort in using advanced machine methods to better understand cryptocurrencies has proved that
investing in digital currencies is considered an alternative investment. As innovations are introduced in
both the crypto world and the natural language processing ﬁeld every day, opportunities and challenges
exist in this niche research area. With cryptocurrency being a new research topic, more work needed to
be done in this area to create an even more robust and accurate monitoring system to better utilize the
massive amount of data available, especially the textual data surrounding the topic.
References
Almutairi, N. D. (2016). The eﬀectiveness of corpus-based approach to language description
in creating corpus-based exercises to teach writing personal statements. English Language
Teaching, 9(7), 103–111.
Boylston, C., Palacios, B., Tassev, P., & Bruckman, A. (2021). Wallstreetbets: positions or
ban. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12110.
Buterin, V.
(2014).
Ethereum whitepaper.
Retrieved from https://ethereum.org/en/
whitepaper/
Cheuque Cerda, G. A.
(2021).
Bitcoin price prediction through stimulus analysis: on the
footprints of twitter’s crypto-inﬂuencers.
Clark, K., Luong, M.-T., Le, Q. V., & Manning, C. D.
(2020).
Electra: Pre-training text
encoders as discriminators rather than generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555.
9
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Farimani, S. A., Jahan, M. V., Fard, A. M., & Haﬀari, G. (2021). Leveraging latent economic
concepts and sentiments in the news for market prediction. In 2021 ieee 8th international
conference on data science and advanced analytics (dsaa) (pp. 1–10).
Farrell, M., Green, T. C., Jame, R., & Markov, S. (2022). The democratization of investment re-
search and the informativeness of retail investor trading. Journal of Financial Economics,
145(2), 616–641.
Garg, S., et al.
(2018).
Autoregressive integrated moving average model based prediction
of bitcoin close price. In 2018 international conference on smart systems and inventive
technology (icssit) (pp. 473–478).
Haber, S., & Stornetta, W. S. (1990). How to time-stamp a digital document. In Conference
on the theory and application of cryptography (pp. 437–455).
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8),
1735–1780.
Huang, X., Zhang, W., Tang, X., Zhang, M., Surbiryala, J., Iosiﬁdis, V., . . . Zhang, J. (2021).
Lstm based sentiment analysis for cryptocurrency prediction. In International conference
on database systems for advanced applications (pp. 617–621).
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., . . . Stoyanov, V. (2019). Roberta: A
robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business
Review, 21260.
Ortu, M., Uras, N., Conversano, C., Bartolucci, S., & Destefanis, G. (2022). On technical
trading and social media indicators for cryptocurrency price classiﬁcation through deep
learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 198, 116804.
Ortu, M., Vacca, S., Destefanis, G., & Conversano, C. (2022). Cryptocurrency ecosystems and
social media environments: An empirical analysis through hawkes’ models and natural
language processing. Machine Learning with Applications, 7, 100229.
Pant, D. R., Neupane, P., Poudel, A., Pokhrel, A. K., & Lama, B. K.
(2018).
Recurrent
neural network based bitcoin price prediction by twitter sentiment analysis. In 2018 ieee
10
3rd international conference on computing, communication and security (icccs) (pp. 128–
132).
Poongodi, M., Sharma, A., Vijayakumar, V., Bhardwaj, V., Sharma, A. P., Iqbal, R., & Kumar,
R. (2020). Prediction of the price of ethereum blockchain cryptocurrency in an industrial
ﬁnance system. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 81, 106527.
Roy, S., Nanjiba, S., & Chakrabarty, A. (2018). Bitcoin price forecasting using time series
analysis. In 2018 21st international conference of computer and information technology
(iccit) (pp. 1–5).
S¸a¸smaz, E., & Tek, F. B. (2021). Tweet sentiment analysis for cryptocurrencies. In 2021 6th
international conference on computer science and engineering (ubmk) (pp. 613–618).
Sul, H. K., Dennis, A. R., & Yuan, L. (2017). Trading on twitter: Using social media sentiment
to predict stock returns. Decision Sciences, 48(3), 454–488.
Vo, A.-D., Nguyen, Q.-P., & Ock, C.-Y. (2019). Sentiment analysis of news for eﬀective cryp-
tocurrency price prediction. International Journal of Knowledge Engineering, 5(2), 47–52.
Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov, R. R., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Xlnet:
Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 32.
Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H.-N., Chen, X., & Wang, H.
(2018).
Blockchain challenges and
opportunities: A survey. International journal of web and grid services, 14(4), 352–375.
11
