Title: Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis of Topics and Emotions in a Comparison with Mainstream Religious Group
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.03804v1
--------------------------------------------------

Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural
Language Processing Analysis of Topics and
Emotions in a Comparison with Mainstream
Religious Group
Mojtaba Heidarysafa1, Kamran Kowsari1, Tolu Odukoya2, Philip Potter3,
Laura E. Barnes1,3, and Donald E. Brown1,3
1 Department of Systems & Information Engineering, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA
2 School of Data Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
3 Department of Politics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
∗Co-corresponding authors: mh4pk@virginia.edu
Abstract. Online propaganda is central to the recruitment strategies of
extremist groups and in recent years these eﬀorts have increasingly ex-
tended to women. To investigate ISIS’ approach to targeting women in
their online propaganda and uncover implications for counterterrorism,
we rely on text mining and natural language processing (NLP). Speciﬁ-
cally, we extract articles published in Dabiq and Rumiyah (ISIS’s online
English language publications) to identify prominent topics. To iden-
tify similarities or diﬀerences between these texts and those produced
by non-violent religious groups, we extend the analysis to articles from
a Catholic forum dedicated to women. We also perform an emotional
analysis of both of these resources to better understand the emotional
components of propaganda. We rely on Depechemood (a lexical-base
emotion analysis method) to detect emotions most likely to be evoked
in readers of these materials. The ﬁndings indicate that the emotional
appeal of ISIS and Catholic materials are similar.
Keywords: ISIS propaganda, Topic modeling, Emotion detection, Nat-
ural language processing
1
Introduction
Since its rise in 2013, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has utilized the
Internet to spread its ideology, radicalize individuals, and recruit them to their
cause. In comparison to other Islamic extremist groups, ISIS’ use of technology
was more sophisticated, voluminous, and targeted. For example, during ISIS’
advance toward Mosul, ISIS related accounts tweeted some 40,000 tweets in
one day [6].However, this heavy engagement forced social media platforms to
institute policies to prevent unchecked dissemination of terrorist propaganda to
their users, forcing ISIS to adapt to other means to reach their target audience.
arXiv:1912.03804v1  [cs.CL]  9 Dec 2019
2
M. Heidarysafa et al.
One such approach was the publication of online magazines in diﬀerent lan-
guages including English. Although discontinued now, these online resources pro-
vided a window into ISIS ideology, recruitment, and how they wanted the world
to perceive them. For example, after predominantly recruiting men, ISIS began
to also include articles in their magazines that speciﬁcally addressed women.
ISIS encouraged women to join the group by either traveling to the caliphate or
by carrying out domestic attacks on behalf of ISIS in their respective countries.
This tactical change concerned both practitioners and researchers in the coun-
terterrorism community. New advancements in data science can shed light on
exactly how the targeting of women in extremist propaganda works and whether
it diﬀers signiﬁcantly from mainstream religious rhetoric.
We utilize natural language processing methods to answer three questions:
– What are the main topics in women-related articles in ISIS’ online maga-
zines?
– What similarities and/or diﬀerences do these topics have with non-violent,
non-Islamic religious material addressed speciﬁcally to women?
– What kind of emotions do these articles evoke in their readers and are there
similarities in the emotions evoked from both ISIS and non-violent religious
materials?
As these questions suggest, to understand what, if anything, makes extremist ap-
peals distinctive, we need a point of comparison in terms of the outreach eﬀorts
to women from a mainstream, non-violent religious group. For this purpose, we
rely on an online Catholic women’s forum. Comparison between Catholic mate-
rial and the content of ISIS’ online magazines allows for novel insight into the
distinctiveness of extremist rhetoric when targeted towards the female popula-
tion. To accomplish this task, we employ topic modeling and an unsupervised
emotion detection method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we review related
works on ISIS propaganda and applications of natural language methods. Sec-
tion 3 describes data collection and pre-processing. Section 4 describes in detail
the approach. Section 5 reports the results, and ﬁnally, Section 6 presents the
conclusion.
2
Related Work
Soon after ISIS emerged and declared its caliphate, counterterrorism practi-
tioners and political science researchers started to turn their attention towards
understanding how the group operated. Researchers investigated the origins of
ISIS, its leadership, funding, and how they rose became a globally dominant non-
state actor [12]. This interest in the organization’s distinctiveness immediately
led to inquiries into ISIS’ rhetoric, particularly their use of social media and
online resources in recruitment and ideological dissemination. For example, Al-
Tamimi examines how ISIS diﬀerentiated itself from other jihadist movements
by using social media with unprecedented eﬃciency to improve its image with
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
3
locals [2]. One of ISIS’ most impressive applications of its online prowess was
in the recruitment process. The organization has used a variety of materials,
especially videos, to recruit both foreign and local ﬁghters. Research shows that
ISIS propaganda is designed to portray the organization as a provider of justice,
governance, and development in a fashion that resonates with young western-
ers [7]. This propaganda machine has become a signiﬁcant area of research, with
scholars such as Winter identifying key themes in it such as brutality, mercy,
victimhood, war, belonging and utopianism. [26]. However, there has been in-
suﬃcient attention focused on how these approaches have particularly targeted
and impacted women. This is signiﬁcant given that scholars have identiﬁed the
distinctiveness of this population when it comes to nearly all facets of terrorism.
ISIS used diﬀerent types of media to propagate its messages, such as videos,
images, texts, and even music. Twitter was particularly eﬀective and the Arabic
Twitter app allowed ISIS to tweet extensively without triggering spam-detection
mechanisms the platform uses [6]. Scholars followed the resulting trove of data
and this became the preeminent way in which they assess ISIS messages. For
example, in [4] they use both lexical analysis of tweets as well as social network
analysis to examine ISIS support or opposition on Twitter. Other researchers
used data mining techniques to detect pro-ISIS user divergence behavior at vari-
ous points in time [18]. By looking at these works, the impact of using text min-
ing and lexical analysis to address important questions becomes obvious. Proper
usage of these tools allows the research community to analyze big chunks of un-
structured data. This approach, however, became less productive as the social
media networks began cracking down and ISIS recruiters moved oﬀof them.
With their ability to operate freely on social media now curtailed, ISIS re-
cruiters and propagandists increased their attentiveness to another longstanding
tool–English language online magazines targeting western audiences. Al Hayat,
the media wing of ISIS, published multiple online magazines in diﬀerent lan-
guages including English. The English online magazine of ISIS was named Dabiq
and ﬁrst appeared on the dark web on July 2014 and continued publishing for
15 issues. This publication was followed by Rumiyah which produced 13 English
language issues through September 2017. The content of these magazines pro-
vides a valuable but underutilized resource for understanding ISIS strategies and
how they appeal to recruits, speciﬁcally English-speaking audiences. They also
provide a way to compare ISIS’ approach with other radical groups. Ingram com-
pared Dabiq contents with Inspire (Al Qaeda publication) and suggested that Al
Qaeda heavily emphasized identity-choice, while ISIS’ messages were more bal-
anced between identity-choice and rational-choice [8]. In another research paper,
Wignell et al. [25] compared Dabiq and Rumiah by examining their style and
what both magazine messages emphasized. Despite the volume of research on
these magazines, only a few researchers used lexical analysis and mostly relied
on experts’ opinions. [23] is one exception to this approach where they used word
frequency on 11 issues of Dabiq publications and compared attributes such as
anger, anxiety, power, motive, etc.
4
M. Heidarysafa et al.
This paper seeks to establish how ISIS speciﬁcally tailored propaganda tar-
geting western women, who became a particular target for the organization as
the “caliphate” expanded. Although the number of recruits is unknown, in 2015
it was estimated that around 10 percent of all western recruits were female [15].
Some researchers have attempted to understand how ISIS propaganda targets
women. Kneip, for example, analyzed women’s desire to join as a form of eman-
cipation [9]. We extend that line of inquiry by leveraging technology to answer
key outstanding questions about the targeting of women in ISIS propaganda.
To further assess how ISIS propaganda might aﬀect women, we used emotion
detection methods on these texts. Emotion detection techniques are mostly di-
vided into lexicon-base or machine learning-base methods. Lexicon-base methods
rely on several lexicons while machine learning (ML) methods use algorithm to
detect the elation of texts as inputs and emotions as the target, usually trained on
a large corpus. Unsupervised methods usually use Non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion (NMF) and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [5] approaches. An important
distinction that should be made when using text for emotion detection is that
emotion detected in the text and the emotion evoked in the reader of that text
might diﬀer. In the case of propaganda, it is more desirable to detect possible
emotions that will be evoked in a hypothetical reader. In the next section, we
describe methods to analyze content and technique to ﬁnd evoked emotions in
a potential reader using available natural language processing tools.
3
Data Collection & Pre-Processing
3.1
Data collection
Finding useful collections of texts where ISIS targets women is a challenging task.
Most of the available material are not reﬂecting ISIS’ oﬃcial point of view or
they do not talk speciﬁcally about women. However, ISIS’ online magazines are
valuable resources for understanding how the organization attempts to appeal
to western audiences, particularly women. Looking through both Dabiq and
Rumiyah, many issues of the magazines contain articles speciﬁcally addressing
women, usually with “ to our sisters ” incorporated into the title. Seven out of
ﬁfteen Dabiq issues and all thirteen issues of Rumiyah contain articles targeting
women, clearly suggesting an increase in attention to women over time.
We converted all the ISIS magazines to texts using pdf readers and all ar-
ticles that addressed women in both magazines (20 articles) were selected for
our analysis. To facilitate comparison with a mainstream, non-violent religious
group, we collected articles from catholicwomensforum.org, an online resource
catering to Catholic women. We scrapped 132 articles from this domain. While
this number is large, the articles themselves are much shorter than those pub-
lished by ISIS. These texts were pre-processed by tokenizing the sentences and
eliminating non-word tokens and punctuation marks. Also, all words turned into
lower case and numbers and English stop words such as “our, is, did, can, etc.
” have been removed from the produced tokens. For the emotion analysis part,
we used a spacy library as part of speech tagging to identify the exact role of
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
5
words in the sentence. A word and its role have been used to look for emotional
values of that word in the same role in the sentence.
3.2
Pre-Processing
Text Cleaning and Pre-processing Most text and document datasets con-
tain many unnecessary words such as stopwords, misspelling, slang, etc. In many
algorithms, especially statistical and probabilistic learning algorithms, noise and
unnecessary features can have adverse eﬀects on system performance. In this
section, we brieﬂy explain some techniques and methods for text cleaning and
pre-processing text datasets [10].
Tokenization Tokenization is a pre-processing method which breaks a stream
of text into words, phrases, symbols, or other meaningful elements called to-
kens [24]. The main goal of this step is to investigate the words in a sentence [24].
Both text classiﬁcation and text mining requires a parser which processes the
tokenization of the documents; for example:
sentence [1] :
After sleeping for four hours, he decided to sleep for another four.
In this case, the tokens are as follows:
{“After” “sleeping” “for” “four” “hours” “he” “decided” “to” “sleep” “for”
“another” “four”}.
Stop words Text and document classiﬁcation includes many words which do
not hold important signiﬁcance to be used in classiﬁcation algorithms such as
{“a”, “about”, “above”, “across”, “after”, “afterwards”, “again”,. . .}. The most
common technique to deal with these words is to remove them from the texts
and documents [19].
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency K Sparck Jones [20] pro-
posed inverse document frequency (IDF) as a method to be used in conjunction
with term frequency in order to lessen the eﬀect of implicitly common words in
the corpus. IDF assigns a higher weight to words with either high frequency or
low frequency term in the document. This combination of TF and IDF is well
known as term frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf). The mathemat-
ical representation of the weight of a term in a document by tf-idf is given in
Equation 1.
W(d, t) = TF(d, t) ∗log( N
df(t))
(1)
Here N is the number of documents and df(t) is the number of documents
containing the term t in the corpus. The ﬁrst term in Equation 1 improves the
recall while the second term improves the precision of the word embedding [22].
Although tf-idf tries to overcome the problem of common terms in the document,
6
M. Heidarysafa et al.
it still suﬀers from some other descriptive limitations. Namely, tf-idf cannot
account for the similarity between the words in the document since each word
is independently presented as an index. However, with the development of more
complex models in recent years, new methods, such as word embedding, have
been presented that can incorporate concepts such as similarity of words and
part of speech tagging.
4
Method
In this section, we describe our methods used for comparing topics and evoked
emotions in both ISIS and non-violent religious materials.
4.1
Content Analysis
The key task in comparing ISIS material with that of a non-violent group involves
analyzing the content of these two corpora to identify the topics. For our analysis,
we considered a simple uni-gram model where each word is considered as a single
unit. Understanding what words appear most frequently provides a simple metric
for comparison. To do so we normalized the count of words with the number
of words in each corpora to account for the size of each corpus. It should be
noted, however, that a drawback of word frequencies is that there might be some
dominant words that will overcome all the other contents without conveying
much information.
Topic modeling methods are the more powerful technique for understanding
the contents of a corpus. These methods try to discover abstract topics in a
corpus and reveal hidden semantic structures in a collection of documents. The
most popular topic modeling methods use probabilistic approaches such as prob-
abilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA).
LDA is a generalization of pLSA where documents are considered as a mixture
of topics and the distribution of topics is governed by a Dirichlet prior (α). Fig-
ure 1 shows plate notation of general LDA structure where β represents prior of
word distribution per topic and θ refers to topics distribution for documents [3].
Since LDA is among the most widely utilized algorithms for topic modeling, we
applied it to our data. However, the coherence of the topics produced by LDA
is poorer than expected.
To address this lack of coherence, we applied non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion (NMF). This method decomposes the term-document matrix into two non-
negative matrices as shown in Figure 2. The resulting non-negative matrices are
such that their product closely approximate the original data. Mathematically
speaking, given an input matrix of document-terms V , NMF ﬁnds two matrices
by solving the following equation [13]:
min
W,H ∥V −WH∥F
s.t
H ≥0, W ≥0.
Where W is topic-word matrix and H represents topic-document matrix.
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
7
Fig. 1: Plate notation of LDA model
NMF appears to provide more coherent topic on speciﬁc corpora. O’Callaghan
et al. compared LDA with NMF and concluded that NMF performs better in
corporas with speciﬁc and non-mainstream areas [14]. Our ﬁndings align with
this assessment and thus our comparison of topics is based on NMF.
4.2
Emotion detection
Propaganda eﬀectiveness hinges on the emotions that it elicits. But detecting
emotion in text requires that two essential challenges are overcome.
First, emotions are generally complex and emotional representation mod-
els are correspondingly contested. Despite this, some models proposed by psy-
chologists have gained wide-spread usage that extends to text-emotion analysis.
Robert Plutchik presented a model that arranged emotions from basic to com-
plex in a circumplex as shown in Figure 3. The model categorizes emotions into
8 main subsets and with addition of intensity and interactions it will classify
emotions into 24 classes [17]. Other models have been developed to capture all
emotions by deﬁning a 3-dimensional model of pleasure, arousal, and dominance.
Fig. 2: NMF decomposition of document-term matrix [11]
8
M. Heidarysafa et al.
The second challenge lies in using text for detecting emotion evoked in a
potential reader. Common approaches use either lexicon-base methods (such as
keyword-based or ontology-based model) or machine learning-base models (usu-
ally using large corpus with labeled emotions) [5]. These methods are suited to
addressing the emotion that exist in the text, but in the case of propaganda we
are more interested in emotions that are elicited in the reader of such materi-
als. The closest analogy to this problem can be found in research that seek to
model feelings of people after reading a news article. One solution for this type
of problem is to use an approach called Depechemood.
Depechemood is a lexicon-based emotion detection method gathered from
crowd-annotated news [21]. Drawing on approximately 23.5K documents with
average of 500 words per document from rappler.com, researchers asked sub-
jects to report their emotions after reading each article. They then multiplied
the document-emotion matrix and word-document matrix to derive emotion-
word matrix for these words. Due to limitations of their experiment setup, the
emotion categories that they present does not exactly match the emotions from
the Plutchik wheel categories. However, they still provide a good sense of the
general feeling of an individual after reading an article. The emotion categories of
Depechemood are: AFRAID, AMUSED, ANGRY, ANNOYED, DON’T CARE,
HAPPY, INSPIRED, SAD. Depechemood simply creates dictionaries of words
where each word has scores between 0 and 1 for all of these 8 emotion categories.
We present our ﬁnding using this approach in the result section.
Fig. 3: 2D representation of Plutchik wheel of emotions [16]
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
9
Table 1: NMF Topics of women in ISIS
early islam
women
Islam /
khilafah marriage islamic praying women’s life
hijrah
islamic
divorce motherhood
spousal
relationship
Topic 0
Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
Topic 6 Topic 7
Topic 8
Topic 9
1
said
wa
husband
masjid
worldly
islamic
wala
mourning
said
spouses
2
khadijah
hijrah
woman
prayer
spend
state
said
iddah
ibn
said
3
munaﬁqin
sallam
sharah
said
regards
khilafah
bara
widow
jihad
husband
4
iman
alayhi
said
masajid
wearing
abu
sake
home
reported
backbiting
5
abu
sallallhu
wives
home
mat
brothers
enmity
husband
children
listening
6
ibn
khilfah
wife
going
menstruation
arrived
kab
ibn
charity
wife
7
dunya
ab
marry
woman
prophet
knew
salam
said
child
abu
8
mother
sisters
ibn
ibn
life
mujahidin remained perfume
abu
divorce
9
people
radiyallhu
married
prophet
clothing
previous
prayer
woman
wealth
word
10
asma
ibn
jihd
hadith
small
soon
shariah
away
ﬂock
problems
11
husband
qurn
duny
reported
lived
children
muslims
night
muslim
instead
12
bakr
islamic
say
prevent
time
later
aﬀection
wear
cause
backbite
13
believers
praise
permitted
men
family
informed
islam
widows
albukhari
relationship
14
hearts
state
lawful
default
aishah
hijrah
anger
house
prophet
tongue
15
killed
said
prohibited
muslim
garment
shariah
aqidah
sleep
policy
woman
16
know
slavegirl
lord
leaving
despite
dua
good
married
shepherd
person
17
steadfast
land
islam
abu
follow
journey
religion
clothing
soul
brother
18
sumayyah
ﬁrm
fear
stay
concern
returned
return
ab
waging
home
19
sisters
people
man
wives
living
umm
state
pregnant
lord
hind
20
spreading
lands
sister
shariah
food
leave
relatives husbands
mother
narrated
10
M. Heidarysafa et al.
Table 2: NMF Topics of women in catholic forum
feminism
law
gender
identity
marrage/
divorce
church
motherhood birth control
life
sexuality
parenting
Topic 0
Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
Topic 6
Topic 7
Topic 8
Topic 9
1
women
abortion
gender
marriage
church
mom
humanae
human
sex
parents
2
abortion
court
lgbt
divorce
catholic
god
pill
social
sexual
school
3
pro
constitutional
identity
family
bishops
mary
vitae
ecology
men
children
4
men
circuit
transgender
children
pope
christ
contraception
work
regnerus
schools
5
life
federal
ideology
marital
synod
mother
control
revolution
cheap
federalist
6
feminist
decision
trans
marriages
priests
jesus
birth
people
consent
education
7
march
abortions
sex
divorced
francis
like
women
family
women
students
8
feminists
state
sexual
spouses
women
baby
contraceptives
moral
desire
transgender
9
woman
kansas
male
annulment
rome
love
health
political
porn
child
10 feminism
supreme
reality
families
letter
motherhood
eﬀects
politics
weinstein
reading
11
equality
law
female
spouse
christ
child
mandate
man
market
kids
12
female
medicaid
activists
married
mccarrick
world
fertility
dignity
marriage
youth
13
choice
roe
catholic
abandoned
vatican
life
iud
person
mating
girl
14
male
constitution
biological
love
bishop
charlie
catholic
ecological
power
family
15 movement
judge
dysphoria
catholics
holy
children
contraceptive
society
pornography
gender
16 vulnerable
case
person
church
god
light
sanger
nature
ﬂy
confused
17
sex
planned
agenda
ﬁdelity
faithful
son
medical
world
good
continue
18
today
parenthood
people
older
faith
little
prevent
liberty
like
boy
19
time
right
orientation situations priesthood
got
sexual
self
risk
public
20
human
government
report
husband
authority
day
free
middle
kind
news
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
11
Fig. 4: Word frequency of most common words in catholic corpora
Fig. 5: Word frequency of most common words in dabiq corpora
5
Results
In this section, we present the results of our analysis based on the contents of ISIS
propaganda materials as compared to articles from the Catholic women forum.
We then present the results of emotion analysis conducted on both corpora.
5.1
Content Analysis
After pre-processing the text, both corpora were analyzed for word frequencies.
These word frequencies have been normalized by the number of words in each
corpus. Figure 5 shows the most common words in each of these corpora.
A comparison of common words suggests that those related to marital rela-
tionships ( husband, wife, etc.) appear in both corpora, but the religious theme
of ISIS material appears to be stronger. A stronger comparison can be made
12
M. Heidarysafa et al.
using topic modeling techniques to discover main topics of these documents. Al-
though we used LDA, our results by using NMF outperform LDA topics, due
to the nature of these corpora. Also, fewer numbers of ISIS documents might
contribute to the comparatively worse performance. Therefore, we present only
NMF results. Based on their coherence, we selected 10 topics for analyzing within
both corporas. Table 1 and Table 2 show the most important words in each topic
with a general label that we assigned to the topic manually. Based on the NMF
output, ISIS articles that address women include topics mainly about Islam,
women’s role in early Islam, hijrah (moving to another land), spousal relations,
marriage, and motherhood.
The topics generated from the Catholic women forum are clearly quite diﬀer-
ent. Some, however, exist in both contexts. More speciﬁcally, marriage/divorce,
motherhood, and to some extent spousal relations appeared in both generated
topics. This suggests that when addressing women in a religious context, these
may be very broadly eﬀective and appeal to the feminine audience. More impor-
tantly, suitable topic modeling methods will be able to identify these similarities
no matter the size of the corpus we are working with. Although, ﬁnding the sim-
ilarities/diﬀerences between topics in these two groups of articles might provide
some new insights, we turn to emotional analysis to also compare the emotions
evoked in the audience.
5.2
Emotion Analysis
We rely on Depechemood dictionaries to analyze emotions in both corpora. These
dictionaries are freely available and come in multiple arrangements. We used a
version that includes words with their part of speech (POS) tags. Only words that
exist in the Depechemood dictionary with the same POS tag are considered for
our analysis. We aggregated the score for each word and normalized each article
by emotions. To better compare the result, we added a baseline of 100 random
articles from a Reuters news dataset as a non-religious general resource which
is available in an NLTK python library. Figure 6 shows the aggregated score for
diﬀerent feelings in our corpora.
Both Catholic and ISIS related materials score the highest in “inspired” cat-
egory. Furthermore, in both cases, being afraid has the lowest score. However,
this is not the case for random news material such as the Reuters corpus, which
are not that inspiring and, according to this method, seems to cause more fear
in their audience. We investigate these results further by looking at the most
inspiring words detected in these two corpora. Table 3 presents 10 words that
are among the most inspiring in both corpora. The comparison of the two lists
indicate that the method picks very diﬀerent words in each corpus to reach to
the same conclusion. Also, we looked at separate articles in each of the issues of
ISIS material addressing women. Figure 7 shows emotion scores in each of the
20 issues of ISIS propaganda. As demonstrated, in every separate article, this
method gives the highest score to evoking inspirations in the reader. Also, in
most of these issues the method scored “being afraid” as the lowest score in each
issue.
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
13
Fig. 6: Comparison of emotions of our both corpora along with Reuters news
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have applied natural language processing methods to ISIS
propaganda materials in an attempt to understand these materials using avail-
able technologies. We also compared these texts with a non-violent religious
groups’ (both focusing on women related articles) to examine possible similari-
ties or diﬀerences in their approaches. To compare the contents, we used word
frequency and topic modeling with NMF. Also, our results showed that NMF
outperforms LDA due to the niche domain and relatively small number of doc-
uments.
The results suggest that certain topics play a particularly important roles in
ISIS propaganda targeting women. These relate to the role of women in early
Islam, Islamic ideology, marriage/divorce, motherhood, spousal relationships,
and hijrah (moving to a new land).
Comparing these topics with those that appeared on a Catholic women fo-
rum, it seems that both ISIS and non-violent groups use topics about moth-
erhood, spousal relationship, and marriage/divorce when they address women.
Moreover, we used Depechemood methods to analyze the emotions that these
materials are likely to elicit in readers. The result of our emotion analysis sug-
gests that both corpuses used words that aim to inspire readers while avoiding
fear. However, the actual words that lead to these eﬀects are very diﬀerent in
the two contexts. Overall, our ﬁndings indicate that, using proper methods, au-
tomated analysis of large bodies of textual data can provide novel insight insight
into extremist propaganda that can assist the counterterrorism community.
14
M. Heidarysafa et al.
Fig. 7: Feeling detected in ISIS magazines (ﬁrst 7 issues belong to Dabiq and last
13 belong to Rumiyah)
Table 3: Words with highest inspiring scores
Words
Group
Catholic
ISIS
Word1
avarice
uprightness
Word2
perceptive
memorization
Word3
educationally
merciful
Word4
stereotypically
aﬄiction
Word5
distrustful
gentleness
Word6
reverence
masjid
Word7
unbounded
verily
Word8
antichrist
sublimity
Word9
loneliness
recompense
Word10
feelings
ﬁerceness
References
1. Aggarwal, C.C.: Machine learning for text. Springer (2018)
2. Al-Tamimi, A.J.: The dawn of the islamic state of iraq and ash-sham. Current
Trends in Islamist Ideology 16, 5 (2014)
3. Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I.: Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
Learning research 3(Jan), 993–1022 (2003)
4. Bodine-Baron, E., Helmus, T.C., Magnuson, M., Winkelman, Z.: Examining isis
support and opposition networks on twitter. Tech. rep., RAND Corporation Santa
Monica United States (2016)
5. Canales, L., Martínez-Barco, P.: Emotion detection from text: A survey. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in the 5th Information
Systems Research Working Days (JISIC), pp. 37–43 (2014)
6. Farwell, J.P.: The media strategy of isis. Survival 56(6), 49–55 (2014)
Women in ISIS Propaganda: A Natural Language Processing Analysis
15
7. Gates, S., Podder, S.: Social media, recruitment, allegiance and the islamic state.
Perspectives on Terrorism 9(4) (2015)
8. Ingram, H.J.: An analysis of inspire and dabiq: Lessons from aqap and islamic
state’s propaganda war. Studies in Conﬂict & Terrorism 40(5), 357–375 (2017)
9. Kneip, K.: Female jihad–women in the isis. politikon 29 (2016)
10. Kowsari, K., Jafari Meimandi, K., Heidarysafa, M., Mendu, S., Barnes, L., Brown,
D.: Text classiﬁcation algorithms: A survey. Information 10(4), 150 (2019)
11. Kuang, D., Brantingham, P.J., Bertozzi, A.L.: Crime topic modeling. Crime Sci-
ence 6(1), 12 (2017)
12. Laub, Z., Masters, J.: Islamic state in iraq and greater syria.
The Council on
Foreign Relations. June 12 (2014)
13. Lee, D.D., Seung, H.S.: Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix fac-
torization. Nature 401(6755), 788 (1999)
14. O’callaghan, D., Greene, D., Carthy, J., Cunningham, P.: An analysis of the coher-
ence of descriptors in topic modeling. Expert Systems with Applications 42(13),
5645–5657 (2015)
15. Perešin, A.: Fatal attraction: Western muslimas and isis. Perspectives on Terrorism
9(3) (2015)
16. Plutchik, R.: A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion.
In: Theories of
emotion, pp. 3–33. Elsevier (1980)
17. Plutchik, R.: The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary
roots, a fact that may explain their complexity and provide tools for clinical prac-
tice. American scientist 89(4), 344–350 (2001)
18. Rowe, M., Saif, H.: Mining pro-isis radicalisation signals from social media users.
In: Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (2016)
19. Saif, H., Fernández, M., He, Y., Alani, H.: On stopwords, ﬁltering and data sparsity
for sentiment analysis of twitter (2014)
20. Sparck Jones, K.: A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its application
in retrieval. Journal of documentation 28(1), 11–21 (1972)
21. Staiano, J., Guerini, M.: Depechemood: a lexicon for emotion analysis from crowd-
annotated news. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.1605 (2014)
22. Tokunaga, T., Makoto, I.: Text categorization based on weighted inverse document
frequency. In: Special Interest Groups and Information Process Society of Japan
(SIG-IPSJ. Citeseer (1994)
23. Vergani, M., Bliuc, A.M.: The evolution of the isis’language: a quantitative anal-
ysis of the language of the ﬁrst year of dabiq magazine. Sicurezza, Terrorismo e
Società= Security, Terrorism and Society 2(2), 7–20 (2015)
24. Verma, T., Renu, R., Gaur, D.: Tokenization and ﬁltering process in rapidminer.
International Journal of Applied Information Systems 7(2), 16–18 (2014)
25. Wignell, P., Tan, S., O’Halloran, K., Lange, R.: A mixed methods empirical ex-
amination of changes in emphasis and style in the extremist magazines dabiq and
rumiyah. Perspectives on Terrorism 11(2), 2–20 (2017)
26. Winter, C.: The Virtual’Caliphate’: Understanding Islamic State’s Propaganda
Strategy, vol. 25. Quilliam London (2015)
