Title: A Legal Framework for Natural Language Processing Model Training in Portugal
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00536v1
--------------------------------------------------

A Legal Framework for Natural Language Processing Model
Training in Portugal
Rúben Almeida, Evelin Amorim
INESC TEC, FCUP-Universidade do Porto
ruben.f.almeida@inesctec.pt, evelin.f.amorim@inesctec.pt
Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have promoted the advent of many computational systems capable of performing
intelligent actions that, until then, were restricted to the human intellect. In the particular case of human languages,
these advances allowed the introduction of applications like ChatGPT that are capable of generating coherent text
without being explicitly programmed to do so. Instead, these models use large volumes of textual data to learn
meaningful representations of human languages. Associated with these advances, concerns about copyright and
data privacy infringements caused by these applications have emerged. Despite these concerns, the pace at which
new natural language processing applications continued to be developed largely outperformed the introduction of
new regulations. Today, communication barriers between legal experts and computer scientists motivate many
unintentional legal infringements during the development of such applications. In this paper, a multidisciplinary team
intends to bridge this communication gap and promote more compliant Portuguese NLP research by presenting a
series of everyday NLP use cases, while highlighting the Portuguese legislation that may arise during its development.
Keywords: Portuguese NLP, Legal NLP, PLN Português
1.
Introduction
In recent years, deep-learning-based methods
have permitted great advances in Computer Sci-
ence (CS) fields previously known for their com-
putational complexity (Bishop and Bishop, 2023).
One of those fields was natural language process-
ing (NLP); the CS field focused on machine under-
standing of human languages and the generation
of coherent human text (Deng and Liu, 2018).
Long before the introduction of state-of-the-
art (SOTA) generative large language mod-
els (LLMs) like Chat-GPT (OpenAI, 2022), NLP
relied on simpler approaches based on rules/word
counts (Jurafsky and Martin, 2014) to deliver
human-interpretable models capable of address-
ing simple NLP tasks. The evolution towards deep
learning permitted NLP to quit the controlled atmo-
sphere of university labs and embrace mainstream
societal adoption at the expense of costly training
processes and vast volumes of textual data.
The capabilities revealed by SOTA NLP mod-
els were accompanied by ethical and legal con-
cerns among prominent NLP researchers1, big-
tech CEOs2, politicians3, and economists4 who
1https://twitter.com/ylecun/status/17
33481002234679685
2https://www.reuters.com/technology/m
usk-experts-urge-pause-training-ai-syste
ms-that-can-outperform-gpt-4-2023-03-2
9/
3https://www.ft.com/content/9339d104-7
b0c-42b8-9316-72226dd4e4c0
4https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/
03/taxing-robots-wont-work-says-yanis-v
appealed for regulation and higher ethical stan-
dards during the development of NLP solutions as
a way of restricting the usage of such capabilities
to induce harm in society.
However, the pace at which new LLMs are cur-
rently being developed largely surpasses the pace
at which new regulations are introduced. This phe-
nomenon, together with the traditional communica-
tion barriers between the formality of legal expertise
and the dynamic world of CS, opens the door to
legal vacuums, promoting undesirable copyright5
and privacy infringements6.
In this paper, we intend to bridge this gap by list-
ing the legal concerns that may arise during every-
day NLP challenges. We focus on the Portuguese
legal system to present a study targeting both com-
puter scientists and legal experts, with the ultimate
goal of promoting awareness about the topic in
one of the most peripherally and underdeveloped7
countries of the European Union (EU). Despite our
focus on Portugal, we believe researchers in other
EU countries may find the concepts introduced in
this paper useful, due to the European nature of
many of the legislation listed in this paper.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 de-
aroufakis/
5https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/27/b
usiness/media/new-york-times-open-ai-mic
rosoft-lawsuit.html
6https://www.forbes.com/sites/emmawoo
llacott/2023/09/01/openai-hit-with-new-l
awsuit-over-chatgpt-training-data/?sh=2f
3d1b856d84
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_o
f_countries_by_Human_Development_Index
arXiv:2405.00536v1  [cs.CL]  1 May 2024
scribes the existing literature about the topic. The
lack of research, focused exclusively on the Por-
tuguese case, forced us to broaden our scope to-
wards other EU countries. Section 3 provides a
quick overview of the current SOTA for Portuguese
NLP, with a special emphasis on explaining the im-
portance of Brazilian NLP research for Portuguese
NLP. In Section 4, we briefly introduce the Por-
tuguese legal system, performing a high-level de-
scription of the legislation that may engage with
the development of NLP solutions. Section 5 lists
common licensing agreements used by NLP re-
searchers to publish their works. Finally, in Sec-
tion 6, we introduce some use cases representing
everyday challenges faced by NLP researchers
highlighting the legal concerns associated with
them.
2.
Related Work
The novelty of this subject translates into a lack of
literature about the topic. The absence would be
even worse if we focused exclusively on the Por-
tuguese legal landscape. Therefore, in the follow-
ing section, we broaden our scope outside Portugal
towards other EU countries.
2.1.
Portuguese
The existing literature concerning the legal impli-
cations of artificial intelligence (AI) systems in Por-
tugal is constrained to regional conferences and
journals in the Portuguese language. We highlight
the pioneering works of (Guimarães et al., 2021)
that compiled summarized versions of master the-
ses developed by law students about different CS
topics, including Big Data (Silva Costa, 2021).
Recently, (Barbosa, 2023) introduced the anal-
ysis concerning data privacy during LLM develop-
ment. Despite focusing on the Portuguese legal
framework, the writer relies heavily on EU regu-
lations to provide a brief overview of the recent
developments surrounding the topic. In particular,
it is demonstrated that the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) alone is incapable of regulat-
ing LLMs like ChatGPT. The author mentions the
importance of the AI Act to establish a legal frame-
work founded on the concept of risk to deal with
the inaccuracies of these models.
Focusing on copyright issues, we highlight the
works of (Nobre, 2012), which provide an extensive
listing of what is protected and what is excluded
from copyright protection.
Lastly, it is worth mentioning the interesting con-
siderations of (Pereira, 2020) regarding copyright
eligibility for AI outputs. In Portugal, the copyrights
for AI results are free, unlike in other countries like
the United Kingdom, where the research team who
made them inherits the rights8.
2.2.
European
At the European level, we highlight the works
of (Eckart de Castilho et al., 2018) and (Kelli et al.,
2020) focusing on copyright. Both works discuss
whether an LLM trained in copyrighted protected
data inherits the same license as its training data.
Both authors concluded there is a lack of clarity on
the topic, but it all depends on how much copyright
data is used. If a model can reproduce data that
is protected by copyright, it is called a derivation
of the dataset and has the same copyright as the
dataset used.
Nevertheless, most of the European literature
about the topic is produced by enterprises. We
highlight the efforts of ML69, KPMG10 or EY11 to
promote the debate about the topic. These blog
posts often have anonymous authors who are not
checked by others. This makes it hard to know if
they are accurate and up-to-date.
3.
Portuguese NLP: Quick Overview
Portuguese is the official language of 260 mil-
lion people spread across five continents. In the
context of NLP, Portuguese is considered a mid-
resourced language (Joshi et al., 2021). Mean-
ing that “they have a large amount of unlabeled
data...and are only challenged by lesser amount
of labeled data” (Joshi et al., 2021). Despite this
classification, the vast majority of these resources
are Brazilian Portuguese, produced by Brazilian
research teams.
Similar to other mid-resource languages, the
shorter investment produces a reduced number
of Portuguese LLMs.
Until recently, BERTim-
bau (Souza et al., 2020), a Brazilian Portuguese
version of BERT, was the only Portuguese LLM.
Progressively, more complex architectures have
emerged: Albertina PT (Rodrigues et al., 2023) or
the generative models Sabiá (Pires et al., 2023),
Gervásio (Santos et al., 2024), and GlórIA (Lopes
et al., 2024).
8https://pec.ac.uk/blog_entries/copyr
ight-protection-in-ai-generated-works/
9https://www.ml6.eu/blogpost/navigati
ng-ethical-considerations-developing-and
-deploying-large-language-models-llms-r
esponsibly
10https://kpmg.com/ie/en/home/insights
/2024/01/eu-artificial-intelligence-act
-art-int.html
11https://www.ey.com/en_ch/forensic-int
egrity-services/the-eu-ai-act-what-it-m
eans-for-your-business
3.1.
Leveraging Brazilian Portuguese
Resources
Despite the major phonological, morphological,
lexical, syntactical and semantic differences be-
tween the numerous Portuguese varieties around
the globe (Scherre and Duarte, 2016), prompt-
engineering12 and fine-tuning13 of Brazilian LLMs
help European Portuguese researchers achieve
SOTA results (Almeida et al., 2024).
4.
Portuguese Legal System
Portugal, as an EU member, must ensure its legal
system is in harmony with EU law. In this sec-
tion, we list the legislation that engages with NLP
development, while describing how EU legislation
impacts the Portuguese legal system.
4.1.
Scientific Exceptions
Many of the legislation listed in the following sub-
sections establish exceptions to scientific work. For
that reason, we believe it is paramount to clarify
what is considered scientific work by the Por-
tuguese law.
The (European Parliament and Council of the
European Union, 2019) directive introduces a com-
prehensive definition of scientific work founded on
the concept of profit: “research organisation means
a university, including its libraries, a research insti-
tute or any other entity, the primary goal of which
is to conduct scientific research or to carry out ed-
ucational activities involving also the conduct of
scientific research: (a) on a not-for-profit basis or
by reinvesting all the profits in its scientific research;
or (b) pursuant to a public interest mission recog-
nised by a Member State" (European Parliament
and Council of the European Union, 2019).
4.2.
National Legislation
Portuguese legislation is divided into two major sets
of laws: the civil code and the penal code. The pe-
nal code lists those actions that constitute a crime
and require the existence of willful misconduct
to be taken into consideration. While in the civil
code, the penalties restrained themselves to some
kind of compensation, the penal code establishes
tougher penalties like prison time. Committing a
crime is a severe action that usually implies not
only a penal condemnation but also a parallel civil-
ian compensation to repair any harm provoked in
society.
12https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prompt
_engineering
13https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fine-t
uning_(deep_learning)
Regarding NLP, most of the legislation that ap-
plies is restricted to the civil code; however, in re-
cent years, with the mass adoption of CS in society,
many penal considerations have arisen focusing
on copyright infringement, privacy violations, or cy-
bercrime.
Finally, before enumerating the Portuguese leg-
islation directly relevant to NLP, it is essential to
clarify the distinctions between public, semi-public,
and private crimes. Public crimes warrant the in-
tervention of public prosecutors to safeguard the
interests of the victim. Semi-public crimes trigger
public prosecution only upon the filing of a com-
plaint with the police. In cases of private crimes,
typically of lesser severity, public prosecution does
not intervene, and a complaint must also be lodged
with the police. In instances where the penal code
does not explicitly specify the classification of the
crime, it defaults to being considered public14.
Sensitive Data Protection: Article 35 of the Por-
tuguese constitution (República Portuguesa, 1976)
strictly prohibits the digital processing of sensitive
ethnic, political, sexual, or religious data without
explicit consent and for scientifically motivated pur-
poses that may positively impact society. Conse-
quently, NLP researchers are advised to refrain
from operating on such sensitive data.
Right to Expression: Article 79 of the Portuguese
civil code (República Portuguesa, 1966) affirms the
right of individuals to freely express themselves
without fear of their words being recorded or utilized
by a third party. This legislation outlines exceptions
for scientific research. Without these provisions,
the use of tweets to train NLP models would be
deemed illegal.
4.3.
European Legislation
The great investment the EU has been making to
regulate AI has had a great effect in peripheral
countries like Portugal, helping reduce inequalities
in access to technology between richer and poorer
countries within the EU.
Before enumerating EU regulations that engage
directly with the development of NLP solutions, it
is important to clarify some terminology regarding
EU law:
Regulation: Regulations come into force automat-
ically upon approval by the European Parliament
and European Council. Requiring a 65% majority
for acceptance, regulations are always accompa-
nied by a transition period to allow EU citizens to
adapt to the new legal framework.
14https://www.ministeriopublico.pt/per
guntas-frequentes/crime
Directive: Directives represent EU laws that mem-
ber states must adopt within a specified transition
period, integrating them into their own legal sys-
tems.
Despite penalties for countries failing to
timely adopt directives, Portugal has earned a rep-
utation for delays in transposing these directives. A
pertinent example is the 2019/790 directive, where
the transposition was delayed by over two years15.
Below, we briefly introduce the most relevant EU
legislation that engages with NLP development:
General Data Protection (Regulation): Enacted
in 2016, this EU regulation (European Parliament
and Council of the European Union, 2016) sets the
foundational standards for online data protection.
Emphasizing transparency and consent, it man-
dates that all corporate operations involving per-
sonal data must be pre-informed and explicitly con-
sented to by users. The regulation applies specifi-
cally to private data - information that, if disclosed,
can identify the individual to whom it pertains. It
also regulates cross-border data transfers, stipu-
lating that EU data protection laws accompany the
data wherever it goes. Outside the EU, in countries
lacking an adequacy decision16, such as Brazil,
additional measures may be necessary to ensure
equivalent levels of protection as those mandated
within the EU. This regulation was integrated into
Portuguese legislation in 2021, complemented by
the introduction of the Portuguese Charter on Hu-
man Rights in the Digital Age (Assembleia da
República, 2021). Concerning NLP, explicit con-
sent is required for data collection and usage in
training NLP models, with researchers urged to
minimize the use of private data whenever possi-
ble. While scientific research exceptions exist, the
legislature advises their avoidance, favoring maxi-
mal consent.
Copyright in the Digital Single Market (Direc-
tive): The 2019/790 EU directive (European Par-
liament and Council of the European Union, 2019)
on copyrights introduced a right to [text] mine,
framing the legal context for NLP development. It
broadened exceptions, permitting scientists to use
copyrighted data for NLP model training if not pur-
sued for profit. Transposed into Portuguese legisla-
tion in 2023 (Presidência do Conselho de Ministros,
2023), this directive provides a legal framework for
NLP endeavors.
Database Sui Generis Protection (Directive): Di-
rective 96/97EC (European Parliament and Council
15https://www.cuatrecasas.com/pt/portu
gal/art/transposicao-da-diretiva-do-mer
cado-unico-digital-1
16https://www.edpb.europa.eu/sme-data-p
rotection-guide/international-data-trans
fers_en
of the European Union, 1996) established copyright
protection for databases, granting 15 years of copy-
right protection to those who compile independent
works into structured units. This regulation was re-
visited during the approval of the 2019/790 directive,
with exceptions allowing copyright infringements for
scientific endeavors also applying to databases.
AI Act (Regulation): Recently approved, this reg-
ulation (European Commission, 2021) aims to be
the world’s first comprehensive AI legal framework,
positioning the EU at the forefront of AI legislation.
It sets rules for AI systems, including NLP, based on
their societal risk levels. Additionally, it mandates
transparency mechanisms during the training of
LLMs exceeding 1025 FLOPS. Given that most NLP
research does not involve sensitive data or yield
automated decisions significantly impacting Euro-
peans’ daily lives, it is categorized as minimal-risk,
exempting researchers from additional considera-
tions. The AI Act is in the final stages of approval
and is expected to be fully implemented within two
years.
5.
NLP Licensing System
In Table 1, we list the licenses of many NLP re-
sources.
Model Name
Year
License
BERT
2018
Apache 2.0
GPT-2
2019
MIT
Bloom
2022
Custom License
Falcon
2023
Apache 2.0
Llama 2
2023
Custom License
Mistral
2023
Apache 2.0
Phi-2
2023
MIT
Gemma
2024
Custom License
BERTimbau
2020
MIT
Albertina PT
2023
MIT
Sabiá
2023
Llama 1 License
Gervásio
2024
MIT
Glória
2024
ClueWeb22 License
Wikitext
2016
CC-BY-SA 3.0
CNN-Dailymail
2017
Apache 2.0
Flores
2019
CC-BY-4.0
OSCAR
2023
CC0-1.0
Table 1: Licenses for different SOTA NLP resources.
The first entries cover non-Portuguese LLMs, while
the second set focuses on Portuguese architecture.
The last set of resources are commonly used NLP
datasets.
The results reveal that many LLMs adopt an
Apache 2.0 or MIT license. The datasets identi-
fied tend to adopt Common Crawl licenses. It is
worth mentioning the case of the Portuguese LLM
Glória (Lopes et al., 2024), where the usage of the
clueweb22 dataset (Overwijk et al., 2022) as part
of the training corpus required Glória’s authors to
adopt this license as well.
The information provided in this section is com-
plemented by the extensive analysis made by the
choose a license platform17.
6.
Use Cases
In this section, we cover three use cases that repre-
sent everyday NLP tasks. In the following subsec-
tions, we assume the perspective of a Portuguese
NLP operating under EU law. The green color used
in the flowcharts represents the yes/permitted case;
in contrast, the red color represents the no/not per-
mitted case.
6.1.
Load Brazilian Portuguese Dataset
From HuggingFace
This use case describes a standard practice in Por-
tuguese NLP, where Brazilian datasets are used
to train new NLP models. In Figure 1 we provide
a flowchart summarizing the legal questions that
may arise during the process.
Brazilian Portuguese
dataset on HuggingFace
Is scientic research
your ultimate goal?
Is it GDPR
compliant?
The dataset is copyright 
compliant and its 
license is confirmed?
Commercial use must
always comply with
copyright laws.
If a resource is GDPR
and copyright compliant
can always be used
You must ensure all data operating
in the EU is GDPR-compliant. 
The data origin doesn't matter for
NLP applications developed in EU
countries
There are exceptions
for scientific research
Figure 1: Flowchart summarizing the legal ques-
tions associated with the loading of a Non-EU
dataset
It is worth mentioning that the geographical origin
of the dataset has no impact on the overall legal
assessment of the resource.
17https://choosealicense.com/appendix/
6.2.
Crawl Portuguese Websites to
Produce a Large NLP Corpus
The
usage
of
web
crawling
techniques
is
paramount for LLM training. SOTA LLMs require
a vast amount of data, whose scale is only
comparable to the amount of information existing
on the web. In Figure 2, we describe the legal
considerations researchers should pay attention to
while crawling websites.
Crawling Portuguese
Websites
Is scientic research
your ultimate goal?
Terms and conditions 
allow crawling?
Ensure the license inherits the
terms and conditions of the
website crawled
There are exceptions for
scientific research
Commercial use must
always respect the terms
and conditions of the
platform
Web crawling is permitted
Figure 2: Flowchart highlighting the legal consider-
ations web crawling may arise.
6.3.
Use Tweets to Produce Political
Profiles: The Facebook-Cambridge
Analytica case
This use case draws inspiration from the Face-
book–Cambridge Analytica data scandal18. It aims
to encapsulate the legal considerations that may
emerge during the development of NLP models,
particularly in scenarios involving sensitive data
such as political profiling. Figure 3 provides a sum-
marized overview of these legal aspects.
7.
Conclusion & Future Work
In this study, we have presented the inaugural le-
gal framework for NLP development in Portugal.
The limited awareness of this subject in one of the
EU’s less affluent nations exposes vulnerabilities to
18https://shorturl.at/uxK47
Use tweets to
produce political
profiles
Is scientic research
your ultimate goal?
Was consent
given?
Are data anonymization 
and minimization 
ensured?
There are exceptions for
scientific research
The GDPR demands sensitive data to
be anonymized and the principle of
data minimization be respected.
The RGPR and the Portuguese
Constitution prohibit any form of
automated processing of sensible data,
including political opinions.
Sensitive data always
demands explicit consent
to be processed.
Figure 3: Flowchart concerning the legal issues of
processing sensitive data.
legal vacuums and potential infringements of copy-
right and data privacy. We have tried to introduce
key NLP concepts in a way that is accessible to
both computer scientists and legal experts. The
three use cases outlined serve to summarize the
principal insights gained from this research. Uti-
lizing flowcharts to illustrate these scenarios aims
to accelerate the procedure of obtaining data and
enhance overall comprehension of the research.
Our future work will focus on expanding the
scope of use cases, matching to the same struc-
tured approach, while exploring additional topics.
Specifically, we aim to incorporate insights from the
recently introduced regulation on AI, the European
AI Act, to further enrich the legal framework for NLP
development.
8.
Acknowledgements
This work is financed by National Funds through
the Portuguese funding agency, FCT - Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, within project
LA/P/0063/2020. DOI 10.54499/LA/P/0063/2020 |
https://doi.org/10.54499/LA/P/0063/2020 The au-
thor also would like to aknowledge the project Sto-
rySense, with reference 2022.09312.PTDC (DOI
10.54499/2022.09312.PTDC).
9.
Bibliographical References
Rúben Almeida, Ricardo Campos, Alípio Jorge,
and Sérgio Nunes. 2024. Indexing portuguese
nlp resources with pt-pump-up. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.15400.
Assembleia da República. 2021. Carta Portuguesa
de Direitos Humanos na Era Digital. Diário da
República Eletrónico. Lei n.º 27/2021 de 17 de
maio.
Mafalda Barbosa. 2023. Proteção de dados e in-
teligência artificial – perigos e soluções (também
a propósito do chatgpt. Revista Do Direito Da
Responsabilidade, 5(1):796–833.
Christopher M Bishop and Hugh Bishop. 2023.
Deep Learning. Springer Nature.
Li Deng and Yang Liu. 2018. Deep Learning in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Springer, Singapore.
Richard Eckart de Castilho, Giulia Dore, Thomas
Margoni,
Penny
Labropoulou,
and
Iryna
Gurevych. 2018. A legal perspective on training
models for natural language processing.
European Commission. 2021.
COM(2021) 206
final. European Commission Document. Pro-
posal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL ESTAB-
LISHING HARMONISED RULES ON ARTIFI-
CIAL INTELLIGENCE (ARTIFICIAL INTELLI-
GENCE REGULATION) AND AMENDING CER-
TAIN UNION LEGISLATIVE ACTS.
European Parliament and Council of the European
Union. 1996. DIRECTIVE 96/9/EC OF THE EU-
ROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUN-
CIL. Official Journal of the European Union. Di-
rective on the legal protection of databases.
European Parliament and Council of the European
Union. 2016. REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
COUNCIL.
Official Journal of the European
Union. Regulation on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of per-
sonal data and on the free movement of such
data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General
Data Protection Regulation).
European Parliament and Council of the European
Union. 2019. DIRECTIVE (EU) 2019/790 OF
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
COUNCIL.
Official Journal of the European
Union. Directive on copyright and related rights
in the Digital Single Market and amending Direc-
tives 96/9/EC and 2001/29/EC.
Maria Raquel Guimarães, Rute Teixeira Pedro,
Maria Regina Gomes Redinha, Fernanda de
Araujo Meirelles Magalhães, et al. 2021. Direito
digital.
Pratik Joshi, Sebastin Santy, Amar Budhiraja, Ka-
lika Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. 2021. The state
and fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion in the
nlp world.
Dan Jurafsky and James H Martin. 2014. Speech
and Language Processing : an Introduction to
Natural Language processing, Computational
linguistics, and Speech Recognition.
Dorling
Kindersley Pvt, Ltd, India.
Aleksei Kelli, Arvi Tavast, Krister Lindén, Kadri
Vider, Ramunas Birštonas, Penny Labropoulou,
Irene Kull, Gaabriel Tavits, Age Värv, Pavel
Stranák, et al. 2020. The impact of copyright
and personal data laws on the creation and use
of models for language technologies. In Selected
Papers from the CLARIN Annual Conference
2019, pages 53–65. Linköping University Elec-
tronic Press.
Ricardo Lopes and João Magalhães and David
Semedo. 2024. GlórIA – A Generative and Open
Large Language Model for Portuguese.
Teresa Nobre. 2012. Direito de Autor e Direitos
Conexos. University of lisbon.
OpenAI. 2022. Introducing chatgpt.
Arnold Overwijk, Chenyan Xiong, and Jamie Callan.
2022. Clueweb22: 10 billion web documents with
rich information. In Proceedings of the 45th In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pages
3360–3362.
Alexandre Pereira. 2020. A PROTEÇÃO JURÍDICA
DO SOFTWARE EXECUTADO POR ROBOTS
(E DAS OBRAS GERADAS POR IA)*, page
239–254. Universidade De Coimbra, Coimbra.
Pires, Ramon and Abonizio, Hugo and Almeida,
Thales Sales and Nogueira, Rodrigo. 2023.
Sabiá:
Portuguese large language models.
Springer.
Presidência do Conselho de Ministros. 2023.
Decreto-Lei n.º 47/2023. Diário da República.
Decreto-Lei transpondo a Diretiva (UE) 2019/790
sobre direitos de autor e direitos conexos no mer-
cado único digital.
Erasmo Marcos Ramos. 1998. A influência do bürg-
erliches gesetzbuch alemão na parte geral do
novo código civil português. Revista da Facul-
dade de Direito da UFRGS, (15).
República Portuguesa. 1966. Código Civil. Diário
do Governo. Article 79.º: Direito à imagem.
República Portuguesa. 1976.
Constituição da
República Portuguesa. Official Journal of the
Portuguese Republic. Article 35: Utilização da
informática.
João Rodrigues, Luís Gomes, João Silva, António
Branco, Rodrigo Santos, Henrique Lopes Car-
doso, and Tomás Osório. 2023. Advancing neu-
ral encoding of portuguese with transformer al-
bertina pt-*.
Rodrigo Santos, João Silva, Luís Gomes, João Ro-
drigues, and António Branco. 2024. Advancing
generative ai for portuguese with open decoder
gervásio pt*.
Maria Marta Pereira Scherre and Maria Eugê-
nia Lammoglia Duarte. 2016. Main current pro-
cesses of morphosyntactic variation. The Hand-
book of Portuguese Linguistics, pages 526–544.
Inês Silva Costa. 2021. A proteção da pessoa na
era dos big data: a opacidade do algoritmo e as
decisões automatizadas. Revista Electrónica De
Direito, 24(1):33–82.
Souza, Fábio and Nogueira, Rodrigo and Lotufo,
Roberto. 2020. BERTimbau: pretrained BERT
models for Brazilian Portuguese. Springer.
