Title: MessageNet: Message Classification using Natural Language Processing and Meta-data
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.01808v1
--------------------------------------------------

MESSAGENET: MESSAGE CLASSIFICATION USING NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND META-DATA
Adar Kahana, Oren Elisha
Microsoft R&D center, ILDC
{adarkahana, orelisha}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a new Deep Learning (DL) approach for message classiﬁcation. Our method
is based on the state-of-the-art Natural Language Processing (NLP) building blocks, combined
with a novel technique for infusing the meta-data input that is typically available in messages
such as the sender information, timestamps, attached image, audio, afﬁliations, and more. As we
demonstrate throughout the paper, going beyond the mere text by leveraging all available channels
in the message, could yield an improved representation and higher classiﬁcation accuracy. To
achieve message representation, each type of input is processed in a dedicated block in the neural
network architecture that is suitable for the data type. Such an implementation enables training all
blocks together simultaneously, and forming cross channels features in the network. We show in the
Experiments Section that in some cases, message’s meta-data holds an additional information that
cannot be extracted just from the text, and when using this information we achieve better performance.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our multi-modality block approach outperforms other approaches
for injecting the meta data to the the text classiﬁer.
Keywords Message classiﬁcation · Meta data injection · Deep learning · Natural language processing
1
Introduction
Many real world applications require message classiﬁcation and regression, such as handling spam emails [1], ticket
routing [2], article sentiment review [3] and more. Accurate message classiﬁcation could improve critical scenarios
such as in call centers (routing tickets based on topic) [2], alert systems (ﬂagging highly important alert messages) [4],
and categorizing incoming messages (automatically unclutter emails) [1, 5]. The main distinction between text and
message classiﬁcation is the availability of additional attributes, such as the sender information, timestamps, attached
image, audio, afﬁliations, and more. New message classiﬁcation contests often appear in the prominent platforms (i.e.,
Kaggle [6]), showing how this topic is sought after. There are already many data-sets to explore in this ﬁeld, but no
clear winner algorithm that ﬁts all scenarios with high accuracy, efﬁciency and simplicity (in terms of implementation
and interpretation).
A notable advancement in the ﬁeld of NLP is the attention based transformers architecture [7]. This family of methods
excels in ﬁnding local connections between words, and better understanding the meaning of a sentence. A leading
example is the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [8] as well as its variations [9, 10, 11],
winning certain benchmarks [12, 13]. Several packages, such as Huggingface Transformers [14], make such models
accessible and easy to use as well as provide pre-trained versions. In addition, one can use transfer learning [15] to
further train BERT on their on data, creating a tailored model for the speciﬁc task at hand.
BERT, and often other transformer based models, are designed to handle text. They operate on the words of a given text
by encoding them into tokens, and by the connections between the tokens they learn the context of sentences. This
approach is limited, since sometimes more information can be extracted and used, not necessarily textual. Throughout
this paper we refer to this information as meta-data to distinguish it from the main stream of textual content (though one
may recognize it as the core data, depending on the application). For example, a meta-data could be the time stamp of
when the text was written, sent, published, etc. Another example is the writer of the text, when dealing with a small
arXiv:2301.01808v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2023
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
list of writers of a corpus. There have been some attempts to incorporate these into BERT models, for example by
assigning artiﬁcial tokens for writers or for temporal segments (token per month for example) [16]. This approach is
limited since not all meta-data entries are suitable for encoding by tokenization. In the example of temporal segments,
more segments introduce more tokens, leading to large computational resources consumption, and less segments cause
loss of information. Another approach is to concatenate the embeddings, created by the transformer module, with the
outputs of an embedding module for the meta-data. In this approach, a transformer for the text is trained (using direct or
transfer learning) on the text, and other separate modules (time series embedding, senders embeddings, etc.) are used
to embed the meta-data. All the embeddings are then concatenated and used as inputs to a classiﬁcation network. A
drawback of this approach is that the internal network features are not trained from a combination of difﬁdent input
streams, and therefore avoid cross dependent features (e.g. the importance of an email is not only determined by its
content, but also by who sent it, when, to whom else, attachments, etc.).
Novelty
To bridge these gaps, we implement a transformer based model that is able to train with both the text (transformer
architecture) and meta-data. We create a new architecture of a blocks based network. Each block handles different
kind of inputs. Splitting to blocks enables the ﬂexibility to handle different kind of inputs. In addition, compared to
the standard practices that suggest separate training and implementation of a "voting between classiﬁers" method, the
proposed approach trains on the text and meta-data simultaneously, such that the language model (transformer) block
weights are adjusted based on the information passing through the meta-data classiﬁcation block weights and vice versa.
We present results of the method with a main block based on a transformer that handles the text, and an additional block
that handles the pre-processed meta-data inputs individually. This method can be extended to support more complex
blocks, such as an advanced DL model for images [17], a temporal analysis block to extract information from temporal
meta-data [18], additional transformer blocks for multiple text inputs (for example, subject and body of an email),
categorical data, and more. To demonstrate the performance of the method we run multiple experiments on publicly
available data-sets (Amazon [19], Yelp [20], Reddit [21] and Enron [5]) to show the advantages of using the block
architecture, and compare them to the benchmarks in the literature (reviewed in the related work in section 2), which
are based on the transformer benchmark (BERT), Random Forest (RF) classiﬁer, and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
networks. We achieve competitive results, and in most cases lead those benchmarks, showcasing that there is much to
extract from the meta-data compared to just using text for classiﬁcation tasks.
2
Related work
Natural language processing tasks. The publication of BERT [8] has been a turning point in the text classiﬁcation
domain. The authors demonstrated high accuracy on complicated tasks such as question and answer, named entity
recognition, and textual entailment [13]. Since then, many authors investigated improved architectures and variations
such as RoBERTa [9], ALBERT [10], DistilBERT [11], and more. Some focus on better performance on the benchmark
tasks, and some create lighter versions of the model that reduce the computational demands while preserving competitive
accuracy. Other propositions, like XLNet [22] and GPT-3 [23], introduce competing architectures to BERT (also using
transformers). The benchmarks for these models are commonly GLUE, SuperGLUE [13], SQuAD 2.0 [12], and more.
Text classiﬁcation is a less common benchmark, but the models can be used for this task as shown in this paper.
Accessibility of transformers. Another contributing factor to the growing popularity of transformers is the variety
of open-source code bases that make it easy for data-scientist to experiment with different architectures and then use
it in their applications. The Huggingface transformers package [24] is a Python library that can be used to train and
ﬁne-tune models, with a large variety of base models to choose from, and straightforward implementation. The GPT-3
[23] has been published as open source and, similar to several other implementations, offers a convenient application
programming interface (API). We mention that many libraries that do not use machine-learning for text classiﬁcation
exist such as NLTK [25], spaCy [26], and more. These are also easily accessible and offer advanced NLP feature
extraction and other text analysis tools.
Text classiﬁcation. There are many tasks in text classiﬁcation, and each may be considered as a ﬁeld of study. A
popular one is sentiment analysis, aiming to classify texts as positive or negative. The survey in [3] presents the
challenges in this domain and the latest innovations. Another example is the Spam or Ham task, where one tries to
differentiate a relevant email from irrelevant ones (like advertisements, phishing attempts, etc.) [1]. In this work we
investigate multi-label classiﬁcation of messages. For example, classifying the category of a product based on purchase
review, the category of a thread based on the posts, the culinary specialty of a restaurant from customer reviews, the
type of product from purchase feedback, the category of an incoming email, and so on. For each of these tasks, publicly
2
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
available data-sets exist and are used in this work to quantify the success of the proposed method. In addition, there are
many competitions in Kaggle [6] and other machine-learning research benchmark websites, using these data-sets.
Message classiﬁcation with meta-data. There are two commonly used method to incorporate meta-data with textual
information for message categorization when using transformers. The ﬁrst is concatenating the embeddings, computed
by the transformer, with the outputs of other embedding systems that are built speciﬁcally for the meta-data. In [27], the
authors use this approach for visual and audio meta-data. In [28] the authors use properties of the text as meta-data
and show that this approach can also work for the German language. In [29] the meta-data is the layout information of
scanned documents, and the authors propose an innovative architecture to extract information from both text and layout
information. There are many other studies exploring this approach. While it is simple to implement, this strategy has
several drawbacks. The training is usually done independently for the text and the meta-data, and the decisions are made
as a "voting between classiﬁers" approach. This may lead to conﬂicts, since the response of the text to the label may be
different from the response of the meta-data and the label, resulting in very low conﬁdence predictions. We compare
the performance of the proposed method to this one in the results section. The second popular approach is to assign
tokens to the meta-data, and add this to the tokenized input of the transformer. In [16], in addition to a hierarchy of
labels, the authors introduce a method to inject multiple meta-data inputs with varying types (web, references, etc.) as
tokens to the embedding vector. Due to the simplicity of embedding the information using tokens, in terms of algorithm
and implementation, developers use this approach in their codes and it appears in many online notebooks and blogs
(open source codes) as well. The main drawback of these methods are the robustness to the input data. For example,
representing an image as a series of tokens is either done by encoding the image which usually faces loss of information,
or by utilizing a large number of tokens that exponentially highers the computational cost. In the numerical experiments
presented here, we do not compare to this method since the feature extraction we are using has a varying and potentially
high number of features, which lead to computational resource exhaustion when using this method. In this work, we
propose a method that can address the issues of the two popular methods, as described in the next section.
3
Approach
We propose a method based on blocks to train a linguistic model with meta-data for a speciﬁc text classiﬁcation task.
By splitting each type of meta-data input into different blocks, one can use state-of-the-art deep-learning architectures
to handle each meta-data type uniquely and more efﬁciently. In addition, the training is done using all block and in a
uniﬁed training loop, adjusting all the weights of all blocks in every optimizer step, so all information from the text and
meta-data sources contributes to the learning process.
3.1
Blocks architecture
The transformer models, including BERT, can be used for text classiﬁcation with the input text and corresponding
output labels. However, we claim that a lot of information can be found in the meta-data of the text. as can be seen in
Figure 1, we use the transformer model as a single block of a neural network. Then, we can add additional blocks for
dealing with the meta-data inputs.
With the recent developments in deep-learning, there are many advanced method of extracting information from input
signals for classiﬁcation. For example, in [30] the authors discuss ways to use deep-learning for analysing time series
data. Messages typically have a temporal element, such as the time of arrival of an email, the time when a review
has been posted, a paper has been published, etc. We propose to utilize these advancements together for better model
training.
In Figure 1, an overall schematic view of the proposed approach is presented. In the ﬁrst row, a standard transformer
architecture is illustrated [24]. The inputs are the tokenized messages, followed by the transformer layers that are
initially pre-trained. These layers are further trained (using transfer learning) to produce the embeddings, and a
classiﬁcation layer is used to predict the categories of the messages. The transformer layers in this illustration are
presented using dashed lines to express the transfer learning process. The second row presents a meta-data extractor
using a deep-neural network. The green layers express layers trained for classiﬁcation (for example, fully-connected
network architecture). The third row presents another transfer learning architecture. Each row expresses a different
block of a neural-network that handles different meta-data inputs.
3.1.1
Representation
Using the propose approach, the expected representation of the data is much different than the one achieved by the
prominent approaches mentioned in section 2. Since the blocks are trained simultaneously, information from the
meta-data may impact the training of the core textual block (the transformer block), and vice-versa. Therefore, a new
3
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
Figure 1: A sketch diagram of the block method. The ﬁrst row illustrates a transformer architecture to handle textual
input, while the second and third rows illustrate neural networks for handling a speciﬁc meta-data input. All the modules
are then combines to create a uniﬁed prediction. Blue tiles are static and green tiles are trainable layers. The dashed
green tiles illustrate the transfer learning layers
and different representation is achieved. As a toy illustrative example, let us say that a single sample has text suggesting
a speciﬁc class but meta-data suggesting another, the textual block would train differently (and the textual representation
would be different, taking this in account), and the weights of the textual block would be able to capture this difference.
We illustrate the different in Figure 2. In Figure 2a we illustrate using tokens to inject the meta-data into the transformer
layers, producing an embedding (e1-eM1). In Figure2b we demonstrate concatenation of the embedding produced by
the transformer layers (e1-eM2) with a vector representation (v) of the meta-data. In Figure 2c the proposed blocks
approach is illustrated. The trainable blocks are wrapped in green to emphasize that training is done together, creating a
uniﬁed representation of the message, compared to 2b where the transformer layers and the dense layers are trained
independently, and the output representations are concatenated. We emphasize that the blocks may have different
architectures and may produce different vector representations, to produce a better representation.
3.1.2
Combine
After the blocks, we propose to take a combination of the layers (e.g. averaging the outputs, summing the outputs,
concatenating the outputs, etc.). This combination may also be trained as part of the training loop. From the experimental
tests we ﬁnd that the best performance was achieved by having the combine step as a weighted concatenation of the
outputs, producing an output sized as the number of classes times the number of blocks. We then use a few dense layers
to produce an output sized as the number of classes, and apply softmax activation for the classiﬁcation.
4
Experiments
For the numerical experiments we train the network of the proposed approach with two blocks: a) the transformer block
operating on the main text, and b) the meta-data block which is a fully-connected block operating on a one dimensional
meta-data vector. We emphasize that more advanced blocks can be used, but even this simple architecture provided
results that demonstrated the value from the meta-data and the blocks approach. In addition, it is simple to distinguish
4
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
(a) Illustration of injecting meta-data as tokens
(b) Illustration of concatenation of meta-data
(c) Illustration of the blocks approach
Figure 2: Overview of the two common methods (a, b) and the proposed approach (c), emphasizing that the blocks
are trained together, so information from one block may affect the training of the other blocks (as opposed to (b) for
example, where the blocks are trained separately and concatenated)
between the transformer only architecture, and the transformer and meta-data architecture in this way, giving us better
explainability of the contribution of the meta-data.
4.1
Data-sets
Amazon reviews. The Amazon product reviews data-set [19] contains a large number of product reviews, varying by
product category (label). The main text is the description of the review. We extract meta-data from the Amazon data-set
comes from the reviewer ﬁeld (sender), the review creation date and time (timestamp), and the overall satisfaction
(enumerated). We expect correlations such as a user often reviews a speciﬁc category of products, or products more
frequently bought at a speciﬁc time of the day. These hold information about the product that is not available from the
text, and enhance the classiﬁcation capabilities. This data-set has in total 82.83 million product reviews. We sub-sample
a subset of the reviews, by choosing the ﬁrst 100,000 reviews of each category and then selecting the ones with the
longest texts. We eventually save 4,687 reviews for training, 521 for validation, and 2,064 for testing (eliminating
text-less messages). The ﬁnal data-set is close to balanced (roughly the same number of reviews per category).
Yelp Open Data-set. The Yelp restaurant reviews data-set [20] contains restaurant reviews, varying by culinary class
(label). The main text is the restaurant review. We extract meta-data from the reviewer ﬁeld (sender), the review
creation date and time (timestamp), is the review useful/funny/cool (enumerated), and the number of stars (enumerated).
The expected correlations here are reviewers that focus on speciﬁc restaurants, breakfast and dinner have different
timestamps, and properties of the review itself can suggest a rate for the experience. We clean the data-set similar to the
Amazon one, and save 4,612 reviews for training, 513 for validation, and 2,050 for testing, roughly balanced as well.
Reddit. The Reddit data-set [21] contains a large volume of Reddit posts, each belongs to a speciﬁc sub-Reddit (label).
Speciﬁcally, we use the data-set of version 2 from 2010. The main text is the post content. We extract meta-data
from the post uploader ﬁeld (sender), the post upload date and time (timestamp), whether the post has comments
(enumerated), and whether it has attachments (enumerated). The expected correlations are that people post usually in
the same sub-Reddits, different poting times can be due to certain events in time, and the comment and attachment
properties often suggest the importance of the comment. We clean the data-set as well and save 4,950 posts for training,
550 for validation, and 2,200 for testing. We focus on 12 sub-Reddits (12 unique labels) and the data-set is roughly
balanced.
5
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
Enron Email Data-set. The Enron email data-set [5] contains a corpus of emails. Although this data-set is publicly
available, we had access to a limited internal version that has been tagged based on email category (label). The main
text is the email body. We extract meta-data from the email sender ﬁeld (sender), and the email reception date and time
(timestamp). The expected correlations are that certain senders send emails in certain topics (colleagues send emails
about work, meetings, etc., while friends send emails about personal matters), and the time of arrival of the email is
usually correlated with the subject. We save 4,500 emails for training, 500 for validation, and 2,000 for testing. This
data-set is not balanced.
4.2
Feature extractor
To conduct the numerical experiments we ﬁrst discuss a genuine feature extractor we use to extract the meta-data
information from the available ﬁelds of the data-set. For each type of meta-data we extract corresponding features.
Since different data-sets have different ﬁelds, we use generic modules to extract information from different ﬁelds of the
same purpose, such as sender ﬁeld (in emails data-set) or reviewer ﬁeld (in restaurant reviews data-set). An overview of
the meta-data features we extract from the data-set is given in Table 1. Note, that the different data-sets have different
ﬁelds. Some of them do not have an enumerated ﬁeld, and some have more than one.
Field type
Features
Number of slots
Description
Sender
Top senders
120
One hot vector,
each slot represents if the sender
is one of the 100 to senders or not
Top afﬁliations
120
Same with sender top afﬁliations
Sender frequency
1
Compute the frequency of
messages received from this sender
Timestamp
Day
7
One hot vector, each slot
represents if the message arrived
at that day
Working hours
1
Indicating if the message
arrived within working hours
or not
Rush hour
50
Creating a histogram of 50 bins
and a corresponding 50 slots
one hot vector where each slot
represents if the message arrived
in the corresponding bin time
Enumerated
Enumerated value
#Options
One hot vector with 1
in the slot representing
the option and 0 otherwise
Numeric
Numeric value
1
The numeric value
Table 1: Review of meta-data features extraction per ﬁeld
4.3
Training details
We use a simple network architecture so that we can clearly show the advantages of the method. We emphasize that
with more advanced handling of the meta-data and introduction of more blocks, higher accuracy is expected. The
model used for the text embedding is a pre-trained BERT model from the HuggingFace [14] library (bert-base-uncased).
We use transfer learning to further train the language model with the meta-data, given the new task (new data). In
addition, we used the ktrain package, speciﬁcally the text classiﬁcation modules, and re-wrote them to have a message
classiﬁcation class. For the meta-data classiﬁcation block we use two fully-connected layers, the ﬁrst is of the size
of the input meta-data and the size of the second is the number of classes, both use the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU)
activation. After the blocks we either use a Random Forest classiﬁer (with 250 trees, unconstrained depth, up to one
sample per leaf, and splitting criterion based on the Gini index) or combine the outputs into one (with averaging or
using trainable weights), depending on the test scenario. In the case of output weighting, we use one fully connected
layer at the end, its size is the number of classes and it is followed by a softmax activation (for the classiﬁcation).
4.4
Results
We use the data-sets mentioned in Section 4.1. We compare multiple methods in terms of accuracy:
6
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
1. Pre-trained BERT with an additional fully-connected layer.
2. Pre-trained BERT with a random forest classiﬁer.
3. Pre-trained BERT with concatenated meta-data and an additional fully-connected layer.
4. Pre-trained BERT with concatenated meta-data and a random forest classiﬁer.
5. Transfer learning BERT with an additional fully-connected layer.
6. Transfer learning BERT with a random forest classiﬁer.
7. Transfer learning BERT with concatenated meta-data and an additional fully-connected layer.
8. Transfer learning BERT with concatenated meta-data and a random forest classiﬁer.
9. The proposed method (BERT and meta-data) with output averaging.
10. The proposed method (BERT and meta-data) with output weighting.
Methods 1-4 use embeddings from a pre-trained BERT model (without transfer learning), and train either an extra
fully-connected layer or a random forest classiﬁer [31] for the classiﬁcation. We do this either without (1-2) or with
(3-4) concatenation of the meta-data to the embeddings, following the common methods in the literature. Methods
5-8 are similar, but the BERT transformers layers are further trained on the speciﬁc task data. Methods 3,4,7,8 are
the reference methods of concatenating the BERT model embedding with a meta-data embedding from the literature
[16]. Methods 9-10 are the proposed ones, exploring the effect of combining the transformer output with the meta-data
block output, once with averaging the block outputs and once with a fully-connected layer to learn the weights after
concatenating the output representations of each block. The latter involves training to learn this weight, which is
implemented so that it happens in the same training process as all other weights in the network. The results are given in
Table 2. By observing the results, we see that the proposed method is competitive with all other methods and even
outperforms most of them.
Method#
Amazon reviews
Yelp Open Data-set
Reddit
Enron Emails
1
0.66
0.29
0.56
0.49
2
0.61
0.22
0.52
0.49
3
0.65
0.24
0.46
0.48
4
0.61
0.22
0.5
0.5
5
0.74
0.39
0.61
0.47
6
0.73
0.38
0.6
0.47
7
0.71
0.38
0.62
0.47
8
0.73
0.39
0.6
0.47
9
0.7
0.3
0.62
0.47
10
0.77
0.4
0.62
0.53
Table 2: Results table
An interesting result is observed for the Enron emails data-set. We notice that the pre-trained methods performed better
than the transfer-learning based methods. This can be explained by the mismatches between the textual information
and the meta-data information. While the text suggests one class, the meta-data may suggest a different one. Methods
1-8, in this case, act as voting between classiﬁers. However, as mentioned in section 3.1.1, the proposed method is
inﬂuenced by both text and meta-data and learns a better representation that can take into account these differences,
performing better than all other methods.
5
Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a new framework for training classiﬁcation models. The proposition relies on the availability
of additional, not necessarily textual, data channels such as attached images, audio, sender and timestamp, etc. We
proposed an architecture with which one can utilize the aforementioned additional information using different blocks,
along with the text, and train a neural network to perform message classiﬁcation more accurately. We demonstrate
the strength of this method using a set examples, varying by data-set and classiﬁcation algorithm, and show that the
proposed method outperforms the reference related works.
7
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
References
[1] Asif Karim, Sami Azam, Bharanidharan Shanmugam, and Krishnan Kannoorpatti. Efﬁcient clustering of emails
into spam and ham: The foundational study of a comprehensive unsupervised framework. IEEE Access, 8:154759–
154788, 2020.
[2] Jianglei Han, Jing Li, and Aixin Sun. Uftr: A uniﬁed framework for ticket routing, 2020.
[3] Walaa Medhat, Ahmed Hassan, and Hoda Korashy. Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: A survey.
Ain Shams engineering journal, 5(4):1093–1113, 2014.
[4] Dheeraj Gupta, P.S. Joshi, A.K. Bhattacharjee, and R.S. Mundada. Ids alerts classiﬁcation using knowledge-based
evaluation. In 2012 Fourth International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS
2012), pages 1–8, 2012.
[5] Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classiﬁcation research. In Jean-François
Boulicaut, Floriana Esposito, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi, editors, Machine Learning: ECML 2004,
pages 217–226, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[6] Kaggle. https://www.kaggle.com/.
[7] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and
Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[8] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding, 2018.
[9] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach, 2019.
[10] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut. Albert: A
lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations, 2019.
[11] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: smaller,
faster, cheaper and lighter, 2019.
[12] Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for squad,
2018.
[13] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. GLUE: A
multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In In the Proceedings of ICLR.,
2019.
[14] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac,
Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite,
Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M.
Rush. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing, 2019.
[15] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data
engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.
[16] Yu Zhang, Zhihong Shen, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Jiawei Han. Match: Metadata-aware text classiﬁcation
in a large hierarchy. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pages 3246–3257, 2021.
[17] Fei Wang, Mengqing Jiang, Chen Qian, Shuo Yang, Cheng Li, Honggang Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou
Tang. Residual attention network for image classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 3156–3164, 2017.
[18] Dino Ienco and Roberto Interdonato. Deep multivariate time series embedding clustering via attentive-gated
autoencoder. In Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 318–329. Springer,
2020.
[19] Ruining He and Julian McAuley. Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution of fashion trends with one-class
collaborative ﬁltering. In proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web, pages 507–517,
2016.
[20] Yelp. Yelp open dataset, https://www.yelp.com/dataset, 2014.
[21] Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. The pushshift reddit
dataset, 2020.
8
Message classiﬁcation using NLP and metadata
[22] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. Xlnet:
Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[23] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Nee-
lakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger,
Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark
Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[24] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac,
Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite,
Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M.
Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online, October 2020.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[25] Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the
natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2009.
[26] Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom embeddings,
convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear, 2017.
[27] Tanzila Rahman, Mengyu Yang, and Leonid Sigal. Tribert: Full-body human-centric audio-visual representation
learning for visual sound separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13412, 2021.
[28] Malte Ostendorff, Peter Bourgonje, Maria Berger, Julian Moreno-Schneider, Georg Rehm, and Bela Gipp.
Enriching bert with knowledge graph embeddings for document classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08402,
2019.
[29] Yiheng Xu, Minghao Li, Lei Cui, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Ming Zhou. Layoutlm: Pre-training of text and
layout for document image understanding. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 1192–1200, 2020.
[30] John-Syin Ang, Kok-Why Ng, and Fang-Fang Chua. Modeling time series data with deep learning: A review,
analysis, evaluation and future trend. In 2020 8th International Conference on Information Technology and
Multimedia (ICIMU), pages 32–37, 2020.
[31] Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001.
9
