Title: SentiMATE: Learning to play Chess through Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.08321v3
--------------------------------------------------

SentiMATE: Learning to play Chess through Natural Language Processing
Isaac Kamlish
University College London
zcahika@ucl.ac.uk
Isaac Bentata Chocron
University College London
zcecibe@ucl.ac.uk
Nicholas McCarthy
University College London
zcapnmc@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
We present SentiMATE, a novel end-to-end Deep Learning
model for Chess, employing Natural Language Processing
that aims to learn an effective evaluation function assessing
move quality. This function is pre-trained on the sentiment
of commentary associated with the training moves, and is
used to guide and optimize the agent’s game-playing decision
making. The contributions of this research are three-fold: we
build and put forward both a classiﬁer which extracts com-
mentary describing the quality of Chess moves in vast com-
mentary datasets, and a Sentiment Analysis model trained on
Chess commentary to accurately predict the quality of said
moves, to then use those predictions to evaluate the optimal
next move of a Chess agent. Both classiﬁers achieve over
90% classiﬁcation accuracy. Lastly, we present a Chess en-
gine, SentiMATE, which evaluates Chess moves based on a
pre-trained sentiment evaluation function. Our results exhibit
strong evidence to support our initial hypothesis - “Can Nat-
ural Language Processing be used to train a novel and sam-
ple efﬁcient evaluation function in Chess Engines?” - as we
integrate our evaluation function into modern Chess engines
and play against agents with traditional Chess move evalua-
tion functions, beating both random agents and a DeepChess
implementation at a level-one search depth - representing the
number of moves a traditional Chess agent (employing the
alpha-beta search algorithm) looks ahead in order to evaluate
a given chess state.
Introduction
Chess has traditionally been one of the most challenging and
researched Artiﬁcial Intelligence problems. Modern Chess
computational theory is reliant on two key components: a
search algorithm that builds a game tree by exploring all
possible moves, and an evaluation algorithm, which analy-
ses the advantage of moving to a given node within the game
tree (Heath and Allum 1997). Our contribution to this area
focuses on developing a novel evaluation method of a Chess
move, based on using moves which have been categorised as
‘positive’ given the sentiment of the commentary describing
it, using a Sentiment Analysis model.
Building algorithms with superhuman ability to play Chess
has been accomplished by systems such as IBM’s Deep-
Blue. However, machine learning alternatives, such as Deep-
Mind’s AlphaZero, only succeeded after millions of itera-
tions of self-play and using thousands of Tensor Processing
Units (TPUs) - not generally available to the research com-
munity (Silver et al. 2016). There is an estimated 10120 pos-
sible Chess game states (Shannon 1950), and 1047 reach-
able positions (Chinchalkar 1996) on a Chess board. Thus,
the ability of an algorithm to outperform State of the art
(SOTA) is reliant on vast amounts of computational power
to model the depth of the aforementioned game tree, and the
ability of the evaluation function to select the optimal ac-
tion. Current Deep Learning approaches to Chess use neu-
ral networks to learn their evaluation function. Supervised
attempts at this have created their training set by sampling
states at random from professional Chess games which re-
sulted in victory (David, Netanyahu, and Wolf 2016). The
sampling from victorious games results in the loss of indi-
vidual information regarding the sampled move, and reveals
little information about the move itself. Additionally, early
Chess states in winning games are not necessarily ’winning’
states. Hence, training such a model may be inefﬁcient, and
will require massive amounts of samples to allow the model
to generalize well.
In our research, we aim to tackle the assessment of the qual-
ity of individual movements through the use of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, to avoid this loss of information before
evaluating the optimality of each node within the tree. Data
from different Chess websites was scraped, which included
information regarding the moves being made, and a qualita-
tive assessment of the moves themselves in the form of com-
mentary, written by a wide range of Chess players; resulting
in a large database of moves with annotated commentary.
The data was cleaned so that only commentaries which were
deemed to describe the ‘quality’ of the moves were em-
ployed, through the use of a preliminary ‘Quality vs Non-
Quality’ classiﬁer, trained using 2,700 commentaries which
we hand-labelled. Hand-engineering was then applied to these
results to ensure False-Positives for the ‘Quality’ section
were removed, ultimately resulting in a dataset of ‘Quality’
moves on which Sentiment Analysis was to be performed.
A novel Sentiment Analysis model was built, given that the
nature of Chess commentary is different to that of, for exam-
ple, movie reviews, thus making sentiment classiﬁers such
as that trained on the IMDb’s database unsuitable for this
problem. 2,090 moves were annotated for their ‘sentiment’,
and a bi-directional LSTM using stacked BERT and GloVe
embeddings was trained on this commentary. The resulting
dataset was then fed into our novel evaluation function for
Chess moves trained on sentiment, which is tested against
other Chess engines.
arXiv:1907.08321v3  [cs.LG]  25 Sep 2019
Related Work
Historically, State Of The Art Chess engines have been de-
signed using extensive manual feature selection to guide ac-
tion/move selection in Chess games along with large amounts
of speciﬁc domain knowledge - something we wanted to
avoid. More recently however, high performance, alterna-
tive Chess engines such as Giraffe (Lai 2015) (a Reinforce-
ment Learning, self-playing Chess engine) and DeepChess
offered the ﬁrst end-to-end machine learning-based models,
using both unsupervised pretraining and supervised training,
to exhibit Grand Master-level Chess-playing performance.
(David, Netanyahu, and Wolf 2016). Seminal work done by
Sabatelli (Sabatelli 2017) went further and provided a way
for Artiﬁcial Neural Networks to play high-level Chess with-
out having to rely on any of the lookahead algorithms that
are used by the above algorithms. Motivated by the success
of this model to learn the quality of a Chess board state from
an algebraic, or in our case, bit format input, we set out
to use this Deep Learning architecture as the basis for our
own evaluation function. To this end, we aim to employ a
novel Sentiment Analysis model with a different focus: to
inﬂuence and improve the decision making of a novel Chess
playing agent. In this sense, the prediction of sentiment is
not the end goal of the model and acts as a view into the
inner workings of the Chess agent. Given the modular na-
ture of our model, it provided us with an opportunity to per-
form important ablation studies in order to iteratively adapt
and improve the various parts of the model so as to improve
game performance.
Background
From the turn of the century, Sentiment Analysis has been
one of the most active research areas in NLP, thus provid-
ing us with a platform from which to work on. To this end,
we aim to employ SOTA Sentiment Analysis so as to in-
ﬂuence and improve the decision making of a Chess play-
ing agent. More recently, given the rapid gains in compute
power available, Deep Learning has emerged as the dom-
inant machine learning technique for Sentiment Analysis.
Given the sequential nature of textual data, the effective use
of RNNs (and in particular LSTM networks) has grown dra-
matically (Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018), with the network
being able to learn long-term dependencies between words.
Given the nature of the text we are dealing with - short,
emotive descriptions of a Chess move in online forums -
we are focused on researching and utilising sentence level
sentiment classiﬁcation. Going beyond using a single neural
network for sentence level sentiment classiﬁcation, work has
been done combining a CNN and RNN architecture (Wang X
2016) in order to exploit the coarse-grained local features
generated by the CNN and the long-distance dependencies
learned via the RNN. As was discovered, this required sig-
niﬁcantly more data preprocessing and data extraction than
was originally established.
Before Deep Learning led the way in Sentiment Analysis in
NLP, substantial amount of work done had been done in ap-
plying Artiﬁcial Intelligence to the game of Chess. The ideal
Chess agent does not only need the ability to evaluate each
game state (the arrangement of pieces on the board) but also
needs to be able to efﬁciently search through every poten-
tial move available to it - the exact role of the tree searching
algorithm present in previous SOTA Chess engines (Heath
and Allum 1997). With inﬁnite time and processing power,
one would ideally explore all possible states, however, these
constraints have lead to innovation in search algorithms to
reduce the number of moves which need to be explored.
As mentioned, the second fundamental part to any Chess
engine is the ability to accurately evaluate the quality of a
conﬁguration of pieces for a given player, which takes the
form of a probability for each player winning from that given
state. Furthermore, given the difﬁculties in tuning large num-
bers of parameters by hand, the number of features in pre-
vious evaluation functions is not that large. Deep Learning
can help to alleviate these issues; not only can it learn all the
necessary parameters, but due to the non-linearity of cer-
tain layers and large amount of parameters, Deep Learn-
ing Networks can allow our evaluation functions to be far
more expressive than previous traditional linear formulas.
DeepChess receives 2 different boards as input, and utilises
as siamese network to output a score on which one is bet-
ter. Giraffe (Lai 2015) initially trains its neural network for
its evaluation function to predict the output of StockFish
scoring function by training it on 5 million states uniformly
sampled from databases from either human Grand Masters
or computers with its corresponding StockFish score. The
whole model was then trained on a dataset consisting of
a hybrid of self-play and professional Chess-engine games
(Silver et al. 2017).
All of these approaches to Chess tackled one fundamental
issue: what data should be used to train these evaluation
function neural networks? Deep Learning approaches such
as DeepChess labelled states depending on the games ﬁnal
outcome such that states were scored +1 if the game ended
up in a win, 0 for a draw and -1 for a loss. Even though
the information is objective in the sense that a game was
won/drawn/lost from that given state, an early state could be
unrelated to the ﬁnal outcome. We believe using NLP move-
based evaluation will improve this, ultimately reducing sam-
ple complexity. Figure 1 shows the proposed pipeline for the
model.
Methods
Collection and analysis of data
The initial dataset comprised of approximately 300,000 indi-
vidually commented Chess moves taken from a online Chess
discussion forum 1 using (Jhamtani et al. 2018)’s data scraper
. The commentary was split up into ﬁve different categories,
based on what it describes: ‘Move Quality’, ‘Comparative’,
‘Planning’, ‘Contextual Information’, ‘General’, using the
provided pre-trained SVM classiﬁer. The scope of this project
draws upon applying Sentiment Analysis to ‘Quality Moves’,
thus making it the most signiﬁcant category of our analy-
1https://gameknot.com/
Figure 1: Complete pipeline for training the evaluation model
sis. Upon inspection of the provided data’s accuracy, it was
found that, whilst ‘Quality’ commentary was categorised with
90% accuracy, the accuracy of commentary classiﬁcation
for the remainder commentary hovered around 70%, thus
leading to a signiﬁcant amount of false positives being cate-
gorised as ‘Quality’, resulting in a dataset riddled with Non-
Quality moves. Furthermore, the boundaries applied to the
‘Quality’ moves were too strict, resulting on classiﬁcation of
‘Quality’ moves into other categories given this was how the
classiﬁer was trained. This resulted in a dataset of only about
1,000 commentaries deemed to be describing the true ‘Qual-
ity’ of moves, insufﬁcient to train both a sentiment model
and a Chess engine.
To remediate this, we propose a newly trained classiﬁer based
on a more relaxed ‘Quality’ commentary boundary and bi-
nary classiﬁcation (Quality VS Non-Quality), to ensure bet-
ter ‘Quality’ classiﬁcation, and a lower quantity of False
Positives. To this end, we manually labelled 2,700 Chess
commentaries for training and 300 commentaries for test-
ing, in the binary class setting. Alternative data avenues were
also pursued, expanding the dataset using information from
six additional websites. Furthermore, the data was reﬁned
to ensure better classiﬁcation quality: all moves represented
by a single token (e.g., a move commentary that is stated
in Chess notation - Bxg8, Kf8, Nf3), commentaries sufﬁxed
with seemingly arbitrary numbers (e.g., “What a fantastic
move 95”), and punctuation that does not pertain to stan-
dardised notation (and that would not contribute to any se-
mantic understanding of the text), were removed from the
data.
Inspired by Zhang et al.’s work on RNNs and LSTMs for
text classiﬁcation (Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018), we set out
to experiment with different structures of Recurrent Neu-
ral Networks, alongside different word embeddings, in or-
der to ﬁnd those yielding the highest accuracy of classiﬁ-
cation into a binary setting using the previously produced
training set: we consider a vanilla RNN, an LSTM, and a
bi-directional LSTM, with different permutations of stacked
and non-stacked GloVe and BERT embeddings, as potential
models for text classiﬁcation. The results and discussion can
be found on ‘Experiments’ and ‘Results & Discussion’ re-
spectively.
With a condensed, structured and quality dataset contain-
ing both the text-based commentary and state representation
(before and after the move has occurred), we proceed to for-
mat the state representations into our novel move representa-
tion which eventually can be feed directly into the evaluation
function, as seen in Figure 1. The provided, standardised for-
mat for the state representations is given in Portable Game
Notation (PGN) format - a plain text computer-processible
format for recording Chess games. The state representations
for before and after the given move are then converted to
FEN format using Python-chess 2). These FEN formats are
then used to extract the ﬁnal representation.
The ﬁnal representation for each of the 2 states (before and
after the move) are transformed into a 8 × 8 × 12 repre-
sentation of the Chess board - where the ﬁrst two dimen-
sions corresponding to the size of the Chess board and each
of the 12 channels in the ﬁnal dimension represent a differ-
ent piece. +1’s are placed at points where white pieces are
found, −1’s for blacks and 0’s at points where no pieces are
found. (i.e if there is a white queen at E4, a +1 would be
placed at the co-ordinate (5,4) on the channel which repre-
sents queens). We then introduce a novel channel (12 →13)
to signify whether it is black or white to move - (all +1’s
for white pieces, all −1’s for black pieces). Finally, we stack
the two vectors (pre-move and post-move) on top of each
other to gain a ﬁnal representation of 8 × 8 × 26. This is
the ﬁnal data representation that we will feed into our CNN
evaluation function.This work ultimately aims to construct
a model that takes in raw natural language in the form of
Chess-move commentaries, performs accurate classiﬁcation
into quality and non-quality, transitions through two differ-
ent Chess-game data formats and outputs a 8 × 8 × 26 rep-
resentation of every Chess board state. The next key stage
2https://github.com/niklasf/python-Chess
in our methodology focuses on taking this newly generated
dataset and generating SOTA sentence level sentiment pre-
dictions using Deep Learning techniques.
Sentiment Analysis
Given the ambiguous and neutral nature of some of the raw
data Chess commentaries, performing Sentiment Analysis
on the different categories would prove to be a challenging
endeavour. For example, protecting a piece can be positive
in that it avoids a negative consequence, or negative in that it
shows the state of threat in the current game state. Further-
more, on pre-trained classiﬁers, “An attack on the queen”
would generally be classiﬁed with negative sentiment given
the nature of the word “attack” - however, this move would
in reality be beneﬁcial for the attacking player. Semantics
and the contextual information are a key element to being
able to correctly analyse the given data (Chaitanya, Harika,
and Prabadevi 2017).
The ﬁrst model we used for sentiment prediction was the
jointed CNN-RNN architecture, trained on the Stanford Sen-
timent Treebank using word2vec embeddings pretrained on
Google News. However, this model was seen to underper-
form the architecture put forward by Zalando’s Flair in pre-
liminary tests, thus making the latter our chosen architecture
for research around Sentiment Analysis. Since the dataset
commentaries are short pieces of text that often lack of fea-
tures for effective classiﬁcation (particularly ﬁne-grained clas-
siﬁcation), the combination of an LSTM and appropriate
word embeddings are extremely effective in learning word
usage in the context of Chess games, given enough training
data. While we hypothesised, given the semantically narrow
nature of our dataset (i.e discussing only Chess moves), that
word embeddings such as word2vec would provide satisfac-
tory results, we believed that the use of additional contextual
string embeddings would provide, in theory, a signiﬁcant
improvement in accuracy. These word embeddings capture
latent syntactic-semantic information that goes beyond stan-
dard word embeddings, with two key differences: 1. they are
trained without any explicit notion of words and 2. they are
contextualised by their surrounding text - meaning that same
word will have different embeddings dependent on its con-
textual use. This latter point is extremely important in accu-
rately predicting samples that are ambiguous in their senti-
ment and for a training set that is relatively small (compared
with other Deep Learning training datasets).
Move Evaluation
With a dataset containing the representations for the Chess
board before and after moves - the 8 × 8 × 26 tensor - along
with the sentiment for an array of Chess moves we then pro-
ceeded to input this into a self-built Convolutional Neural
Network. After experimenting with a variety of models, the
network architecture that we employed was based on work
done by Sabatelli (Sabatelli 2017) - however, we propose a
novel representation that inputs a tensor of size 8 × 8 × 26,
applies two layers of convolutions (the ﬁrst with ﬁlter size
5, the second with ﬁlter size 3) with elu activations (the use
of elu can increase on the speed of convergence and gain a
better accuracy (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015)),
has a dropout of 0.25, is ﬂattened and then followed by two
dense, fully connected layers of size 500 and 200 respec-
tively (both with elu activations) to then ﬁnally output a bi-
nary, softmax output which quantiﬁes the ‘goodness’ (G) or
‘badness’ (B) of a move M, where G, B ∈[0, 1]. Given the
importance of the location of every Chess piece on the board,
padding techniques were employed while pooling were not,
so as to preserve all the geometrical properties of the input -
this way the output of the convolutions is of the exact same
size as the original Chess positions. The ‘goodness’ output
of each legal move G(M) at time t is recursively compared
to other legal moves through the following proposed move
search algorithm:
Alpha Beta Move Search (ABMS)
To develop an algorithm which now searches between po-
tential moves rather than states, we applied a slight tweak to
the traditionally used Alpha-Beta search algorithm. Nodes
still represent states St however as we traverse down the
tree we also store a variable which maintains the prior board
state to the current node we are in St−1. We then can con-
catenate these two board states together to give us the input
I = [R(St−1), R(St)] for our evaluation function. Given the
Branching factor B and search Depth D, this search algo-
rithm still maintains the reduced search complexity of B
D
2
while allowing us to evaluate in a move-wise fashion.
Experiments and Results
Quality move category classiﬁcation
Using the aforementioned training set of 2,700 labelled com-
mentaries into quality and non-quality data, we proceed to
experiment using different architectures for text classiﬁca-
tion with pre-trained GloVe embeddings. The considered ar-
chitectures are: a vanilla RNN, an LSTM and a bi-directional
LSTM. The parameters used in these architectures were ﬁne-
tuned using a hyper-parameter search, and yielded the fol-
lowing results on the testing set:
Figure 2: Analysis of different architectures for text classiﬁ-
cation
It can be inferred from Figure 2 that a bi-directional LSTM
yields the highest classiﬁcation results, with 94.2% accuracy
on classifying Quality data (0.8% higher than the second-
highest, the non bi-directional LSTM), and only marginally
lower classiﬁcation accuracy than the highest classiﬁer for
the non-Quality data (78.8%, 0.2% less than the non bi-
directional LSTM). Upon this result, different word embed-
dings were tested using the bi-directional LSTM architec-
ture, namely BERT, GloVe and stacked BERT and GloVe
embeddings, the results of which can be seen in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Analysis of different embeddings for text classiﬁ-
cation
BERT word embeddings achieved marginally higher results
than the stacked GloVe and BERT embeddings, with 96.3%
classiﬁcation accuracy for ‘Quality’ commentary, and 84%
accuracy for non-Quality commentary respectively. This ex-
ceeds the classiﬁcation accuracy reported in literature using
SVMs, by 5% for ‘Quality’ commentary, and 9% for non-
Quality commentary (across the ﬁve aforementioned cate-
gories).
Sentiment Classiﬁcation
The LSTM sentiment model was trained on 2090 examples
of moves that are considered to be informative about whether
a move is good or bad (i.e a quality move description). It was
then tested on 233 Chess commentaries that consisted only
of quality moves (commentary that describes whether the
move is good or not), resulting in an accuracy of 91.42% and
a balanced accuracy (Brodersen et al. 2010) of 90.83% - sim-
ilar to that of the jointed CNN-RNN architecture (89.95%)
and other implementations of a bi-LSTM(Barnes, Klinger,
and Schulte im Walde 2017) (82.6%) in the binary sentiment
prediction setting (when trained on the Stanford Sentiment
Treebank dataset 3).
Overall Chess agent performance
The ﬁnal experiment involved the testing of the agent in its
entirety, by playing it against an DeepChess implemnenta-
tion and an agent with a random strategy. To be able to test
our engine against a competitor over many games, the op-
ponent’s strategy must contain some element of stochastity.
3https://nlp.stanford.edu/sentiment/
Otherwise the same sequence of moves will be played out
for every game. To evaluate the performance of the agents,
we used StockFish’s evaluation function to evaluate how
well SentiMATE was performing throughout the game. Due
to the computational constraints on the look-ahead element
of the agent, it struggles during the end game to checkmate
its opponent, therefore a win was decided by the player with
the best state (evaluated by StockFish) after 40 moves. We
also measured the Material score for each player at every
move using the most common assignment of points for each
piece (Q:9, R:5, N:3, B:3, P:1). Here the material score is de-
ﬁned to be the sum of the piece values (a value determining
the relative strength of pieces in potential exchanges) of each
side. In 100 games, SentiMATE won 81% of the time against
the random agent and beat DeepChess on search depth 1
(representing the number of moves ahead the agent will look
in order to evaluate it’s current game state) as both black and
white (given there is no randomness in both agents’ play,
only two games are possible).
A positive divergence in material score can be seen in Fig-
Figure 4: Material Score decay over time averaged over 100
games for Random and Black and White for DeepChess
ure 4 between SentiMATE and the Random agent, with the
gap increasing as the game goes on. This is suggestive that
SentiMATE’s strength occurs later in midgame and shows
no strategical advantage during opening play. This issue has
been noted by many previous Chess engines which typically
use an opening book to guide the agent into middle play. A
similar pattern can be seen against DeepChess where Senti-
MATE’s advantage occurs after some exchanges after move
25.
Discussion
Move Quality
As mentioned in the ‘Experiments’ section, the best per-
forming model for ‘Quality’ commentary classiﬁcation was
a bi-directional LSTM architecture using pre-trained BERT
embeddings. These results were in accordance with our ex-
pectations: the LSTM exhibits SOTA performance, however
the bi-LSTM is superior in this setting (Zhou et al. 2016)
- given the ability of the network to preserve information
from both past and future (rather than just past information)
thus understanding the context of each word in the commen-
tary and returning accurate text classiﬁcation. Upon clas-
siﬁcation of the provided dataset employing the aforemen-
tioned model, further tweaking was applied to the dataset.
For example, the classiﬁer was not trained on comments
which reﬂected quality based solely on symbols common
to Chess notation (e.g., !!, representing a good move), since
previous experiments reﬂected that the use of these symbols
confused the classiﬁer in understanding the sentence struc-
ture and common words behind ‘Quality Moves’. Hence,
these comments were added into the dataset. Upon clean-
ing and classifying the dataset based on commentary, biti-
fying the Chess moves, and applying Sentiment Analysis to
the commentary, we present SentiChess a dataset of 15,000
Chess moves represented in bit format, alongside their com-
mentary and sentiment evaluation. This dataset is offered in
the hope of further development of work around sentiment-
based Chess models, and statistical move analysis.
Sentiment prediction
Due to the required data format required by the jointed CNN-
RNN architecture that we intended to use, we changed track
and built our own bi-LSTM model to predict the sentiment
of the Chess commentaries using stacked, pre-trained BERT
and GloVe word embeddings in order to achieve the best re-
sults.
While we were aware that ﬁne-grained sentiment classiﬁ-
cation historically has displayed mediocre results, we pos-
tulated that a binary prediction would simply not provide
enough information at the evaluation stage. Despite this, our
prediction accuracies (and corresponding precision and re-
call) emerged unsatisfactory in the ﬁne-grained setting us-
ing our custom built bi-LSTM. To this end, we revised the
model to output binary predictions (good or bad move) with
corresponding probabilities. It was found, after experiment-
ing with various pre-trained word embeddings, that BERT
embeddings (an embedding based on a bidirectional trans-
former architecture) were the most effective in accurate sen-
timent predictions. The particular embedding that enabled
SOTA prediction consisted of 24 layers, 1024 hidden units,
16-heads and 340m parameters. While character embeddings
were tried and tested, they did not provide optimal test ac-
curacy. In the below, 1 (1.0) = Bad move with total cer-
tainty and 2 (0.05) = Good move with little certainty. The
model displayed high levels of understanding of the com-
mentaries, correctly predicting moves constructed with a va-
riety of double negation techniques (implicit negation, nega-
tional preﬁxes and unseen double negatives). There were
mixed results however when faced with unseen, emotive and
descriptive adjectives and seemed to break down rather dra-
matically when faced with increasingly rare adjectives un-
seen in the training set, as can be observed in Figure 5:
Another important testing strategy was to establish how well
the model dealt with annotation symbols from Algebraic no-
tation 4 - speciﬁcally the following symbols: !: an excellent
move; !!: a particularly good move; ?: a bad move; a mis-
take; ??: a blunder; !?: interesting move that may not be
best; ?!: a dubious move or move that may turn out to be
bad.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic notation (Chess)
Figure 5: Sentiment Prediction on difﬁcult sentences
It was shown that the model predicted correctly with to-
tal certainty on all testing examples that contained partic-
ularly ambiguous commentary descriptions of abnormally
large lengths (≈100 words), but were prepended with one of
the above symbols (or permutations thereof).
Chess Model
To delve deeper into the strengths and weaknesses of the
model, the positions of each of SentiMATE’s pieces over the
100 games were logged. There is a clear distinction between
the pieces which the agent has managed to deploy success-
fully and ones which it has not. The heatmap in Figure 6
display the development of pieces by SentiMATE:
Figure 6: Heatmaps of SentiMATE piece’s which show pos-
itive development
Figure 7: Heatmaps of SentiMATE pieces which show lack
of development
SentiMATE shows a preference for the King Pawn opening,
an aggressive and attacking ﬁrst move, given that it imme-
diately stakes a claim to the center and frees up the queen-
side bishop. Bobby Fischer (Grand Master) claims that the
King’s Pawn Game is ”Best by test” (Fischer 2012), and
stated that ”With 1.e4! I win” (Seirawan 2003). This was a
common occurrence in our agent’s play, and showed its ca-
pability of learning given that it was a recurring move in the
dataset. It provides control of key central squares and allows
for rapid game development. Additionally it can be seen that
it has learned to develop its knight speciﬁcally king side to
deep positions on the board early on. Finally, remarkably,
it learns to maintain its queen in an e4 position giving Sen-
tiMATE a big presence in the central squares, a region of
extreme importance.
On the other hand, Figure 7 shows that the agent does not use
its bishop or rooks to their full potential. Rooks are speciﬁ-
cally hard to manoeuvre and requires several moves of plan-
ning to place them into advantageous positions; this is chal-
lenging for SentiMATE, which plans one move ahead. As
can be seen in the King’s heatmap (in Figure 7), it success-
fully learns to castle queen side but this does not match well
with the highly occurring b4 pawn seen above.
Conclusion & Future Work
We conclude that this research gives rise to a promising
ﬁeld for move evaluation in Chess engines. It addresses our
research hypothesis, given that NLP has successfully been
used to train a Chess evaluation function. A dataset of c.
15,000 annotated moves and their respective sentiment is
sufﬁcient for the model to outperform a random player and a
(restrained) depth-one DeepChess engine. Furthermore, the
provided classiﬁcation models exhibit high accuracy, mak-
ing the expansion of the dataset both feasible and timely.
The expansion of the dataset is a key element to the improve-
ment of SentiMATE. DeepChess, employed for comparison
purposes, is trained on over one million moves and, whilst
we outperformed DeepChess with a depth of one, increas-
ing the size of the provided dataset will allow for the model
to have a look-ahead element and plan several moves ahead,
allowing for SentiMATE to run on larger depths.
A low-level state representation was used for the model to
learn features from scratch. However, it could beneﬁt from
having an input with a higher-level of information. This could
be done by extracting features which could be deemed ben-
eﬁcial as the input.
References
[Barnes, Klinger, and Schulte im Walde 2017] Barnes,
J.;
Klinger, R.; and Schulte im Walde, S.
2017.
Assess-
ing state-of-the-art sentiment models on state-of-the-art
sentiment datasets. CoRR abs/1709.04219.
[Brodersen et al. 2010] Brodersen,
K.
H.;
Ong,
C.
S.;
Stephan, K. E.; and Buhmann, J. M. 2010. The balanced
accuracy and its posterior distribution.
In 2010 20th In-
ternational Conference on Pattern Recognition, 3121–3124.
IEEE.
[Chaitanya, Harika, and Prabadevi 2017] Chaitanya,
T.
S. K.; Harika, V. S.; and Prabadevi, B.
2017.
A senti-
ment analysis approach by identifying the subject object
relationship.
[Chinchalkar 1996] Chinchalkar, S. 1996. An upper bound
for the number of reachable positions.
[Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2015] Clevert,
D.-A.;
Unterthiner, T.; and Hochreiter, S. 2015. Fast and accu-
rate deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus).
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289.
[David, Netanyahu, and Wolf 2016] David, E.; Netanyahu,
N.; and Wolf, L. 2016. Deepchess: End-to-end deep neu-
ral network for automatic learning in chess. 88–96.
[Fischer 2012] Fischer, B. 2012. My 60 Memorable Games
: chess tactics, chess strategies with Bobby Fischer. New
York : Pavilion Books Company Limited. Description based
upon print version of record.
[Heath and Allum 1997] Heath, D., and Allum, D. 1997. The
historical development of computer chess and its impact on
artiﬁcial intelligence. AAAI Technical Report.
[Jhamtani et al. 2018] Jhamtani, H.; Gangal, V.; Hovy, E.;
Neubig, G.; and Berg-Kirkpatrick, T. 2018. Learning to
generate move-by-move commentary for chess games from
large-scale social forum data. In Proceedings of the 56th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 1661–1671.
[Lai 2015] Lai, M. 2015. Giraffe: Using deep reinforcement
learning to play chess.
[Sabatelli 2017] Sabatelli, M. 2017. Learning to play chess
with minimal lookahead and deep value neural networks.
[Seirawan 2003] Seirawan, Y. 2003. Winning Chess Brillian-
cies (Winning Chess - Everyman Chess). Everyman Chess.
[Shannon 1950] Shannon, C. E. 1950. Programming a com-
puter for playing chess. Philosophical Magazine 41(314).
[Silver et al. 2016] Silver, D.; Schrittwieser, J.; Simonyan,
K.; Antonoglou, I.; and Aja Huang, A. 2016. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural network and tree search.
[Silver et al. 2017] Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.;
Antonoglou, I.; Lai, M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; Sifre, L.;
Kumaran, D.; Graepel, T.; Lillicrap, T.; Simonyan, K.; and
Hassabis, D. 2017. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play
with a general reinforcement learning algorithm.
[Wang X 2016] Wang X, Jiang W, L. Z. 2016. Combina-
tion of convolutional and recurrent neural network for sen-
timent analysis of short texts. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
2016).
[Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018] Zhang, L.; Wang, S.; and Liu,
B. 2018. Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey.
[Zhou et al. 2016] Zhou, P.; Qi, Z.; Zheng, S.; Xu, J.; Bao,
H.; and Xu, B.
2016.
Text classiﬁcation improved by
integrating bidirectional LSTM with two-dimensional max
pooling. CoRR abs/1611.06639.
