Title: Schrödinger's Tree -- On Syntax and Neural Language Models
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.08887v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2110.08887v1  [cs.CL]  17 Oct 2021
Schrödinger’s Tree – On Syntax and Neural
Language Models
Artur Kulmizev∗
Uppsala University
Joakim Nivre
Uppsala University
In the last half-decade, the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP) has undergone two major
transitions: the switch to neural networks as the primary modeling paradigm and the homoge-
nization of the training regime (pre-train, then ﬁne-tune). Amidst this process, language models
have emerged as NLP’s workhorse, displaying increasingly ﬂuent generation capabilities and
proving to be an indispensable means of knowledge transfer downstream. Due to the otherwise
opaque, black-box nature of such models, researchers have employed aspects of linguistic theory in
order to characterize their behavior. Questions central to syntax — the study of the hierarchical
structure of language — have factored heavily into such work, shedding invaluable insights
about models’ inherent biases and their ability to make human-like generalizations. In this paper,
we attempt to take stock of this growing body of literature. In doing so, we observe a lack of clarity
across numerous dimensions, which inﬂuences the hypotheses that researchers form, as well as
the conclusions they draw from their ﬁndings. To remedy this, we urge researchers make careful
considerations when investigating coding properties, selecting representations, and evaluating
via downstream tasks. Furthermore, we outline the implications of the different types of research
questions exhibited in studies on syntax, as well as the inherent pitfalls of aggregate metrics.
Ultimately, we hope that our discussion adds nuance to the prospect of studying language models
and paves the way for a less monolithic perspective on syntax in this context.
1. Introduction
Syntax — how words are combined to form sentences in natural language — has
perhaps never garnered as much attention from NLP researchers as it does in the present
day. Naturally, its recent relevance at conferences is owed to the deep learning paradigm,
which the NLP community has embraced with open arms since the midpoint of the last
decade. Prior to this paradigm shift, questions central to syntax were often restricted
to the parsing domain. There, researchers were largely interested in developing super-
vised algorithms for processing structured input — usually in the form of annotated
constituency or dependency treebanks. Beyond parsing, syntax also often factored into
researchers’ hypotheses about what information models may need to succeed in a
given task. Feature engineering was a pivotal component of pre-neural NLP, where text
was ﬁltered through hand-crafted feature templates that emphasized parts of speech,
morphology, and tree structure, so as to inform simple, often linear models about the
underlying syntax of sentences.
The deep learning revolution of the mid 2010s quickly obviated the need for feature
engineering, which was widely considered a time-consuming and painstaking process.
∗E-mail: artur.kulmizev@lingfil.uu.se
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
Embeddings — dense vectors representing the distributional properties of words —
quickly replaced the sparse, hand-crafted vectors of yore and boosted performance dra-
matically (Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014). Such progress
presented a trade-off, however: accuracy at the expense of interpretability. Indeed,
without the guiding hand of the feature engineer, it became difﬁcult to ascertain what
properties of natural language the new neural models — highly complex and non-linear
— had come to rely on.
It was this uncertainty that inspired a new line of inquiry within NLP, concerning
what exactly models know and how they come to learn it. Early insights from this
domain intimated that neural networks could capture facets of the hierarchical structure
of language, beyond the linear order of words in a sentence. The Long Short Term
Memory network (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) featured prominently in
such studies, where researchers employed linguistic minimal pairs (mostly based on
agreement phenomena) in order to demonstrate the model’s sensitivity to syntactic
hierarchy (Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg 2016a; Gulordava et al. 2018). Such ﬁndings
were deemed exciting mainly due the LSTM’s design as a sequence processor, which
lacked the sort of structural supervision or inductive bias that one might encounter in
the parsing literature.
Amidst skyrocketing research budgets and the continued advancement of process-
ing hardware, NLP faced another paradigm shift in 2018–19. Researchers began realiz-
ing that representations for input words need not be ﬁxed to a single static vector per
type (as with word embeddings), but can instead be computed dynamically, with each
word contextualized with respect to the rest of the sentence (Peters et al. 2018). Per this
logic, it also became apparent that models capable of generating such representations
could be ﬁne-tuned with respect to downstream tasks, with impressive gains in per-
formance thereafter (Howard and Ruder 2018). Language models — the basis of classic
word embedding algorithms — were a natural ﬁt for this paradigm and became NLP’s
backbone going forward.
In the modern day, models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), GPT (Radford et al. 2019)
and their successors feature prominently in NLP research, showcasing the efﬁcacy of
the pretrain-and-ﬁnetune paradigm. Naturally, the human-like generation capability of
such models, as well as their success on natural language understanding (NLU) bench-
marks (Wang et al. 2018, 2019), makes the question of what the models know about
language and how they acquire such knowledge and ever-pressing one. Increasingly,
we ﬁnd, NLP researchers turn to the ﬁeld of syntax — with its decades of research,
theory, and debate — in order to answer such questions. In this paper, we attempt to
take stock of the ever-growing literature on the syntactic capabilities of neural language
models. In doing so, we observe a lack of clarity across numerous dimensions, which
inﬂuences the hypotheses that researchers form, as well as the conclusions they draw
from their ﬁndings. We argue that this failure of articulation results in a body of work
whose hypotheses, methodologies, and conclusions comprise many conﬂicting insights,
giving rise to a paradoxical picture reminiscent of Schrödinger’s cat — where syntax
appears to be simultaneously dead and alive inside the black box models. In particular,
by framing studies around aggregate metrics and benchmarks, syntax is often reduced
to a monolithic phenomenon, which fails to do justice both to the complex interplay
between different manifestations of hierarchical structure in natural language and to
the substantial variation that exists across typologically different languages.
Our goal in this article is not to criticize earlier studies, which all provide valuable
pieces of evidence for understanding the role of syntax in contemporary NLP, partic-
ularly language models. Instead, we propose a number of conceptual distinctions, the
2
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
consideration and articulation of which, we argue, can help us better understand the
seemingly conﬂicting results, resolve some of the apparent contradictions, and pave
the way for a more nuanced and articulated research agenda. To provide the necessary
background for this analysis, we begin by introducing the concept of syntax from a
bird’s eye perspective. We then review a representative sample of investigations into the
syntactic capabilities of neural language models, which we categorize as belonging to
three different paradigms. We supplement this review by discussing what we perceive
to be important distinctions about syntax left implicit in this body of work. This leads to
a discussion of different classes of research questions underlying the surveyed literature,
and the role of aggregate metrics in addressing these research questions. We conclude
with some thoughts on how our analysis can inform our research methodology for the
future.
2. Background: Aspects of Syntax
Syntax is usually described as the way that words are combined into larger expressions
like phrases and sentences. On one hand, syntax can then be contrasted with mor-
phology, which is concerned with the internal structure of words. On the other hand,
it can be contrasted with semantics, which deals with the meaning of words, phrases
and sentences — as opposed to their form. In reality, however, syntax is concerned with
the complex mapping between form and meaning at the phrase and sentence level. It
is therefore important to make a distinction between syntactic structure — an abstract
hierarchical structure that determines or constrains semantic composition — and coding
properties — expressive devices such as word order, function words and morphological
inﬂection that are used to partially encode the syntactic structure. To illustrate this point,
let us consider two equivalent sentences in Finnish and English:
(1)
koira
jahtasi
kissan
huoneesta
dog-NOM chase-PRS cat-ACC room-ELA
‘a/the dog chased a/the cat from a/the room’
(2)
the dog chased the cat from the room
Most linguists would agree that (1) and (2) not only mean (roughly) the same thing
but also have a similar syntactic structure, where the main verb (jahtasi, chased) takes a
subject (koira, the dog), a direct object (kissan, the cat) and a locative modiﬁer (huoneesta,
from the room). However, the encoding of this syntactic structure is quite different in
the two languages. In English, the subject and object are primarily identiﬁed through
their position relative to the verb, while the locative modiﬁer is introduced by a prepo-
sition (from). In Finnish, the role of all three dependents of the verb is indicated by
morphological case inﬂection, and constituent order is not signiﬁcant.1 Note also that
the overt coding properties (word order, function words, morphological inﬂection) do
not (always) uniquely determine the syntactic structure. For example, in the English
example, the phrase from the room could also function as a modiﬁer of the noun phrase
the cat, although this is a less likely interpretation in most contexts.
1 In principle, the words of the Finnish sentence can be rearranged in any order without changing the
syntactic roles, but some orders may be less natural and/or carry special pragmatic implications.
3
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
While coding properties are concrete aspects of the sentence, the syntactic structure
is essentially an abstract concept that is not directly observable. Nevertheless, linguists
have over the years accumulated compelling evidence for the existence of a hierarchical
structure over and above the sequential order of words. The most obvious type of
evidence is perhaps the occurrence of structural ambiguity, where a single sequence
of words can be assigned multiple compositional interpretations, exempliﬁed in the
following classic examples:
(3)
she saw the man with the telescope
(4)
old men and women
(5)
ﬂying planes can be dangerous
Other types of evidence come from substitution and permutation tests (see, e.g.,
Matthews 1981). However, while the existence of a hierarchical structure is hardly
contested today, the linguistic theories developed to account for this structure vary
in their theoretical assumptions as well as in their mathematical representations of
syntactic structure. A broad distinction can be made here between theories based on
phrase structure (constituency) (Bloomﬁeld 1933; Chomsky 1957) and theories based on
dependency structure (Tesnière 1959; Mel’ˇcuk 1988), but there are also other approaches
and considerable variation within each family of theories. To some degree, it is possible
to convert syntactic representations from one theoretical framework to another, but the
conversion is usually heuristic and lossy and, therefore, the different representations are
not commensurable, strictly speaking.
The existence of a wide range of syntactic theories arises from contested views on
how a diverse range communicative principles, including the use of different coding
properties, can come to exist across languages. For example, the Chomskyan tradition
posits that an innate human grammar — a set of rules and processes that govern human
cognition — is privy to a series of language-speciﬁc transformations that result in such
idiosyncrasies (Chomsky 1965, 1981, 1995). Other accounts argue that syntax itself is
shaped by functional or cognitive constraints (Zipf 1949; Givón 1995; Hawkins 2004;
Jaeger and Tily 2011; Gibson et al. 2019), such as managing memory load by preferring
dependencies of shorter length (Gibson 1998; Gibson et al. 2000) — a process which
can also inﬂuence coding properties like word order (Hahn, Jurafsky, and Futrell 2020;
Futrell, Levy, and Gibson 2020). Cultural differences across languages are likewise the-
orized to play a large role (Tomasello 2009; Evans and Levinson 2009), with complex
morphosyntactic processes like polysynthesis being largely observable in small, non-
industrial communities with dense social-network structures (Trudgill 2017). Directly
or not, such debates revolve around the controversial poverty of the stimulus argument
(Lasnik and Lidz 2017)— linguistics’ own spin on psychology’s nature vs. nurture
debate — where the human capacity to acquire and generalize across structures is
perceived as either predominantly learned or predominantly innate.
Neural networks — especially large scale language models — have recently as-
sumed an interesting place in this discussion. Primarily, syntactic theory has offered a
useful toolkit for more ﬁne-grained evaluation of language models, which have shown
an ability to generate coherent, grammatical output, resembling that of humans. To
this end, researchers have employed well-studied coding properties like subject-verb
agreement (Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg 2016b) or phenomena like ﬁller-gap depen-
dencies (Wilcox et al. 2018) to articulate exactly on which grounds a models’ output
4
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
might be judged as grammatical or not. Such studies have served as a welcome comple-
ment to the ubiqutious, yet opaque perplexity metric — a measure of how predictable
sentences or documents are, given a model’s parameterization. In a sense, however, they
can likewise be perceived as a means of sanity-checking models’ behavior (Baroni 2021),
with paper titles often framed interrogatively: do neural language models learn
?
Nonetheless, answering such questions is useful, and a concrete understanding of the
ability of neural networks to generalize with respect to natural language — as well
as the algorithmic processes that underlie this capacity — could, in the least, provide
interesting perspectives on the age-old debates mentioned above (Linzen and Baroni
2021).
3. Review: The Quest for Syntax
In this section, we review work belonging to what we perceive as the three dominant
paradigms for attesting language models’ knowledge of syntax — targeted syntac-
tic evaluation, probing, and (downstream) NLU evaluation. Though comprehensive
surveys of such studies can be found, for example, in Linzen and Baroni (2021) or
Manning et al. (2020), our aim here is to relate them to the concepts and distinctions
discussed in the previous section. Readers interested in a more detailed description and
analysis are referred to the aforementioned work.
3.1 Targeted Syntactic Evaluation
Targeted syntactic evaluation2 (TSE) is arguably the most popular framework for assess-
ing neural networks’ ability to make syntactic — therefore hierarchical — generaliza-
tions. At its core, TSE is a black-box testing approach concerned with measuring model
output (typically probabilities) with respect to a curated set of stimuli. Such stimuli are
typically based on minimal pairs motivated by phenomena in the syntax literature. For
example, consider the (by now classic) example in sentences 6a and 6b.
(6) a. The keys to the cabinet are on the table.
b. *The keys to the cabinet is on the table.
c. *The key to the cabinets are on the table.
d. The key to the cabinets is on the table.
The literature dictates that a competent English speaker would rely on a structural
analysis of the keys to the cabinet to infer number agreement between the plural subject
(keys) and the copula verb (are). On the other hand, a purely sequential processing of
the sentence would arrive at the opposite conclusion in 6b: is agrees with the adjacent
singular noun (cabinet). To ascertain whether or not a language model M follows the
former logic, one could, for example, compare the probabilities assigned to the target
verb be in 6a-6b, given the context C = the keys to the cabinet, and examine whether
PM(are|C) > PM(is|C). This can also be extended to full paradigms, where, in the case
of 6, M has to assign higher probabilities to both (6a) and (6d) with respect to (6b) and
(6c). TSE (per this formulation) can thus be seen as based on an accuracy metric, which,
if returning a high value over n stimuli, implies that M is able to generalize with respect
to the relevant syntactic phenomenon. It should be noted that probability assigned to the
word form x, per various theoretical justiﬁcations, is sometimes replaced with surprisal,
2 This term was coined, to the authors’ best knowledge, by Marvin and Linzen (2018).
5
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
e.g., S = −log2PM(x|C), as in Wilcox et al. (2018) and Futrell et al. (2019). Furthermore,
in situations where the locus of ungrammaticality does not lie on a single word (as
in English subject-verb agreement), but is dependent on the interaction of several
words (e.g., as in negative polarity items), it is common to compare the probabilities
or perplexities of entire sentences (Marvin and Linzen 2018; Jumelet and Hupkes 2018).
The TSE framework also allows for ﬂexibility in integrating more complex sets of
stimuli, as in the study on syntactic state by Futrell et al. (2019):
(7) a. As the doctor studied the textbook, the nurse walked into the ofﬁce.
b. *As the doctor studied the textbook.
c. ?The doctor studied the textbook, the nurse walked into the ofﬁce.
d. The doctor studied the textbook.
With respect to (7), Futrell et al. (2019) formulate a set of hypotheses, whereby they posit
(1) that the surprisal at the matrix clause after the comma (... the nurse walked into the
ofﬁce.) should be lower for (7a) than for (7c) (the network knows it is in a subordinate
clause per the subordinator as), and (2) that the surprisal at the matrix clause should
be higher for 7b than 7d (the network expects a matrix clause per the subordinator).
Though the aforementioned accuracy approach could likewise be appropriated here as
a summary statistic, researchers also often employ signiﬁcance testing in order to accept
or reject their hypotheses. For example, Futrell et al. (2019) apply a linear mixed-effect
model on their models’ stimulus-level predictions in order to accept hypothesis (1) on
behalf of all models, but reject hypothesis (2) for all but two. This formulation — in line
with common paradigms in psycholinguistics — leads them to conclude that, while all
models are partially capable of tracking syntactic state across subordinate and main
clauses, certain training conditions are required (large data or explicit structural objec-
tives) in order to fully capture the structural expectations induced by subordinators.
A similar methodology is employed in Wilcox et al. (2018) for investigating ﬁller-gap
dependencies.
The popularity of the TSE framework has precipitated the creation of challenge
suites, which offer holistic measures of models’ performance across a variety of lin-
guistic phenomena. Marvin and Linzen (2018) were among the ﬁrst to introduce such
datasets, employing a context-free grammar to procedurally generate minimal pair
sentences — such as 6a and 6b — for a variety of phenomena: agreement (of various
kinds), reﬂexive anaphora, and negative polarity items. Warstadt et al. (2020) later pre-
sented a similar, automatically generated dataset of minimal pairs (BLiMP), albeit with
wider coverage: 1000 sentences per 67 paradigms belonging to 12 different phenom-
ena. The authors used BLiMP to study various popular language model architectures
(LSTM, Transformer), whereby they associated average accuracy across phenomena
with models’ linguistic knowledge. A similar suite was contemporaneously introduced
by Hu et al. (2020), albeit in employ of 2 × 2 templates like 6 for hand-curated stimuli
culled from syntax textbooks. Like Warstadt et al. (2020), Hu et al. (2020) used their
suite3 to study language model architectures, most notably relating language models’
syntactic generalization (SG) score — measured in aggregate across phenomena — to
their test set perplexity.
3 This suite was later named SYNTAXGYM in (Gauthier et al. 2020).
6
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
3.2 Probing
Probing4 is another popular paradigm for attesting NLP models’ acquisition of syntax.
The key distinction between TSE and probing is that, while the former is concerned
with model behavior, the latter focuses explicitly on model representation. In this context,
behavior is likened to the probabilities assigned to certain outputs (extracted, typically,
from the output layer of a language model), while representation refers to the intermedi-
ate hidden state vectors computed by the model. Mainly, probing is motivated as being
necessary due to deep learning’s end-to-end nature: features are learned with respect to
a given task, not engineered like in traditional systems. Due to this fact, neural models’
representations are wholly uninterpretable to the human interlocutor and thus require
intervention in order to understand what they portray.
Formally speaking, probing is concerned with representations h extracted from
a model M for a given input x: h = M(x). A representation h ∈R1×d is typically a
ﬁxed-length dense vector corresponding to input word x (e.g., keys in 6a), where d is
the hidden-state dimensionality of M. A probe f for a given linguistic property A is
a classiﬁer ﬁt on h to produce output y ∈Y , where Y is a ﬁnite label set: y = fA(h).
For properties that can be decoded from single words, such as part-of-speech (POS)
tags, a trained probe fPOS must be able to assign the correct label to h with respect to
the ground truth, e.g., ˆy = NOUN for M(keys). For properties concerning two or more
words, such as dependencies or phrases, a concatenation of hidden states corresponding
to discontiguous tokens xi, xj or a contiguous span of tokens xi, ..., xj is applied. In
this latter formulation, deemed edge-probing by Tenney et al. (2019), one might expect
a probe fDEP to decode ˆy = NSUBJ for M(keys, are) and fCON to decode ˆy = PP for
M(on, the, table). Though probing models vary widely in terms of architecture, param-
eters, optimization, etc., the vast majority of them assume a training set DA representa-
tive of property A on which f’s parameters Θ can be ﬁt, like a treebank. Such probes are
then evaluated in standard supervised learning fashion via accuracy on a held out test
set.If such accuracy is high, it can then be said that A is decodable from h, i.e. that M
learns it. This framework was notably employed by Liu et al. (2019a) and Tenney et al.
(2019), who concurrently demonstrated that representations extracted from popular con-
textual embedding models (ELMo, BERT, GPT) yielded exceedingly good performance
on suites of linguistic tasks. Also noteworthy is Tenney, Das, and Pavlick (2019)’s study,
which showed that BERT’s representations appear to evolve in capturing properties
with increasing levels of complexity, from lexical features to syntax and semantics.
While the aforementioned word-level approach is by far the most popular probing
setup, other methods for decoding the syntactic structure of entire sentences have
been proposed. One model that is of particular interest is that of Hewitt and Manning
(2019), who attempt to decode dependency structure from models’ vector spaces. To
this end, they propose to learn transformations over model representations, such
that (1) the squared l2 distance between any vectors hi, hj reﬂects the distance be-
tween their corresponding words xi, xj in a parse tree, and (2) that the l2 norm of
any vector hi reﬂects the depth of its corresponding word xi in a parse tree. They
ﬁnd that this method is particularly effective for decoding Stanford Dependencies
trees (de Marneffe, MacCartney, and Manning 2006) from ELMo and BERT represen-
tations, with respect to several lexical-only baselines. Beyond Hewitt and Manning
(2019)’s method, which can be imagined as doing parsing by proxy, other work has
4 Also known as diagnostic classiﬁcation (see, e.g., Hupkes, Veldhoen, and Zuidema 2018).
7
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
directly employed (underparameterized) dependency parsers as probes. For example,
see Hewitt and Liang (2019), who employ a graph-based bilinear probe; Maudslay et al.
(2020), who investigate the relation between probing and parsing; and Pimentel et al.
(2020), who advocate for adding full dependency parsing to the probing task suite.
At this stage, probing can be considered a ﬁeld of inquiry in its own right, with
researchers presenting new models, metrics, and criticisms for every conference cycle.
Naturally, the use of intermediary models trained on top of extracted representations
warrants caution from the interlocutor. Some concerns expressed in the literature in-
clude, but are not limited to: the use of smaller, linear models vs. larger, nonlinear
ones; appropriate baselines and evaluation metrics; properties being learned by the
probe vs. occurring in representations; properties being employed by the model in
the original task vs. simply being decodable, etc. Though a full consideration of these
methodological concerns is outside the scope of this article, we refer the interested
reader to Belinkov (2021) — a comprehensive review of the paradigm, open issues, and
alternative approaches like attention analysis.
3.3 NLU Evaluation
Outside of TSE and probing, another technique that has recently attracted much atten-
tion is the evaluation of models (imbued with or deprived of syntactic knowledge) on
downstream tasks. The logic inherent to this line of inquiry is as follows: if a model
has come to rely on human-like knowledge of language to solve complex NLP tasks,
then it should (1) perform poorly on such tasks when the surface form of an utterance
has been corrupted beyond (human) comprehension, and (2) perform identically when
imbued with the exact abstract structure theorized by linguists as governing the surface
form. Such tasks are typically taken from the GLUE benchmark — a suite of natural
language understanding (NLU) datasets “designed to favor and encourage models that
share general linguistic knowledge across tasks” (Wang et al. 2018). GLUE has served
as the principal point of comparison for pretraining architectures, where, as of writing,
15 models have surpassed the published human performance on the same tasks.
In terms of input corruption, many studies have investigated the effect of word
order on NLU task performance. Indeed, word order is the primary means of
encoding syntactic argument structure in English, and such work often hypothe-
sizes that sensitivity to this particular property should result in lower NLU scores.
Gupta, Kvernadze, and Srikumar (2021) demonstrate that this is not the case for BERT
when ﬁne-tuning on various GLUE tasks: sequences corrupted at test-time by means
of shufﬂing, sorting, duplicating, and dropping tokens still retain 70-90% performance
of the non-perturbed input. Moreover, models appear to be as conﬁdent in assigning
labels to perturbed inputs as they are to naturalistic ones. These results are corroborated
by Pham et al. (2020), who show that models predominantly seek salient words in
sequences, with numerous attention heads specializing themselves for this exact pur-
pose. Sinha et al. (2020) report similar ﬁndings for various NLI datasets (in English and
Chinese) across a variety of model architectures. They show that models are insensitive
to word reorderings, some of which can actually result in improved task performance.
Perhaps most strinkingly, Sinha et al. (2021) show that pre-training full-scale RoBERTa
models on perturbed sentences (across n-grams of varying lengths) and ﬁne-tuning
them on unaltered GLUE tasks leads to negligible performance loss. They also report
that a popular probe for dependency structure, that of Pimentel et al. (2020), is able
to decode trees from the perturbed representations — even a unigram baseline with
resampled words — with considerable accuracy.
8
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
As a conceptual counterpoint to the permutation-based line of research, several
studies have posed the opposite question: does explicitly injecting syntactic structure
into models’ representations or training objectives lead to better downstream perfor-
mance? The observations in such studies are similar to the aforementioned work, albeit
slightly more subtle: models that factor syntax into their decisions generally do not
beneﬁt in performance via its injection, which is taken to imply that such structure is
redundant to the model, or not needed at all. Most notably, Glavaš and Vuli´c (2021a)
ﬁne-tune BERT and RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b) as dependency parsers, before ﬁne-
tuning the same models again on NLI, paraphrase detection, and commonsense reason-
ing tasks. They show that, while intermediate parsing training (IPT) can produce near
state-of-the-art parsers, repurposing these parameters for NLU tasks leads to negligible
improvement. A similar trend is shown in Kuncoro et al. (2020), who train a BERT
model distilled from an RNNG teacher (Dyer et al. 2016). They, too, ﬁnd that, while
their syntactically-aware model achieves top marks on a suite of parsing and otherwise
syntactic tasks, the beneﬁts for ﬁne-tuning on GLUE are scant, if any. Swayamdipta et al.
(2019) corroborate these ﬁndings for ELMo models conditioned on chunked input
derived from phrase structure trees.
4. Discussion: A Call For Clarity and Caution
After our general discussion of syntax, as well as our review of work exploring its
role in contemporary language models, we are now in a position to make a few basic
distinctions. In this section, we attempt to situate the ﬁndings of the aforementioned
studies along several dimensions that we deem important towards the advancement of
our research agenda.
4.1 Coding Properties are not Syntax
First, we would like to highlight the need to be clear about whether a study is con-
cerned with abstract syntactic structure, overt coding properties, or with some relation
between the two. A typical fallacy that may arise from not observing this distinction
is to conﬂate a particular coding property with the abstract syntactic structure that it
partially encodes. Naturally, if we fall victim to this fallacy when interpreting certain
ﬁndings, we risk drawing conclusions based on insufﬁcient or irrelevant evidence. This
applies to situations where we may be tempted to employ coding properties as proxies
of syntactic structure — either for attesting models’ sensitivity to the latter or refuting
it.
For example, it is important to acknowledge that studying agreement via TSE gives
us a glimpse into how language models capture the syntactic relationship between
selected words, such as verbs and their subjects. Per this view, high performance —
even in the presence of various types of attractors — does not necessarily ential that a
model has learned the grammar of a language. Rather, it has simply shown itself to be
particularly sensitive to a single coding property, grammatical relation, or dependency
type. Notably, English agreement is limited to expressing the number or person of the
subject on the ﬁnite main verb (when in the present tense). This amounts to being, in
the vast majority of cases, a binary distinction between correct and incorrect inﬂections,
which bears a strong random choice baseline of 50% in the case of TSE. Thus, when one
considers types of agreement manifested in other languages — such as number, gender,
and case agreement between nouns and their modifying adjectives (e.g., German,
Russian), or polypersonal agreement between a verb and multiple arguments (e.g.,
9
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
Basque, Georgian) — it becomes difﬁcult to judge agreement as the primary mechanism
by which syntax is encoded in English. Indeed, studies have shown that models tend
to struggle with more expressive agreement mechanisms in morphologically rich
languages (Ravfogel, Goldberg, and Tyers 2018). Such insights call not only for a
typologically driven research agenda, but also for nuance in interpreting positive
ﬁndings for singular properties in selected languages.
We must also note that the above logic can apply in reverse: a model’s lack of
sensitivity to a single coding property, for example, word order (Dryer 1992), does
not imply that the model has failed to acquire syntax as a byproduct of its training
objective. Even in a language like English, where word order is very salient, it is not the
only coding property that signals syntactic structure. Consider chases the cats the dog as
a permutation of the dog chases the cats: it is not unreasonable for an English speaker to
decode the argument structure of this permutation using subject-verb agreement alone.
Indeed, recent research in psycholinguistics has intimated that humans are relatively
robust to permutations of linguistic form (Traxler 2014). In the context of word order,
Mollica et al. (2020) show that humans are able to process permuted sentences similarly
to naturalistic ones, albeit when local structure (measured via pointwise mutual
information) is preserved. Recently, this has been corroborated for models ﬁne-tuned
on GLUE as well, with performance therein strongly correlated with the extent of local
structure corruption (Clouatre et al. 2021). With this in mind, one can see that order
perturbation studies do not provide enough evidence to conclude that models (or
humans) are insensitive to syntax. Instead, when conducting such studies, we must
recall that word order (or agreement, for that matter) is simply a single coding property
in a mosaic of such properties, all of which are privy to underlying processes that drive
composition and comprehension.
4.2 Syntactic Representations are not Linguistic Data
As a second point, if a study is concerned with syntactic structure, we need to clarify
whether it assumes a speciﬁc type of syntactic representation, since the choice of rep-
resentation may affect the results. Other things being equal, we may therefore prefer
methods that do not presuppose speciﬁc syntactic representations, since conclusions
will otherwise be valid only on the assumption that the chosen representation correctly
captures syntactic structure. This consideration is even more important when we make
use of automatically parsed data — as opposed to manually annotated sentences from
treebanks — where otherwise sound syntactic representations may give misleading
results due to parsing errors. At the same time, it is important to note that avoiding
syntactic representations altogether may be limiting in another way, as it may restrict
our methodological repertoire. Thus, as long as we maintain a critical attitude towards
representation-dependent methods, they may still provide us with valuable results that
cannot be obtained with other methods.
To illustrate the importance of representations in the context of probing, we can
start by asking: does high UAS on a particular treebank imply that those trees are
indeed the structures encoded by a given model? Or can alternative, linguistically
plausible structures be decoded with comparable accuracy? Kulmizev et al. (2020) ex-
plore this question when probing various models for UD, a dependency formalism
which prioritizes content-word heads (de Marneffe et al. 2021), and Surface-Syntactic
UD, which assumes a traditional function-word head style analysis (Gerdes et al. 2018).
10
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
They ﬁnd that, while the difference in decoding UAS between the two formalisms is
minimal for some treebanks, other treebanks exhibit strong preferences for either UD or
SUD. They contribute such preferences to a complex interplay between the formalisms’
inherent graph properties (e.g., average tree height), the probe employed for decoding
(Hewitt and Manning (2019)’s, in their case), annotation factors like tokenization, and
morphology. Though preliminary, Kulmizev et al. (2020)’s study is a cautionary tale in
tree-based probing, where choice of representation directly affects what conclusions one
may draw about models.
We can ask similar questions when attempting to imbue models with syntactic
structure. For example, is the injection of UD trees into a model’s architecture enough
to draw conclusions about the role of syntax in downstream performance? Or do
alternative, linguistically plausible representations exist that models might yet beneﬁt
from? Beyond this, what privileges one particular injection method, say intermediate
parsing training (Glavaš and Vuli´c 2021a), over another, such as knowledge distillation
from an RNNG teacher (Kuncoro et al. 2020)? A template for exploring such consid-
erations can be found in Wu, Peng, and Smith (2021), who report that infusing BERT
with semantic dependencies can provide modest gains on GLUE. In that study, they
compare the DM representation focused explicitly on predicate-argument structure
(Ivanova et al. 2012) with the more syntactically oriented UD, ﬁnding that the former
leads to slightly better performance.5 Furthermore, they compare their chosen infusion
method — semantic graph embeddings learned via a relational graph convolution
encoder (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018) — with other means of injecting structure into rep-
resentations, where their method performs best in most cases.
4.3 Theory, Model, and Task
As a further means of promoting clarity, we consider it vital, for any study investigating
the syntactic capabilities of language models, to motivate the evaluation with a direct
aspect of syntax in mind. Indeed, TSE studies on coding properties and probing studies
on tree representations satisfy this desideratum by design. Studies that investigate
models’ knowledge of syntax through the prism of downstream tasks, however, do not.
For example, if we observe models achieving high performance on NLU tasks, we
may be tempted — by virtue of the NLU branding — to assume that they are, in
some fashion, similar to humans in their decision-making. To ascertain the extent to
which this is true, we must ﬁrst attempt to articulate exactly how humans behave when
choosing a particular label for a sample over another. Indeed, this has, to an extent,
been achieved for some textual entailment datasets, where annotators were asked to
justify their labeling decisions with free-text rationales (Camburu et al. 2018; Rajani et al.
2019). Such datasets, however, introduce a third variable into the mix (input, output, and
explanation), which complicates architecture design and further divorces the original
model (one that may be evaluated, presumably, for its syntactic capabilities) from the
task on which it is now being ﬁne-tuned and offering explanations for. Furthermore, and
perhaps more importantly, the existence of a third variable complicates the interpreta-
tion of the self-rationalizing model itself, as noted by Wiegreffe, Marasovi´c, and Smith
(2020): for example, how might we ensure that the model’s explanation is indeed faithful
to the label it produced? To its input?
5 Interestingly, both syntactic and semantic models seem to outperform the ﬁne-tuned RoBERTa baseline.
11
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
Given that we typically lack an explicit characterization of how humans make label-
ing decisions at the sample level, we are then left to interpret the behavior of the model
itself. For example, if working with Transformer models, we may be tempted to examine
their self-attention weights after ﬁne-tuning, as in Clark et al. (2019) or Htut et al. (2019).
However, the prospect of treating attention as explanation has received its fair share
of criticism in recent years, due to (1) a lack of input token identiﬁability in deep
Transformer models (Brunner et al. 2019; Abnar and Zuidema 2020) and (2) an unclear
correspondence between a model’s attention patterns and its outputs (Jain and Wallace
2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019; Serrano and Smith 2019). Due to these drawbacks, we
may then attempt to employ alternative methods of explanation, such as gradient-
based saliency (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2017), Shapley value-based feature attributions (Lundberg and Lee 2017), or model ag-
nostic approaches (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), inter alia. Here, we are met with
a space of methods, whose utility in NLP tasks has been surveyed with mixed results
(Poerner, Schütze, and Roth 2018; Arras et al. 2019; Atanasova et al. 2020). Hence, in or-
der to draw insights about a model’s syntactic capabilities vis-a-vis its performance on a
downstream task, we must not only make a principled choice of explanation model, but
also relate that model’s explanations — which are computed with respect to predictions
downstream — to the particular aspect of syntax we are interested in. Again, questions
central to faithfulness (Jacovi and Goldberg 2021) become vital: how can we guarantee
that an explanation of our model’s behavior represents what it actually did? Further
yet, how can we use explanations pertaining to one type of behavior to shed light on
another, unobserved one?
Certainly, numerous caveats are endemic to the process of interpreting model be-
havior (Lipton 2018). This may lead us to put our full trust in the task, which we can
employ as a prism through which to opine on the model. This necessitates that the
task is indeed well-motivated and designed, and difﬁcult to exploit via heuristics. If
we believe this to be true, we can hypothesize that, by performing well on such tasks,
our models possess whatever latent ability humans do in solving them — see, e.g.,
Sinha et al. (2020): “models should have to know the syntax ﬁrst, ...if performing any
particular NLU task that genuinely requires a humanlike understanding of meaning”.
Unfortunately, in the context of NLI (which Sinha et al. (2020) study) this is a highly
dubious claim: the crowd-funded nature of such datasets makes them prone to anno-
tation artefacts (e.g., subsequence overlap between premise/hypothesis, lexical choice
across inference classes, sentence length, etc.), which models often exploit as heuristics,
thus leading to highly inﬂated performance metrics (Gururangan et al. 2018; Poliak et al.
2018; McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019).
Ultimately, the extent of trust we place in the model (performing as hypothesized)
over the task (being correctly expressed) may inﬂuence not only our hypotheses, but
also the conclusions we draw from our ﬁndings. For example, consider Pham et al.
(2020) as a counterpoint to Sinha et al. (2020). Though the observations regarding BERT-
based models’ insensitivity to word order are largely similar, the former are more
critical of the task (“GLUE does not necessarily require syntactic information or complex
reasoning”), and the latter of the model (“current models do not yet ‘know syntax’ in the
fully systematic and human-like way we would like them to”). Naturally, for this and
the aforementioned reasons, disentangling the complex web of theory, model, and task
remains a gargantuan undertaking. However, if we formulate our hypotheses using
the exact behavior we would like to investigate and evaluate our models along those
same lines, then the conclusions we draw from our ﬁndings should be much clearer to
interpret.
12
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
4.4 What are the Research Questions?
In addition to specifying which aspect of syntax a study is concerned with, we also need
to be clear about what our research questions are. For example, given a model M, a task
T , some training data D and some aspect of syntax A, we may ask the following three
questions:
1.
To what degree does M learn A when trained on D to perform T ?
2.
To what degree can M learn A when trained on D to perform T ?
3.
To what degree does M need to learn A when trained on D to perform T ?
Questions of type 1 are the most straightforward to investigate as long as we have a
valid and reliable method for measuring the degree to which M learns A in the context
of D and T . This is quite a big assumption in itself, and one that we will return to shortly,
but we will focus ﬁrst on the logic for answering different research questions. Questions
of type 2 are modal in nature and therefore hard to investigate empirically, except
indirectly by investigating questions of type 1. For example, in the pioneering study by
Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg (2016a), discussed in Section 3, the authors were primar-
ily interested in whether an LSTM (M) can learn “syntax-sensitive dependencies” (A) —
a question of type 2. To investigate this, they examined the actual learning behavior of
the model in two speciﬁc settings (questions of type 1): (a) when trained on unlabeled
text (DU) for the task of language modeling (TLM), and (b) when trained on labeled
sentences (DL) for a speciﬁc agreement decision task (TA). The results were largely
negative in the ﬁrst case and positive in the second. From the positive result, they could
conclude that the model can learn the relevant dependencies when trained on DL for TA;
from the negative results, they could however only conclude that there was no evidence
that the model was capable of learning the relevant aspect of syntax when trained on
DU for TLM. This illustrates the fundamental asymmetry between positive and negative
results when it comes to generalizations about possibility. A single positive result —
if interpreted correctly — is sufﬁcient to establish that something is possible, while
any number of negative results are in principle inconclusive.6 Indeed, as discussed in
Section 3, the later study by Gulordava et al. (2018) managed to obtain positive results
also in a setting similar to the ﬁrst scenario of Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg (2016a),
from which they concluded that LSTMs are capable of learning at least one aspect of
syntactic structure without explicit supervision.
Questions of type 3 are more complex still, because they involve causality as well
as modality. More precisely, they combine the question of whether learning A results
in better performance of M on T (causality) with the question of whether learning A
is necessary to achieve better peformance (modality). A typical example is the study
of Glavaš and Vuli´c (2021b), discussed in Section 3, where the authors study the effect
of intermediate parser training of a pre-trained language model later ﬁne-tuned for
various language understanding tasks. The underlying research question is whether
knowledge of syntax is needed for language understanding — a question of type 3 —
and the lack of improvement may suggest a negative answer, but this conclusion is
6 This is the mirror image of the case of necessity, underlying the famous quotation attributed (probably
incorrectly) to Einstein: “No amount of experimentation can ever prove me right; a single experiment can
prove me wrong.”
13
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
only warranted if it can also be shown (a) that the model has actually learned (some
aspects of) syntax and (b) that this knowledge causally affects the model’s behavior on
the downstream task (and still fails to improve performance). Note, however, that a
positive improvement would not be more conclusive in this case, because it would only
show that improvement is possible, not that it is necessary. This illustrates the complexity
involved when relating experimental results to research questions and again points to
the need for careful meta-analysis.
4.5 Aggregate Metrics may be Misleading – but are Necessary
Let us ﬁnally turn to the question of how we can measure the degree to which a model
M learns some aspect of syntax A when trained on data set D to perform task T — a
question that is crucial to all studies in this area, regardless of what the more general
research questions are. As we have seen in Section 3, the answer usually involves
measuring performance on an appropriate task T ′, although the exact solution depends
on the type of study. In TSE studies, T ′ is typically the task of discriminating positive
from negative instances of some grammatical pattern, for example by assigning higher
probability to the positive instance in a minimal pair. In probing, T ′ is a supervised
classiﬁcation task assumed to reﬂect syntactic knowledge. And in NLU evaluation, T ′ is
simply the downstream language understanding task and thus normally coincides with
the main task T . Each of these paradigms comes with its own methodological pitfalls,
which have been extensively discussed in particular in the case of probing, but we will
focus here on the complexities that are common to all of them.
First of all, we note that performance on T ′ is almost always measured by averaging
over individual test instances. In the simplest case, this may just be the arithmetic mean
of a 0-1 loss metric, such as the accuracy reported for a probing classiﬁer predicting part-
of-speech tags. In other cases, it may be a more or less sophisticated macro-average, like
an average over different grammatical patterns in a TSE study. In all cases, however,
such aggregate measures need to be interpreted carefully. First of all, how do we know
whether a given metric value indicates presence or absence of syntactic knowledge?
Does a value of 0.5 mean that the glass is half full or half empty? This highlights the
importance of relevant and informative baselines, a point that has been made in the
literature before but that has perhaps not been fully appreciated.
Second, it is in the nature of aggregate metrics that they can easily be misleading
by hiding important variation, especially if the distribution of different types of phe-
nomena is heavily skewed. For example, in the related ﬁeld of syntactic parser evalua-
tion, Rimell, Clark, and Steedman (2009) have shown that parsers with very respectable
performance according to standard aggregate metrics like EVALB can have close to
zero accuracy on certain types of unbounded dependency constructions. Moreover,
aggregation may hide important variation in a number of different ways. If we use
naturally occurring text in our test sets, certain words and constructions will inevitably
be much more frequent than others and therefore dominate the aggregate scores in the
same way as for syntactic parser evaluation. As a result of this, Newman et al. (2021)
argue that standard metrics used in TSE overestimate the systematicity of language
model behavior. If in addition we aggregate over different syntactic phenomena, we
may hide the fact that different phenomena are captured to different degrees. And if we
aggregate over multiple languages — or only report results for a single language — we
may neglect important language-speciﬁc properties and risk over-generalization.
Lastly, we must consider the role aggregation plays in the interpretation of models’
performance on benchmarks like BLiMP, SyntaxGym, or GLUE. At its core, such an
14
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
enterprise entails that all aspects of syntax or language understanding — at least those
of particular salience — have been successfully enumerated. Given the abstract nature of
these notions, and the extent of debate regarding them, it is naturally doubtful that such
an enumeration could ever be attained. Relaxing this somewhat, in assuming a salient
set of aspects has indeed been collected, one must likewise assume — before aggre-
gating — that a principled weighting of such aspects exists. This is especially relevant
when dealing with a space of tasks or phenomena where ﬁne-grained categorizations
are likewise included — for instance, the 6 subject-verb agreement settings attested in
BLiMP. In such cases, one must not only choose between micro or macro averaging
across phenomena and their ﬁne-grained attestations, but also articulate whether or not
all phenomena lie on an equal playing ﬁeld — in other words, that they are all equally
(1) difﬁcult to attest and (2) salient for evaluation. Certainly, in the vast majority of cases
we assume a uniform weighting of classes when aggregating, since introducing hand-
selected weights may introduce bias that we would otherwise prefer to avoid. However,
we must not fail to acknowledge that benchmarks, in themselves, are inﬂuenced by
designers’ theories on what component parts adequately represent abstract notions like
syntax or language understanding.
There is unfortunately no simple remedy to the complexities discussed in this
section. In particular, giving up aggregate metrics is deﬁnitely not an option, since they
are necessary for statistical signiﬁcance testing and generalization. However, to make
further progress in this area, we need to be aware of their inherent limitations, be open to
consider alternative metrics, and to make sure to complement them with more speciﬁc
forms of analysis whenever possible.
5. Conclusion
The rapid progress in NLP thanks to deeper and larger neural network models trained
on very large data sets with little or no linguistic supervision raises a number of
questions concerning the status of traditional linguistic notions and theories in this land-
scape. Is there still a role for traditional techniques like supervised syntactic parsing? If
not, is this because neural language models learn the relevant generalizations about
linguistic structure without explicit supervision, or because language understanding
does not really depend on such generalizations in the way traditionally assumed. If the
latter, does this hold only for language understanding by machines, or does it also have
implications for human language understanding?
These are exciting questions and it is therefore not surprising that we have seen a
considerable body of research in this area recently. They are also hard questions, and the
methodology for tackling them is still under development, so it is also not surprising
that results so far have been inconclusive and sometimes contradictory. As stated in
the introduction, the goal of this article has not been to criticize previous efforts, but to
contribute to our understanding of methods and results by articulating and discussing
some of the inherent complexities in this research area. Without pretending to have
any solutions, we want to conclude with some recommendations for future research,
echoing the main points made throughout the paper.
Our general recommendation can be summed up as a plea for clarity and caution.
Clarity means being clear about what conception of syntax underlies our investigations,
which aspects of syntax are being studied, and whether we make speciﬁc assumptions
about syntactic representations. Clarity also implies that we explicitly discuss what
research questions are being asked, and how they can be elucidated by the speciﬁc
experiments we perform. Caution means being careful when interpreting aggregate
15
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
results, always looking for alternative metrics and additional analysis, and making
sure to consider evidence from multiple languages if we want to draw conclusions
about natural language in general. Caution ﬁnally means resisting the temptation to
draw strong conclusions from any single study, which is usually impossible given the
complex interplay of research questions, methodology and data. It is only by piecing
together all available evidence that we can hope to see the forest for the trees.
References
Abnar, Samira and Willem Zuidema. 2020. Quantifying attention ﬂow in transformers. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
4190–4197, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online.
Arras, Leila, Ahmed Osman, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek. 2019. Evaluating
recurrent neural network explanations. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 113–126, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy.
Atanasova, Pepa, Jakob Grue Simonsen, Christina Lioma, and Isabelle Augenstein. 2020. A
diagnostic study of explainability techniques for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 3256–3274,
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online.
Baroni, Marco. 2021. On the proper role of linguistically-oriented deep net analysis in linguistic
theorizing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08694.
Belinkov, Yonatan. 2021. Probing classiﬁers: Promises, shortcomings, and alternatives. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.12452.
Bloomﬁeld, Leonard. 1933. Language.
Brunner, Gino, Yang Liu, Damian Pascual, Oliver Richter, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Roger
Wattenhofer. 2019. On identiﬁability in transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04211.
Camburu, Oana-Maria, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2018. e-snli:
Natural language inference with natural language explanations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.01193.
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic Structures.
Chomsky, Noam. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Chomsky, Noam. 1981. Lectures on Government and Binding.
Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program.
Clark, Kevin, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. 2019. What does
bert look at? an analysis of bert’s attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop
BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 276–286.
Clouatre, Louis, Prasanna Parthasarathi, Amal Zouaq, and Sarath Chandar. 2021. Demystifying
neural language models’ insensitivity to word-order. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13955.
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
Dryer, Matthew S. 1992. The greenbergian word order correlations. Language, pages 81–138.
Dyer, Chris, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Recurrent neural
network grammars. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 199–209,
Association for Computational Linguistics, San Diego, California.
Evans, Nicholas and Stephen C Levinson. 2009. The myth of language universals: Language
diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and brain sciences, 32(5):429–448.
Futrell, Richard, Roger P Levy, and Edward Gibson. 2020. Dependency locality as an
explanatory principle for word order. Language, 96(2):371–412.
Futrell, Richard, Ethan Wilcox, Takashi Morita, Peng Qian, Miguel Ballesteros, and Roger Levy.
2019. Neural language models as psycholinguistic subjects: Representations of syntactic state.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
32–42.
Gauthier, Jon, Jennifer Hu, Ethan Wilcox, Peng Qian, and Roger Levy. 2020. Syntaxgym: An
online platform for targeted evaluation of language models. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 70–76.
Gerdes, Kim, Bruno Guillaume, Sylvain Kahane, and Guy Perrier. 2018. Sud or surface-syntactic
16
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
universal dependencies: An annotation scheme near-isomorphic to ud. EMNLP 2018, page 66.
Gibson, Edward. 1998. Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition,
68(1):1–76.
Gibson, Edward, Richard Futrell, Steven P Piantadosi, Isabelle Dautriche, Kyle Mahowald, Leon
Bergen, and Roger Levy. 2019. How efﬁciency shapes human language. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 23(5):389–407.
Gibson, Edward et al. 2000. The dependency locality theory: A distance-based theory of
linguistic complexity. Image, language, brain, 2000:95–126.
Givón, Talmy. 1995. Functionalism and grammar. John Benjamins Publishing.
Glavaš, Goran and Ivan Vuli´c. 2021a. Is supervised syntactic parsing beneﬁcial for language
understanding tasks? an empirical investigation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 3090–3104.
Glavaš, Goran and Ivan Vuli´c. 2021b. Is supervised syntactic parsing beneﬁcial for language
understanding tasks? an empirical investigation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 3090–3104.
Gulordava, Kristina, Piotr Bojanowski, Édouard Grave, Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
Colorless green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1195–1205.
Gupta, Ashim, Giorgi Kvernadze, and Vivek Srikumar. 2021. Bert & family eat word salad:
Experiments with text understanding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, volume 35, pages 12946–12954.
Gururangan, Suchin, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and
Noah A. Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 107–112, Association for
Computational Linguistics, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Hahn, Michael, Dan Jurafsky, and Richard Futrell. 2020. Universals of word order reﬂect
optimization of grammars for efﬁcient communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 117(5):2347–2353.
Hawkins, John A. 2004. Efﬁciency and complexity in grammars. Oxford University Press on
Demand.
Hewitt, John and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
2733–2743, Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China.
Hewitt, John and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. A structural probe for ﬁnding syntax in word
representations.
Hochreiter, Sepp and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.
Howard, Jeremy and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal language model ﬁne-tuning for text
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 328–339, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Melbourne, Australia.
Htut, Phu Mon, Jason Phang, Shikha Bordia, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019. Do attention heads
in bert track syntactic dependencies? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12246.
Hu, Jennifer, Jon Gauthier, Peng Qian, Ethan Wilcox, and Roger P Levy. 2020. A systematic
assessment of syntactic generalization in neural language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.03692.
Hupkes, Dieuwke, Sara Veldhoen, and Willem Zuidema. 2018. Visualization and ‘diagnostic
classiﬁers’ reveal how recurrent and recursive neural networks process hierarchical structure.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 61:907–926.
Ivanova, Angelina, Stephan Oepen, Lilja Øvrelid, and Dan Flickinger. 2012. Who did what to
whom? a contrastive study of syntacto-semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of the sixth
linguistic annotation workshop, pages 2–11.
Jacovi, Alon and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Aligning faithful interpretations with their social
attribution. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:294–310.
Jaeger, T Florian and Harry Tily. 2011. On language ‘utility’: Processing complexity and
communicative efﬁciency. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(3):323–335.
17
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
Jain, Sarthak and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention is not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 3543–3556, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Jumelet, Jaap and Dieuwke Hupkes. 2018. Do language models understand anything? on the
ability of LSTMs to understand negative polarity items. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 222–231,
Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium.
Kulmizev, Artur, Vinit Ravishankar, Mostafa Abdou, and Joakim Nivre. 2020. Do neural
language models show preferences for syntactic formalisms? pages ?–?
Kuncoro, Adhiguna, Lingpeng Kong, Daniel Fried, Dani Yogatama, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer,
and Phil Blunsom. 2020. Syntactic structure distillation pretraining for bidirectional encoders.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:776–794.
Lasnik, Howard and Jeffrey L Lidz. 2017. The argument from the poverty of the stimulus. The
Oxford handbook of universal grammar, pages 221–248.
Linzen, Tal and Marco Baroni. 2021. Syntactic structure from deep learning. Annual Review of
Linguistics, 7:195–212.
Linzen, Tal, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016a. Assessing the ability of lstms to
learn syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:521–535.
Linzen, Tal, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016b. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to
learn syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
4:521–535.
Lipton, Zachary C. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept
of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue, 16(3):31–57.
Liu, Nelson F., Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov, Matthew E. Peters, and Noah A. Smith. 2019a.
Linguistic knowledge and transferability of contextual representations. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1073–1094, Association
for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Liu, Yinhan, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019b. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Lundberg, Scott M and Su-In Lee. 2017. A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In
Proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information processing systems, pages
4768–4777.
Manning, Christopher D, Kevin Clark, John Hewitt, Urvashi Khandelwal, and Omer Levy. 2020.
Emergent linguistic structure in artiﬁcial neural networks trained by self-supervision.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30046–30054.
de Marneffe, Marie, Christopher D. Manning, Joakim Nivre, and Daniel Zeman. 2021. Universal
dependencies. Computational Linguistics, 47:255–308.
de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine, Bill MacCartney, and Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating
typed dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06), European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), Genoa, Italy.
Marvin, Rebecca and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syntactic evaluation of language models. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1192–1202.
Matthews, Peter H. 1981. Syntax.
Maudslay, Rowan Hall, Josef Valvoda, Tiago Pimentel, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020.
A tale of a probe and a parser. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 7389–7395.
McCoy, Tom, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing
syntactic heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 3428–3448, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Florence, Italy.
Mel’ˇcuk, Igor. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and Practice. State University of New York Press.
Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efﬁcient estimation of word
representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
18
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
Mollica, Francis, Matthew Siegelman, Evgeniia Diachek, Steven T Piantadosi, Zachary Mineroff,
Richard Futrell, Hope Kean, Peng Qian, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2020. Composition is the core
driver of the language-selective network. Neurobiology of Language, 1(1):104–134.
Newman, Benjamin, Kai-Siang Ang, Julia Gong, and John Hewitt. 2021. Reﬁning targeted
syntactic evaluation of language models. CoRR, abs/2104.09635.
Pennington, Jeffrey, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. pages 1532–1543.
Peters, Matthew E., Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher clark, Kenton Lee,
and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word representations. pages 2227–2237.
Pham, Thang M, Trung Bui, Long Mai, and Anh Nguyen. 2020. Out of order: How important is
the sequential order of words in a sentence in natural language understanding tasks? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.15180.
Pimentel, Tiago, Naomi Saphra, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020. Pareto probing:
Trading off accuracy for complexity. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 3138–3153, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online.
Poerner, Nina, Hinrich Schütze, and Benjamin Roth. 2018. Evaluating neural network
explanation methods using hybrid documents and morphosyntactic agreement. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 340–350, Association for Computational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia.
Poliak, Adam, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar, Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme.
2018. Hypothesis only baselines in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 180–191, Association for
Computational Linguistics, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Radford, Alec, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
Rajani, Nazneen Fatema, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019. Explain
yourself! leveraging language models for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4932–4942, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy.
Ravfogel, Shauli, Yoav Goldberg, and Francis Tyers. 2018. Can LSTM learn to capture
agreement? the case of Basque. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 98–107, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium.
Ribeiro, Marco Tulio, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. " why should i trust you?"
explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1135–1144.
Rimell, Laura, Stephen Clark, and Mark Steedman. 2009. Unbounded dependency recovery for
parser evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 813–821.
Schlichtkrull, Michael, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
Welling. 2018. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In European
semantic web conference, pages 593–607, Springer.
Serrano, Soﬁa and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Is attention interpretable? In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2931–2951, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy.
Simonyan, Karen, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2013. Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6034.
Sinha, Koustuv, Robin Jia, Dieuwke Hupkes, Joelle Pineau, Adina Williams, and Douwe Kiela.
2021. Masked language modeling and the distributional hypothesis: Order word matters
pre-training for little. CoRR, abs/2104.06644.
Sinha, Koustuv, Prasanna Parthasarathi, Joelle Pineau, and Adina Williams. 2020. Unnatural
language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00010.
Sundararajan, Mukund, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017. Axiomatic attribution for deep
networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3319–3328, PMLR.
Swayamdipta, Swabha, Matthew Peters, Brendan Roof, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith. 2019.
Shallow syntax in deep water. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.11047.
Tenney, Ian, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline.
19
Kulmizev and Nivre
Schrödinger’s Tree
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
4593–4601, Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy.
Tenney, Ian, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. 2019. What do you learn from
context? probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.06316.
Tesnière, Lucien. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structurale. Editions Klincksieck.
Tomasello, Michael. 2009. The cultural origins of human cognition. Harvard university press.
Traxler, Matthew J. 2014. Trends in syntactic parsing: Anticipation, bayesian estimation, and
good-enough parsing. Trends in cognitive sciences, 18(11):605–611.
Trudgill, Peter. 2017. The anthropological setting of polysynthesis. In The Oxford handbook of
polysynthesis.
Wang, Alex, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill,
Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for
general-purpose language understanding systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00537.
Wang, Alex, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman.
2018. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07461.
Warstadt, Alex, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mohananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and
Samuel R Bowman. 2020. Blimp: The benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs for english.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–392.
Wiegreffe, Sarah, Ana Marasovi´c, and Noah A Smith. 2020. Measuring association between
labels and free-text rationales. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12762.
Wiegreffe, Sarah and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is not not explanation. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 11–20, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China.
Wilcox, Ethan, Roger Levy, Takashi Morita, and Richard Futrell. 2018. What do RNN language
models learn about ﬁller–gap dependencies? In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop
BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 211–221, Association
for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium.
Wu, Zhaofeng, Hao Peng, and Noah A Smith. 2021. Infusing ﬁnetuning with semantic
dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:226–242.
Zipf, G.K. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Human Ecology.
Addison-Wesley Press.
20
21
