Title: A Survey on Recent Approaches for Natural Language Processing in Low-Resource Scenarios
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.12309v3
--------------------------------------------------

A Survey on Recent Approaches for Natural Language Processing in
Low-Resource Scenarios
Michael A. Hedderich*1, Lukas Lange*1,2, Heike Adel2,
Jannik Strötgen2 & Dietrich Klakow1
1Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Germany
{mhedderich,dietrich.klakow}@lsv.uni-saarland.de
{lukas.lange,heike.adel,jannik.stroetgen}@de.bosch.com
Abstract
Deep neural networks and huge language mod-
els are becoming omnipresent in natural lan-
guage applications. As they are known for re-
quiring large amounts of training data, there
is a growing body of work to improve the
performance in low-resource settings.
Moti-
vated by the recent fundamental changes to-
wards neural models and the popular pre-train
and ﬁne-tune paradigm, we survey promising
approaches for low-resource natural language
processing. After a discussion about the dif-
ferent dimensions of data availability, we give
a structured overview of methods that enable
learning when training data is sparse.
This
includes mechanisms to create additional la-
beled data like data augmentation and distant
supervision as well as transfer learning set-
tings that reduce the need for target supervi-
sion. A goal of our survey is to explain how
these methods differ in their requirements as
understanding them is essential for choosing
a technique suited for a speciﬁc low-resource
setting. Further key aspects of this work are to
highlight open issues and to outline promising
directions for future research.
1
Introduction
Most of today’s research in natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) is concerned with the processing
of 10 to 20 high-resource languages with a special
focus on English, and thus, ignores thousands of
languages with billions of speakers (Bender, 2019).
The rise of data-hungry deep learning systems in-
creased the performance of NLP for high resource-
languages, but the shortage of large-scale data in
less-resourced languages makes their processing
a challenging problem. Therefore, Ruder (2019)
named NLP for low-resource scenarios one of the
four biggest open problems in NLP nowadays.
The umbrella term low-resource covers a spec-
trum of scenarios with varying resource conditions.
* equal contribution
It includes work on threatened languages, such
as Yongning Na, a Sino-Tibetan language with
40k speakers and only 3k written, unlabeled sen-
tences (Adams et al., 2017). Other languages are
widely spoken but seldom addressed by NLP re-
search. More than 310 languages exist with at
least one million L1-speakers each (Eberhard et al.,
2019). Similarly, Wikipedia exists for 300 lan-
guages.1 Supporting technological developments
for low-resource languages can help to increase par-
ticipation of the speakers’ communities in a digital
world. Note, however, that tackling low-resource
settings is even crucial when dealing with popu-
lar NLP languages as low-resource settings do not
only concern languages but also non-standard do-
mains and tasks, for which – even in English – only
little training data is available. Thus, the term “lan-
guage” in this paper also includes domain-speciﬁc
language.
This importance of low-resource scenarios and
the signiﬁcant changes in NLP in the last years have
led to active research on resource-lean settings and
a wide variety of techniques have been proposed.
They all share the motivation of overcoming the
lack of labeled data by leveraging further sources.
However, these works differ greatly on the sources
they rely on, e.g., unlabeled data, manual heuristics
or cross-lingual alignments. Understanding the re-
quirements of these methods is essential for choos-
ing a technique suited for a speciﬁc low-resource
setting. Thus, one key goal of this survey is to high-
light the underlying assumptions these techniques
take regarding the low-resource setup.
In this work, we (1) give a broad and structured
overview of current efforts on low-resource NLP,
(2) analyse the different aspects of low-resource
settings, (3) highlight the necessary resources and
data assumptions as guidance for practitioners and
(4) discuss open issues and promising future direc-
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_
of_Wikipedias
arXiv:2010.12309v3  [cs.CL]  9 Apr 2021
Method
Requirements
Outcome
For low-resource
languages
domains
Data Augmentation (§ 4.1)
labeled data, heuristics*
additional labeled data


Distant Supervision (§ 4.2)
unlabeled data, heuristics*
additional labeled data


Cross-lingual projections (§ 4.3)
unlabeled
data,
high-
resource
labeled
data,
cross-lingual alignment
additional labeled data


Embeddings & Pre-trained LMs
(§ 5.1)
unlabeled data
better language representation


LM domain adaptation (§ 5.2)
existing LM,
unlabeled domain data
domain-speciﬁc language rep-
resentation


Multilingual LMs (§ 5.3)
multilingual
unlabeled
data
multilingual feature represen-
tation


Adversarial Discriminator (§ 6)
additional datasets
independent representations


Meta-Learning (§ 6)
multiple auxiliary tasks
better target task performance


Table 1: Overview of low-resource methods surveyed in this paper. * Heuristics are typically gathered manually.
tions. Table 1 gives an overview of the surveyed
techniques along with their requirements a practi-
tioner needs to take into consideration.
2
Related Surveys
Recent surveys cover low-resource machine trans-
lation (Liu et al., 2019) and unsupervised domain
adaptation (Ramponi and Plank, 2020). Thus, we
do not investigate these topics further in this pa-
per, but focus instead on general methods for low-
resource, supervised natural language processing
including data augmentation, distant supervision
and transfer learning. This is also in contrast to the
task-speciﬁc survey by Magueresse et al. (2020)
who review highly inﬂuential work for several ex-
traction tasks, but only provide little overview of re-
cent approaches. In Table 2 in the appendix, we list
past surveys that discuss a speciﬁc method or low-
resource language family for those readers who
seek a more specialized follow-up.
3
Aspects of “Low-Resource”
To visualize the variety of resource-lean scenarios,
Figure 1 shows exemplarily which NLP tasks were
addressed in six different languages from basic to
higher-level tasks. While it is possible to build
English NLP systems for many higher-level appli-
cations, low-resource languages lack the data foun-
dation for this. Additionally, even if it is possible
to create basic systems for tasks, such as tokeniza-
tion and named entity recognition, for all tested
low-resource languages, the training data is typical
of lower quality compared to the English datasets,
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
MA
MA
MA
MA
MA
MA
SA
SA
SA
SA
SA
SA
DS
DS
DS
DS
DS
DS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
RS
RS
RS
RS
D
D
D
H
H
H
H
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
English
(1000)
Yoruba
(40)
Hausa
(60)
Quechuan
(8)
Nahuatl
(1.7)
Estonian
(1.3)
Supported Tasks
Language (Speakers in million) above / Tasks below
H: Higher-level NLP applications
D: Discourse
RS: Relational semantics
LS: Lexical semantics
DS: Distributional semantics
SA: Syntactic analysis
MA: Morphological analysis
TP: Text processing
Figure 1: Supported NLP tasks in different languages.
Note that the ﬁgure does not incorporate data quality
or system performance. More details on the selection
of tasks and languages are given in the appendix Sec-
tion B.
or very limited in size. It also shows that the four
American and African languages with between 1.5
and 60 million speakers have been addressed less
than the Estonian language, with 1 million speak-
ers. This indicates the unused potential to reach
millions of speakers who currently have no access
to higher-level NLP applications. Joshi et al. (2020)
study further the availability of resources for lan-
guages around the world.
3.1
Dimensions of Resource Availability
Many techniques presented in the literature depend
on certain assumptions about the low-resource sce-
nario. These have to be adequately deﬁned to eval-
uate their applicability for a speciﬁc setting and
to avoid confusion when comparing different ap-
proaches. We propose to categorize low-resource
settings along the following three dimensions:
(i) The availability of task-speciﬁc labels in
the target language (or target domain) is the most
prominent dimension in the context of supervised
learning. Labels are usually created through man-
ual annotation, which can be both time- and cost-
intensive. Not having access to adequate experts
to perform the annotation can also be an issue for
some languages and domains.
(ii) The availability of unlabeled language- or
domain-speciﬁc text is another factor, especially
as most modern NLP approaches are based on some
form of input embeddings trained on unlabeled
texts.
(iii) Most of the ideas surveyed in the next sec-
tions assume the availability of auxiliary data
which can have many forms. Transfer learning
might leverage task-speciﬁc labels in a different
language or domain. Distant supervision utilizes
external sources of information, such as knowledge
bases or gazetteers. Some approaches require other
NLP tools in the target language like machine trans-
lation to generate training data. It is essential to
consider this as results from one low-resource sce-
nario might not be transferable to another one if
the assumptions on the auxiliary data are broken.
3.2
How Low is Low-Resource?
On the dimension of task-speciﬁc labels, differ-
ent thresholds are used to deﬁne low-resource.
For part-of-speech (POS) tagging, Garrette and
Baldridge (2013) limit the time of the annotators to
2 hours resulting in up to 1-2k tokens. Kann et al.
(2020) study languages that have less than 10k la-
beled tokens in the Universal Dependency project
(Nivre et al., 2020) and Loubser and Puttkammer
(2020) report that most available datasets for South
African languages have 40-60k labeled tokens.
The threshold is also task-dependent and more
complex tasks might also increase the resource re-
quirements. For text generation, Yang et al. (2019)
frame their work as low-resource with 350k la-
beled training instances. Similar to the task, the
resource requirements can also depend on the lan-
guage. Plank et al. (2016) ﬁnd that task perfor-
mance varies between language families given the
same amount of limited training data.
Given the lack of a hard threshold for low-
resource settings, we see it as a spectrum of re-
source availability.
We, therefore, also argue
that more work should evaluate low-resource tech-
niques across different levels of data availabil-
ity for better comparison between approaches.
For instance, Plank et al. (2016) and Melamud
et al. (2019) show that for very small datasets
non-neural methods outperform more modern ap-
proaches while the latter obtain better performance
in resource-lean scenarios once a few hundred la-
beled instances are available.
4
Generating Additional Labeled Data
Faced with the lack of task-speciﬁc labels, a variety
of approaches have been developed to ﬁnd alterna-
tive forms of labeled data as substitutes for gold-
standard supervision. This is usually done through
some form of expert insights in combination with
automation. We group the ideas into two main cate-
gories: data augmentation which uses task-speciﬁc
instances to create more of them (§ 4.1) and dis-
tant supervision which labels unlabeled data (§ 4.2)
including cross-lingual projections (§ 4.3). Ad-
ditional sections cover learning with noisy labels
(§ 4.4) and involving non-experts (§ 4.5).
4.1
Data Augmentation
New instances can be obtained based on existing
ones by modifying the features with transforma-
tions that do not change the label. In the com-
puter vision community, this is a popular approach
where, e.g., rotating an image is invariant to the
classiﬁcation of an image’s content. For text, on
the token level, this can be done by replacing words
with equivalents, such as synonyms (Wei and Zou,
2019), entities of the same type (Raiman and Miller,
2017; Dai and Adel, 2020) or words that share the
same morphology (Gulordava et al., 2018; Vania
et al., 2019). Such replacements can also be guided
by a language model that takes context into consid-
eration (Fadaee et al., 2017; Kobayashi, 2018).
To go beyond the token level and add more diver-
sity to the augmented sentences, data augmentation
can also be performed on sentence parts. Opera-
tions that (depending on the task) do not change the
label include manipulation of parts of the depen-
dency tree (¸Sahin and Steedman, 2018; Vania et al.,
2019; Dehouck and Gómez-Rodríguez, 2020), sim-
pliﬁcation of sentences by removal of sentence
parts (¸Sahin and Steedman, 2018) and inversion
of the subject-object relation (Min et al., 2020).
For whole sentences, paraphrasing through back-
translation can be used. This is a popular approach
in machine translation where target sentences are
back-translated into source sentences (Bojar and
Tamchyna, 2011; Hoang et al., 2018). An important
aspect here is that errors in the source side/features
do not seem to have a large negative effect on the
generated target text the model needs to predict. It
is therefore also used in other text generation tasks
like abstract summarization (Parida and Motlicek,
2019) and table-to-text generation (Ma et al., 2019).
Back-translation has also been leveraged for text
classiﬁcation (Xie et al., 2020; Hegde and Patil,
2020). This setting assumes, however, the avail-
ability of a translation system. Instead, a language
model can also be used for augmenting text classi-
ﬁcation datasets (Kumar et al., 2020; Anaby-Tavor
et al., 2020). It is trained conditioned on a label,
i.e., on the subset of the task-speciﬁc data with this
label. It then generates additional sentences that ﬁt
this label. Ding et al. (2020) extend this idea for
token level tasks.
Adversarial methods are often used to ﬁnd weak-
nesses in machine learning models (Jin et al., 2020;
Garg and Ramakrishnan, 2020). They can, how-
ever, also be utilized to augment NLP datasets (Ya-
sunaga et al., 2018; Morris et al., 2020). Instead of
manually crafted transformation rules, these meth-
ods learn how to apply small perturbations to the
input data that do not change the meaning of the
text (according to a speciﬁc score). This approach
is often applied on the level of vector represen-
tations. For instance, Grundkiewicz et al. (2019)
reverse the augmentation setting by applying trans-
formations that ﬂip the (binary) label. In their case,
they introduce errors in correct sentences to obtain
new training data for a grammar correction task.
Open Issues: While data augmentation is ubiq-
uitous in the computer vision community and while
most of the above-presented approaches are task-
independent, it has not found such widespread use
in natural language processing. A reason might
be that several of the approaches require an in-
depth understanding of the language. There is
not yet a uniﬁed framework that allows applying
data augmentation across tasks and languages. Re-
cently, Longpre et al. (2020) hypothesised that data
augmentation provides the same beneﬁts as pre-
training in transformer models. However, we argue
that data augmentation might be better suited to
leverage the insights of linguistic or domain ex-
perts in low-resource settings when unlabeled data
or hardware resources are limited.
4.2
Distant & Weak Supervision
In contrast to data augmentation, distant or weak
supervision uses unlabeled text and keeps it un-
modiﬁed. The corresponding labels are obtained
through a (semi-)automatic process from an ex-
ternal source of information. For named entity
recognition (NER), a list of location names might
be obtained from a dictionary and matches of to-
kens in the text with entities in the list are auto-
matically labeled as locations. Distant supervision
was introduced by Mintz et al. (2009) for relation
extraction (RE) with extensions on multi-instance
(Riedel et al., 2010) and multi-label learning (Sur-
deanu et al., 2012). It is still a popular approach
for information extraction tasks like NER and RE
where the external information can be obtained
from knowledge bases, gazetteers, dictionaries and
other forms of structured knowledge sources (Luo
et al., 2017; Hedderich and Klakow, 2018; Deng
and Sun, 2019; Alt et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2019;
Lange et al., 2019a; Nooralahzadeh et al., 2019;
Le and Titov, 2019; Cao et al., 2019; Lison et al.,
2020; Hedderich et al., 2021a). The automatic an-
notation ranges from simple string matching (Yang
et al., 2018) to complex pipelines including classi-
ﬁers and manual steps (Norman et al., 2019). This
distant supervision using information from external
knowledge sources can be seen as a subset of the
more general approach of labeling rules. These
encompass also other ideas like reg-ex rules or sim-
ple programming functions (Ratner et al., 2017;
Zheng et al., 2019; Adelani et al., 2020; Hedderich
et al., 2020; Lison et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2020;
Karamanolakis et al., 2021).
While distant supervision is popular for infor-
mation extraction tasks like NER and RE, it is
less prevalent in other areas of NLP. Nevertheless,
distant supervision has also been successfully em-
ployed for other tasks by proposing new ways for
automatic annotation. Li et al. (2012) leverage a
dictionary of POS tags for classifying unseen text
with POS. For aspect classiﬁcation, Karamanolakis
et al. (2019) create a simple bag-of-words classi-
ﬁer on a list of seed words and train a deep neu-
ral network on its weak supervision. Wang et al.
(2019) use context by transferring a document-
level sentiment label to all its sentence-level in-
stances. Mekala et al. (2020) leverage meta-data for
text classiﬁcation and Huber and Carenini (2020)
build a discourse-structure dataset using guidance
from sentiment annotations. For topic classiﬁca-
tion, heuristics can be used in combination with
inputs from other classiﬁers like NER (Bach et al.,
2019) or from entity lists (Hedderich et al., 2020).
For some classiﬁcation tasks, the labels can be
rephrased with simple rules into sentences. A pre-
trained language model then judges the label sen-
tence that most likely follows the unlabeled input
(Opitz, 2019; Schick and Schütze, 2020; Schick
et al., 2020). An unlabeled review, for instance,
might be continued with "It was great/bad" for ob-
taining binary sentiment labels.
Open Issues: The popularity of distant supervi-
sion for NER and RE might be due to these tasks
being particularly suited. There, auxiliary data like
entity lists is readily available and distant supervi-
sion often achieves reasonable results with simple
surface form rules. It is an open question whether
a task needs to have speciﬁc properties to be suit-
able for this approach. The existing work on other
tasks and the popularity in other ﬁelds like image
classiﬁcation (Xiao et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Mahajan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020)
suggests, however, that distant supervision could
be leveraged for more NLP tasks in the future.
Distant supervision methods heavily rely on aux-
iliary data. In a low-resource setting, it might be
difﬁcult to obtain not only labeled data but also
such auxiliary data. Kann et al. (2020) ﬁnd a large
gap between the performance on high-resource and
low-resource languages for POS tagging pointing
to the lack of high-coverage and error-free dictio-
naries for the weak supervision in low-resource
languages. This emphasizes the need for evaluat-
ing such methods in a realistic setting and avoiding
to just simulate restricted access to labeled data in
a high-resource language.
While distant supervision allows obtaining la-
beled data more quickly than manually annotat-
ing every instance of a dataset, it still requires
human interaction to create automatic annotation
techniques or to provide labeling rules. This time
and effort could also be spent on annotating more
gold label data, either naively or through an active
learning scheme. Unfortunately, distant supervi-
sion papers rarely provide information on how long
the creation took, making it difﬁcult to compare
these approaches. Taking the human expert into the
focus connects this research direction with human-
computer-interaction and human-in-the-loop setups
(Klie et al., 2018; Qian et al., 2020).
4.3
Cross-Lingual Annotation Projections
For cross-lingual projections, a task-speciﬁc clas-
siﬁer is trained in a high-resource language. Us-
ing parallel corpora, the unlabeled low-resource
data is then aligned to its equivalent in the high-
resource language where labels can be obtained
using the aforementioned classiﬁer. These labels
(on the high-resource text) can then be projected
back to the text in the low-resource language based
on the alignment between tokens in the parallel
texts (Yarowsky et al., 2001). This approach can,
therefore, be seen as a form of distant supervi-
sion speciﬁc for obtaining labeled data for low-
resource languages. Cross-lingual projections have
been applied in low-resource settings for tasks,
such as POS tagging and parsing (Täckström et al.,
2013; Wisniewski et al., 2014; Plank and Agi´c,
2018; Eskander et al., 2020).
Sources for par-
allel text can be the OPUS project (Tiedemann,
2012), Bible corpora (Mayer and Cysouw, 2014;
Christodoulopoulos and Steedman, 2015) or the re-
cent JW300 corpus (Agi´c and Vuli´c, 2019). Instead
of using parallel corpora, existing high-resource
labeled datasets can also be machine-translated
into the low-resource language (Khalil et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019a; Fei et al., 2020; Amjad et al.,
2020). Cross-lingual projections have even been
used with English as a target language for detecting
linguistic phenomena like modal sense and telicity
that are easier to identify in a different language
(Zhou et al., 2015; Marasovi´c et al., 2016; Friedrich
and Gateva, 2017).
Open issues: Cross-lingual projections set high
requirements on the auxiliary data needing both
labels in a high-resource language and means to
project them into a low-resource language. Espe-
cially the latter can be an issue as machine trans-
lation by itself might be problematic for a speciﬁc
low-resource language. A limitation of the parallel
corpora is their domains like political proceedings
or religious texts. Mayhew et al. (2017), Fang and
Cohn (2017) and Karamanolakis et al. (2020) pro-
pose systems with fewer requirements based on
word translations, bilingual dictionaries and task-
speciﬁc seed words, respectively.
4.4
Learning with Noisy Labels
The above-presented methods allow obtaining la-
beled data quicker and cheaper than manual an-
notations. These labels tend, however, to contain
more errors. Even though more training data is
available, training directly on this noisily-labeled
data can actually hurt the performance. Therefore,
many recent approaches for distant supervision use
a noise handling method to diminish the negative
effects of distant supervision. We categorize these
into two ideas: noise ﬁltering and noise modeling.
Noise ﬁltering methods remove instances from
the training data that have a high probability of
being incorrectly labeled. This often includes train-
ing a classiﬁer to make the ﬁltering decision. The
ﬁltering can remove the instances completely from
the training data, e.g., through a probability thresh-
old (Jia et al., 2019), a binary classiﬁer (Adel and
Schütze, 2015; Onoe and Durrett, 2019; Huang and
Du, 2019), or the use of a reinforcement-based
agent (Yang et al., 2018; Nooralahzadeh et al.,
2019). Alternatively, a soft ﬁltering might be ap-
plied that re-weights instances according to their
probability of being correctly labeled (Le and Titov,
2019) or an attention measure (Hu et al., 2019).
The noise in the labels can also be modeled. A
common model is a confusion matrix estimating
the relationship between clean and noisy labels
(Fang and Cohn, 2016; Luo et al., 2017; Hedderich
and Klakow, 2018; Paul et al., 2019; Lange et al.,
2019a,c; Chen et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Hed-
derich et al., 2021b). The classiﬁer is no longer
trained directly on the noisily-labeled data. Instead,
a noise model is appended which shifts the noisy to
the (unseen) clean label distribution. This can be in-
terpreted as the original classiﬁer being trained on
a “cleaned” version of the noisy labels. In Ye et al.
(2019), the prediction is shifted from the noisy to
the clean distribution during testing. In Chen et al.
(2020a), a group of reinforcement agents relabels
noisy instances. Rehbein and Ruppenhofer (2017),
Lison et al. (2020) and Ren et al. (2020) leverage
several sources of distant supervision and learn how
to combine them.
In NER, the noise in distantly supervised la-
bels tends to be false negatives, i.e., mentions of
entities that have been missed by the automatic
method. Partial annotation learning (Yang et al.,
2018; Nooralahzadeh et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2019)
takes this into account explicitly.
Related ap-
proaches learn latent variables (Jie et al., 2019), use
constrained binary learning (Mayhew et al., 2019)
or construct a loss assuming that only unlabeled
positive instances exist (Peng et al., 2019).
4.5
Non-Expert Support
As an alternative to an automatic annotation pro-
cess, annotations might also be provided by non-
experts. Similar to distant supervision, this results
in a trade-off between label quality and availability.
For instance, Garrette and Baldridge (2013) obtain
labeled data from non-native-speakers and without
a quality control on the manual annotations. This
can be taken even further by employing annota-
tors who do not speak the low-resource language
(Mayhew and Roth, 2018; Mayhew et al., 2019;
Tsygankova et al., 2020).
Nekoto et al. (2020) take the opposite direction,
integrating speakers of low-resource languages
without formal training into the model development
process in an approach of participatory research.
This is part of recent work on how to strengthen
low-resource language communities and grassroot
approaches (Alnajjar et al., 2020; Adelani et al.,
2021).
5
Transfer Learning
While distant supervision and data augmentation
generate and extend task-speciﬁc training data,
transfer learning reduces the need for labeled tar-
get data by transferring learned representations and
models. A strong focus in recent works on transfer
learning in NLP lies in the use of pre-trained lan-
guage representations that are trained on unlabeled
data like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). Thus, this
section starts with an overview of these methods
(§ 5.1) and then discusses how they can be utilized
in low-resource scenarios, in particular, regarding
the usage in domain-speciﬁc (§ 5.2) or multilingual
low-resource settings (§ 5.3).
5.1
Pre-Trained Language Representations
Feature vectors are the core input component of
many neural network-based models for NLP tasks.
They are numerical representations of words or sen-
tences, as neural architectures do not allow the pro-
cessing of strings and characters as such. Collobert
et al. (2011) showed that training these models for
the task of language-modeling on a large-scale cor-
pus results in high-quality word representations,
which can be reused for other downstream tasks as
well. Subword-based embeddings such as fastText
n-gram embeddings (Bojanowski et al., 2017) and
byte-pair-encoding embeddings (Heinzerling and
Strube, 2018) addressed out-of-vocabulary issues
by splitting words into multiple subwords, which
in combination represent the original word. Zhu
et al. (2019) showed that these embeddings lever-
aging subword information are beneﬁcial for low-
resource sequence labeling tasks, such as named
entity recognition and typing, and outperform word-
level embeddings. Jungmaier et al. (2020) added
smoothing to word2vec models to correct its bias
towards rare words and achieved improvements
in particular for low-resource settings. In addi-
tion, pre-trained embeddings were published for
more than 270 languages for both embedding meth-
ods. This enabled the processing of texts in many
languages, including multiple low-resource lan-
guages found in Wikipedia. More recently, a trend
emerged of pre-training large embedding models
using a language model objective to create context-
aware word representations by predicting the next
word or sentence. This includes pre-trained trans-
former models (Vaswani et al., 2017), such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) or RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019b). These methods are particularly helpful for
low-resource languages for which large amounts
of unlabeled data are available, but task-speciﬁc
labeled data is scarce (Cruz and Cheng, 2019).
Open Issues: While pre-trained language mod-
els achieve signiﬁcant performance increases com-
pared to standard word embeddings, it is still ques-
tionable if these methods are suited for real-world
low-resource scenarios. For example, all of these
models require large hardware requirements, in
particular, considering that the transformer model
size keeps increasing to boost performance (Raffel
et al., 2020). Therefore, these large-scale meth-
ods might not be suited for low-resource scenarios
where hardware is also low-resource.
Biljon et al. (2020) showed that low- to medium-
depth transformer sizes perform better than larger
models for low-resource languages and Schick
and Schütze (2020) managed to train models with
three orders of magnitude fewer parameters that
perform on-par with large-scale models like GPT-
3 on few-shot task by reformulating the training
task and using ensembling. Melamud et al. (2019)
showed that simple bag-of-words approaches are
better when there are only a few dozen training
instances or less for text classiﬁcation, while more
complex transformer models require more training
data. Bhattacharjee et al. (2020) found that cross-
view training (Clark et al., 2018) leverages large
amounts of unlabeled data better for task-speciﬁc
applications in contrast to the general represen-
tations learned by BERT. Moreover, data quality
for low-resource, even for unlabeled data, might
not be comparable to data from high-resource lan-
guages. Alabi et al. (2020) found that word embed-
dings trained on larger amounts of unlabeled data
from low-resource languages are not competitive
to embeddings trained on smaller, but curated data
sources.
5.2
Domain-Speciﬁc Pre-Training
The language of a specialized domain can differ
tremendously from what is considered the standard
language, thus, many text domains are often less-
resourced as well. For example, scientiﬁc articles
can contain formulas and technical terms, which
are not observed in news articles. However, the
majority of recent language models are pre-trained
on general-domain data, such as texts from the
news or web-domain, which can lead to a so-called
“domain-gap” when applied to a different domain.
One solution to overcome this gap is the adap-
tation to the target domain by ﬁnetuning the lan-
guage model. Gururangan et al. (2020) showed
that continuing the training of a model with ad-
ditional domain-adaptive and task-adaptive pre-
training with unlabeled data leads to performance
gains for both high- and low-resource settings for
numerous English domains and tasks. This is also
displayed in the number of domain-adapted lan-
guage models (Alsentzer et al., 2019; Huang et al.,
2019; Adhikari et al., 2019; Lee and Hsiang, 2020;
Jain and Ganesamoorty, 2020, (i.a.)), most notably
BioBERT (Lee et al., 2020) that was pre-trained on
biomedical PubMED articles and SciBERT (Belt-
agy et al., 2019) for scientiﬁc texts. For exam-
ple, Friedrich et al. (2020) showed that a general-
domain BERT model performs well in the materials
science domain, but the domain-adapted SciBERT
performs best. Xu et al. (2020) used in- and out-of-
domain data to pre-train a domain-speciﬁc model
and adapt it to low-resource domains. Aharoni
and Goldberg (2020) found domain-speciﬁc clus-
ters in pre-trained language models and showed
how these could be exploited for data selection in
domain-sensitive training.
Powerful representations can be achieved by
combining high-resource embeddings from the gen-
eral domain with low-resource embeddings from
the target domain (Akbik et al., 2018; Lange et al.,
2019b). Kiela et al. (2018) showed that embed-
dings from different domains can be combined us-
ing attention-based meta-embeddings, which cre-
ate a weighted sum of all embeddings. Lange et al.
(2020b) further improved on this by aligning em-
beddings trained on diverse domains using an ad-
versarial discriminator that distinguishes between
the embedding spaces to generate domain-invariant
representations.
5.3
Multilingual Language Models
Analogously to low-resource domains,
low-
resource languages can also beneﬁt from labeled re-
sources available in other high-resource languages.
This usually requires the training of multilingual
language representations by combining monolin-
gual representations (Lange et al., 2020a) or train-
ing a single model for many languages, such as
multilingual BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) or XLM-
RoBERTa (Conneau et al., 2020) . These models
are trained using unlabeled, monolingual corpora
from different languages and can be used in cross-
and multilingual settings, due to many languages
seen during pre-training.
In cross-lingual zero-shot learning, no task-
speciﬁc labeled data is available in the low-resource
target language.
Instead, labeled data from a
high-resource language is leveraged. A multilin-
gual model can be trained on the target task in a
high-resource language and afterwards, applied to
the unseen target languages, such as for named
entity recognition (Lin et al., 2019; Hvingelby
et al., 2020), reading comprehension (Hsu et al.,
2019), temporal expression extraction (Lange et al.,
2020c), or POS tagging and dependency parsing
(Müller et al., 2020). Hu et al. (2020) showed, how-
ever, that there is still a large gap between low and
high-resource setting. Lauscher et al. (2020) and
Hedderich et al. (2020) proposed adding a mini-
mal amount of target-task and -language data (in
the range of 10 to 100 labeled sentences) which
resulted in a signiﬁcant boost in performance for
classiﬁcation in low-resource languages.
The transfer between two languages can be im-
proved by creating a common multilingual embed-
ding space of multiple languages. This is useful for
standard word embeddings (Ruder et al., 2019) as
well as pre-trained language models. For example,
by aligning the languages inside a single multilin-
30
16
8
6
3
3
1
15
13
2
5
0
0
0
14
12
2
4
0
0
0
All
Asian
African
European
South
American
North
American
Oceanic
Language families with >1 mio. speakers
BERT
RoBERTa
Figure 2: Language families with more than 1 million
speakers covered by multilingual transformer models.
gual model, i.a., in cross-lingual (Schuster et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019a) or multilingual settings
(Cao et al., 2020).
This alignment is typically done by computing a
mapping between two different embedding spaces,
such that the words in both embeddings share simi-
lar feature vectors after the mapping (Mikolov et al.,
2013; Joulin et al., 2018). This allows to use differ-
ent embeddings inside the same model and helps
when two languages do not share the same space in-
side a single model (Cao et al., 2020). For example,
Zhang et al. (2019b) used bilingual representations
by creating cross-lingual word embeddings using
a small set of parallel sentences between the high-
resource language English and three low-resource
African languages, Swahili, Tagalog, and Somali,
to improve document retrieval performance for the
African languages.
Open Issues: While these multilingual models
are a tremendous step towards enabling NLP in
many languages, possible claims that these are uni-
versal language models do not hold. For example,
mBERT covers 104 and XLM-R 100 languages,
which is a third of all languages in Wikipedia as
outlined earlier. Further, Wu and Dredze (2020)
showed that, in particular, low-resource languages
are not well-represented in mBERT. Figure 2
shows which language families with at least 1 mil-
lion speakers are covered by mBERT and XLM-
RoBERTa2. In particular, African and American
languages are not well-represented within the trans-
former models, even though millions of people
speak these languages. This can be problematic, as
languages from more distant language families are
less suited for transfer learning, as Lauscher et al.
(2020) showed.
2A language family is covered if at least one associated
language is covered. Language families can belong to multiple
regions, e.g., Indo-European belongs to Europe and Asia.
6
Ideas From Low-Resource Machine
Learning in Non-NLP Communities
Training on a limited amount of data is not unique
to natural language processing. Other areas, like
general machine learning and computer vision,
can be a useful source for insights and new ideas.
We already presented data augmentation and pre-
training. Another example is Meta-Learning (Finn
et al., 2017), which is based on multi-task learning.
Given a set of auxiliary high-resource tasks and
a low-resource target task, meta-learning trains a
model to decide how to use the auxiliary tasks in
the most beneﬁcial way for the target task. For NLP,
this approach has been evaluated on tasks such as
sentiment analysis (Yu et al., 2018), user intent
classiﬁcation (Yu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020b),
natural language understanding (Dou et al., 2019),
text classiﬁcation (Bansal et al., 2020) and dialogue
generation (Huang et al., 2020). Instead of having a
set of tasks, Rahimi et al. (2019) built an ensemble
of language-speciﬁc NER models which are then
weighted depending on the zero- or few-shot target
language.
Differences in the features between the pre-
training and the target domain can be an issue in
transfer learning, especially in neural approaches
where it can be difﬁcult to control which informa-
tion the model takes into account. Adversarial dis-
criminators (Goodfellow et al., 2014) can prevent
the model from learning a feature-representation
that is speciﬁc to a data source. Gui et al. (2017),
Liu et al. (2017), Kasai et al. (2019), Grießhaber
et al. (2020) and Zhou et al. (2019) learned domain-
independent representations using adversarial train-
ing. Kim et al. (2017), Chen et al. (2018) and Lange
et al. (2020c) worked with language-independent
representations for cross-lingual transfer. These
examples show the beneﬁcial exchange of ideas be-
tween NLP and the machine learning community.
7
Discussion and Conclusion
In this survey, we gave a structured overview of
recent work in the ﬁeld of low-resource natural
language processing. Beyond the method-speciﬁc
open issues presented in the previous sections, we
see the comparison between approaches as an im-
portant point of future work. Guidelines are neces-
sary to support practitioners in choosing the right
tool for their task. In this work, we highlighted that
it is essential to analyze resource-lean scenarios
across the different dimensions of data-availability.
This can reveal which techniques are expected to be
applicable in a speciﬁc low-resource setting. More
theoretic and experimental work is necessary to
understand how approaches compare to each other
and on which factors their effectiveness depends.
Longpre et al. (2020), for instance, hypothesized
that data augmentation and pre-trained language
models yield similar kind of beneﬁts. Often, how-
ever, new techniques are just compared to similar
methods and not across the range of low-resource
approaches. While a fair comparison is non-trivial
given the different requirements on auxiliary data,
we see this endeavour as essential to improve the
ﬁeld of low-resource learning in the future. This
could also help to understand where the different
approaches complement each other and how they
can be combined effectively.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Annemarie
Friedrich for her valuable feedback and the anony-
mous reviewers for their helpful comments. This
work has been partially funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) – Project-ID 232722074 – SFB 1102
and the EU Horizon 2020 project ROXANNE un-
der grant number 833635.
References
Oliver Adams, Adam Makarucha, Graham Neubig,
Steven Bird, and Trevor Cohn. 2017. Cross-lingual
word embeddings for low-resource language model-
ing. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages
937–947, Valencia, Spain. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Heike Adel and Hinrich Schütze. 2015. CIS at TAC
cold start 2015: Neural networks and coreference
resolution for slot ﬁlling.
In Proceedings of TAC
KBP Workshop.
David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Jade Abbott, Graham Neu-
big, Daniel D’souza, Julia Kreutzer, Constantine
Lignos, Chester Palen-Michel, Happy Buzaaba,
Shruti Rijhwani, Sebastian Ruder, Stephen May-
hew, Israel Abebe Azime, Shamsuddeen Muham-
mad, Chris Chinenye Emezue, Joyce Nakatumba-
Nabende,
Perez
Ogayo,
Anuoluwapo
Aremu,
Catherine Gitau, Derguene Mbaye, Jesujoba Al-
abi, Seid Muhie Yimam, Tajuddeen Gwadabe, Ig-
natius Ezeani, Rubungo Andre Niyongabo, Jonathan
Mukiibi,
Verrah
Otiende,
Iroro
Orife,
Davis
David,
Samba
Ngom,
Tosin
Adewumi,
Paul
Rayson, Mofetoluwa Adeyemi, Gerald Muriuki,
Emmanuel Anebi, Chiamaka Chukwuneke, Nkiruka
Odu,
Eric Peter Wairagala,
Samuel Oyerinde,
Clemencia Siro, Tobius Saul Bateesa, Temilola
Oloyede, Yvonne Wambui, Victor Akinode, Deb-
orah Nabagereka,
Maurice Katusiime,
Ayodele
Awokoya, Mouhamadane MBOUP, Dibora Gebrey-
ohannes, Henok Tilaye, Kelechi Nwaike, Degaga
Wolde, Abdoulaye Faye, Blessing Sibanda, Ore-
vaoghene Ahia, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou, Kelechi
Ogueji, Thierno Ibrahima DIOP, Abdoulaye Diallo,
Adewale Akinfaderin, Tendai Marengereke, and Sa-
lomey Osei. 2021.
Masakhaner:
Named entity
recognition for african languages.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.11811.
David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Michael A Hedderich, Dawei
Zhu, Esther van den Berg, and Dietrich Klakow.
2020.
Distant supervision and noisy label learn-
ing for low resource named entity recognition: A
study on hausa and yoruba.
Workshop on Practi-
cal Machine Learning for Developing Countries at
ICLR’20.
Ashutosh Adhikari, Achyudh Ram, Raphael Tang, and
Jimmy Lin. 2019. Docbert: Bert for document clas-
siﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08398.
Charu C Aggarwal, Xiangnan Kong, Quanquan Gu, Ji-
awei Han, and S Yu Philip. 2014. Active learning:
A survey. In Data Classiﬁcation: Algorithms and
Applications, pages 571–605. CRC Press.
Željko Agi´c and Ivan Vuli´c. 2019. JW300: A wide-
coverage parallel corpus for low-resource languages.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
3204–3210, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Unsupervised
domain clusters in pretrained language models. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 7747–
7763, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alan Akbik, Duncan Blythe, and Roland Vollgraf.
2018. Contextual string embeddings for sequence
labeling. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
1638–1649, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Mahmoud
Al-Ayyoub,
Aya
Nuseir,
Kholoud
Alsmearat,
Yaser
Jararweh,
and
Brij
Gupta.
2018.
Deep learning for arabic nlp:
A survey.
Journal of computational science, 26:522–531.
Jesujoba Alabi, Kwabena Amponsah-Kaakyire, David
Adelani, and Cristina España-Bonet. 2020.
Mas-
sive vs. curated embeddings for low-resourced lan-
guages: the case of yorùbá and twi. In Proceedings
of The 12th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 2754–2762, Marseille, France.
European Language Resources Association.
Görkem Algan and Ilkay Ulusoy. 2021.
Image clas-
siﬁcation with deep learning in the presence of
noisy labels: A survey. Knowledge-Based Systems,
215:106771.
Khalid Alnajjar, Mika Hämäläinen, Jack Rueter, and
Niko Partanen. 2020.
Ve’rdd. narrowing the gap
between paper dictionaries, low-resource NLP and
community involvement. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics: System Demonstrations, pages 1–6, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-
tational Linguistics (ICCL).
Emily Alsentzer, John Murphy, William Boag, Wei-
Hung Weng, Di Jindi, Tristan Naumann, and
Matthew McDermott. 2019. Publicly available clini-
cal BERT embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop,
pages 72–78, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Christoph Alt, Marc Hübner, and Leonhard Hennig.
2019. Fine-tuning pre-trained transformer language
models to distantly supervised relation extraction.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1388–1398, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Maaz Amjad, Grigori Sidorov, and Alisa Zhila. 2020.
Data augmentation using machine translation for
fake news detection in the Urdu language. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, pages 2537–2542, Marseille,
France. European Language Resources Association.
Ateret Anaby-Tavor, Boaz Carmeli, Esther Goldbraich,
Amir Kantor, George Kour, Segev Shlomov, Naama
Tepper, and Naama Zwerdling. 2020. Do not have
enough data? deep learning to the rescue!
In The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Ap-
plications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI
2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New
York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 7383–
7390. AAAI Press.
Stephen H. Bach, Daniel Rodriguez, Yintao Liu,
Chong Luo, Haidong Shao, Cassandra Xia, Souvik
Sen, Alexander Ratner, Braden Hancock, Houman
Alborzi, Rahul Kuchhal, Christopher Ré, and Rob
Malkin. 2019. Snorkel drybell: A case study in de-
ploying weak supervision at industrial scale. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 International Conference on
Management of Data, SIGMOD Conference 2019,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 30 - July 5, 2019,
pages 362–375. ACM.
N. Banik, M. H. Haﬁzur Rahman, S. Chakraborty,
H. Seddiqui, and M. A. Azim. 2019.
Survey on
text-based sentiment analysis of bengali language.
In 2019 1st International Conference on Advances
in Science, Engineering and Robotics Technology
(ICASERT), pages 1–6.
Trapit Bansal, Rishikesh Jha, Tsendsuren Munkhdalai,
and Andrew McCallum. 2020.
Self-supervised
meta-learning for few-shot natural language classiﬁ-
cation tasks. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 522–534, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Muazzam Bashir, Azilawati Rozaimee, and Wan Ma-
lini Wan Isa. 2017.
Automatic hausa language
text summarization based on feature extraction using
naive bayes model. World Applied Science Journal,
35(9):2074–2080.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciB-
ERT: A pretrained language model for scientiﬁc text.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3615–
3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Emily Bender. 2019. The benderrule: On naming the
languages we study and why it matters. The Gradi-
ent.
Kasturi Bhattacharjee, Miguel Ballesteros, Rishita
Anubhai, Smaranda Muresan, Jie Ma, Faisal Lad-
hak, and Yaser Al-Onaizan. 2020. To BERT or not
to BERT: Comparing task-speciﬁc and task-agnostic
semi-supervised approaches for sequence tagging.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 7927–7934, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Elan
Van
Biljon,
Arnu
Pretorius,
and
Julia
Kreutzer. 2020.
On optimal transformer depth
for low-resource language translation.
CoRR,
abs/2004.04418.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.
Ondˇrej Bojar and Aleš Tamchyna. 2011.
Improving
translation model by monolingual data. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 330–336, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Steven Cao, Nikita Kitaev, and Dan Klein. 2020. Mul-
tilingual alignment of contextual word representa-
tions. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Yixin Cao, Zikun Hu, Tat-seng Chua, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Heng Ji. 2019.
Low-resource name tagging
learned with weakly labeled data. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 261–270, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Daoyuan Chen, Yaliang Li, Kai Lei, and Ying Shen.
2020a.
Relabel the noise: Joint extraction of en-
tities and relations via cooperative multiagents. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5940–
5950, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Junfan Chen, Richong Zhang, Yongyi Mao, Hongyu
Guo, and Jie Xu. 2019. Uncover the ground-truth re-
lations in distant supervision: A neural expectation-
maximization framework.
In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 326–336, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xilun Chen, Asish Ghoshal, Yashar Mehdad, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. 2020b.
Low-
resource domain adaptation for compositional task-
oriented semantic parsing.
In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 5090–5100,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xilun Chen, Yu Sun, Ben Athiwaratkun, Claire Cardie,
and Kilian Weinberger. 2018. Adversarial deep av-
eraging networks for cross-lingual sentiment classi-
ﬁcation. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 6:557–570.
Christos Christodoulopoulos and Mark Steedman.
2015. A massively parallel corpus: the bible in 100
languages.
Lang. Resour. Evaluation, 49(2):375–
395.
Christopher Cieri, Mike Maxwell, Stephanie Strassel,
and Jennifer Tracey. 2016.
Selection criteria for
low resource language programs.
In Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 4543–
4549, Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Quoc Le. 2018.
Semi-supervised se-
quence modeling with cross-view training. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1914–
1925, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael
Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Pavel Kuksa.
2011.
Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch.
Journal of machine learning research,
12(ARTICLE):2493–2537.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale.
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 8440–
8451, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ryan Cotterell, Christo Kirov, John Sylak-Glassman,
Géraldine Walther, Ekaterina Vylomova, Arya D.
McCarthy, Katharina Kann, Sabrina J. Mielke, Gar-
rett Nicolai, Miikka Silfverberg, David Yarowsky,
Jason Eisner, and Mans Hulden. 2018. The CoNLL–
SIGMORPHON 2018 shared task: Universal mor-
phological reinﬂection.
In Proceedings of the
CoNLL–SIGMORPHON 2018 Shared Task: Univer-
sal Morphological Reinﬂection, pages 1–27, Brus-
sels. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jan Christian Blaise Cruz and Charibeth Cheng.
2019. Evaluating language model ﬁnetuning tech-
niques for low-resource languages. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.00409.
Xiang Dai and Heike Adel. 2020.
An analysis of
simple data augmentation for named entity recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 3861–
3867, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Com-
mittee on Computational Linguistics.
Ali Daud, Wahab Khan, and Dunren Che. 2017. Urdu
language processing: a survey.
Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Review, 47(3):279–311.
Guy De Pauw, Gilles-Maurice De Schryver, Laurette
Pretorius, and Lori Levin. 2011. Introduction to the
special issue on african language technology. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, 45(3):263–269.
Mathieu Dehouck and Carlos Gómez-Rodríguez. 2020.
Data augmentation via subtree swapping for de-
pendency parsing of low-resource languages.
In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 3818–3830,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee
on Computational Linguistics.
Xiang Deng and Huan Sun. 2019. Leveraging 2-hop
distant supervision from table entity pairs for rela-
tion extraction.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 410–420, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Bosheng Ding, Linlin Liu, Lidong Bing, Canasai Kru-
engkrai, Thien Hai Nguyen, Shaﬁq Joty, Luo Si, and
Chunyan Miao. 2020. DAGA: Data augmentation
with a generation approach for low-resource tagging
tasks.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 6045–6057, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Zi-Yi Dou, Keyi Yu, and Antonios Anastasopoulos.
2019.
Investigating meta-learning algorithms for
low-resource natural language understanding tasks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1192–
1197, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
David M. Eberhard, Gary F. Simons, and Charles
D. Fennig (eds.). 2019. Ethnologue: Languages of
the world. twenty-second edition.
Ramy Eskander, Smaranda Muresan, and Michael
Collins. 2020. Unsupervised cross-lingual part-of-
speech tagging for truly low-resource scenarios. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 4820–4831, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Felix Abidemi Fabuni and Akeem Segun Salawu. 2005.
Is yorùbá an endangered language? Nordic Journal
of African Studies, 14(3):18–18.
Marzieh Fadaee, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz.
2017.
Data augmentation for low-resource neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 567–
573, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Meng Fang and Trevor Cohn. 2016. Learning when
to trust distant supervision: An application to low-
resource POS tagging using cross-lingual projection.
In Proceedings of The 20th SIGNLL Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
178–186, Berlin, Germany. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Meng Fang and Trevor Cohn. 2017.
Model transfer
for tagging low-resource languages using a bilingual
dictionary. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 587–593, Vancou-
ver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Hao Fei, Meishan Zhang, and Donghong Ji. 2020.
Cross-lingual semantic role labeling with high-
quality translated training corpus. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 7014–7026, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017.
Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70,
ICML’17, page 1126–1135. JMLR.org.
Benoît Frénay and Michel Verleysen. 2013. Classiﬁca-
tion in the presence of label noise: a survey. IEEE
transactions on neural networks and learning sys-
tems, 25(5):845–869.
Annemarie Friedrich, Heike Adel, Federico Tomazic,
Johannes Hingerl, Renou Benteau, Anika Mar-
usczyk, and Lukas Lange. 2020.
The SOFC-exp
corpus and neural approaches to information extrac-
tion in the materials science domain. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1255–1268, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Annemarie Friedrich and Damyana Gateva. 2017.
Classiﬁcation of telicity using cross-linguistic anno-
tation projection. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2559–2565, Copenhagen, Den-
mark. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Siddhant Garg and Goutham Ramakrishnan. 2020.
BAE: BERT-based adversarial examples for text
classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 6174–6181, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Dan Garrette and Jason Baldridge. 2013. Learning a
part-of-speech tagger from two hours of annotation.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 138–147, Atlanta, Georgia. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
Generative
adversarial nets.
In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 27, pages 2672–2680. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Daniel Grießhaber, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Johannes
Maucher. 2020. Low-resource text classiﬁcation us-
ing domain-adversarial learning. Computer Speech
& Language, 62:101056.
Aditi Sharma Grover, Karen Calteaux, Gerhard van
Huyssteen, and Marthinus Pretorius. 2010.
An
overview of hlts for south african bantu languages.
In Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Research Con-
ference of the South African Institute of Computer
Scientists and Information Technologists, pages 370–
375.
Roman Grundkiewicz, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, and
Kenneth Heaﬁeld. 2019. Neural grammatical error
correction systems with unsupervised pre-training
on synthetic data. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications, pages 252–263, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Imane Guellil, Faiçal Azouaou, and Alessandro Vali-
tutti. 2019.
English vs arabic sentiment analysis:
A survey presenting 100 work studies, resources
and tools.
In 2019 IEEE/ACS 16th International
Conference on Computer Systems and Applications
(AICCSA), pages 1–8.
Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Haoran Huang, Minlong Peng, and
Xuanjing Huang. 2017. Part-of-speech tagging for
twitter with adversarial neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2411–2420,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
Colorless
green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1195–1205, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Suchin
Gururangan,
Ana
Marasovi´c,
Swabha
Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t stop pretraining:
Adapt language models to domains and tasks.
In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
8342–8360, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
DN Hakro, AZ TALIB, and GN Mojai. 2016. Multilin-
gual text image database for ocr. Sindh University
Research Journal-SURJ (Science Series), 47(1).
BS Harish and R Kasturi Rangan. 2020. A comprehen-
sive survey on indian regional language processing.
SN Applied Sciences, 2(7):1–16.
Michael A. Hedderich, David Adelani, Dawei Zhu, Je-
sujoba Alabi, Udia Markus, and Dietrich Klakow.
2020.
Transfer learning and distant supervision
for multilingual transformer models: A study on
African languages. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 2580–2591, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Michael A. Hedderich and Dietrich Klakow. 2018.
Training a neural network in a low-resource setting
on automatically annotated noisy data. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Deep Learning Approaches
for Low-Resource NLP, pages 12–18, Melbourne.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Michael A. Hedderich, Lukas Lange, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2021a.
ANEA: distant supervision for
low-resource named entity recognition.
CoRR,
abs/2102.13129.
Michael A. Hedderich, Dawei Zhu, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2021b. Analysing the noise model error for
realistic noisy label data. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Chaitra Hegde and Shrikumar Patil. 2020.
Unsuper-
vised paraphrase generation using pre-trained lan-
guage models. CoRR, abs/2006.05477.
Benjamin Heinzerling and Michael Strube. 2018.
BPEmb:
Tokenization-free Pre-trained Subword
Embeddings in 275 Languages. In Proceedings of
the Eleventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki,
Japan. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Vu Cong Duy Hoang, Philipp Koehn, Gholamreza
Haffari, and Trevor Cohn. 2018.
Iterative back-
translation for neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Neural Machine
Translation and Generation, pages 18–24, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Mi-
caelli, and Amos Storkey. 2020.
Meta-learning
in neural networks:
A survey.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05439.
Tsung-Yuan Hsu, Chi-Liang Liu, and Hung-yi Lee.
2019. Zero-shot reading comprehension by cross-
lingual transfer learning with multi-lingual lan-
guage representation model. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 5933–5940, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Junjie Hu, Sebastian Ruder, Aditya Siddhant, Graham
Neubig, Orhan Firat, and Melvin Johnson. 2020.
Xtreme: A massively multilingual multi-task bench-
mark for evaluating cross-lingual generalisation. In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
4411–4421.
Linmei Hu, Luhao Zhang, Chuan Shi, Liqiang Nie,
Weili Guan, and Cheng Yang. 2019.
Improving
distantly-supervised relation extraction with joint la-
bel embedding.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 3821–3829, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Kexin Huang, Jaan Altosaar, and Rajesh Ranganath.
2019.
Clinicalbert: Modeling clinical notes and
predicting hospital readmission.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.05342.
Yi Huang, Junlan Feng, Shuo Ma, Xiaoyu Du, and
Xiaoting Wu. 2020.
Towards low-resource semi-
supervised dialogue generation with meta-learning.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 4123–4128, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuyun Huang and Jinhua Du. 2019. Self-attention en-
hanced CNNs and collaborative curriculum learn-
ing for distantly supervised relation extraction. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 389–
398, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Patrick Huber and Giuseppe Carenini. 2020. MEGA
RST discourse treebanks with structure and nuclear-
ity from scalable distant sentiment supervision. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 7442–7457, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rasmus Hvingelby, Amalie Brogaard Pauli, Maria Bar-
rett, Christina Rosted, Lasse Malm Lidegaard, and
Anders Søgaard. 2020. DaNE: A named entity re-
source for Danish. In Proceedings of the 12th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
4597–4604, Marseille, France. European Language
Resources Association.
Ayush Jain and Meenachi Ganesamoorty. 2020. Nuke-
bert: A pre-trained language model for low resource
nuclear domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13821.
Wei Jia, Dai Dai, Xinyan Xiao, and Hua Wu. 2019.
ARNOR: Attention regularization based noise reduc-
tion for distant supervision relation classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1399–
1408, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zhanming Jie, Pengjun Xie, Wei Lu, Ruixue Ding, and
Linlin Li. 2019. Better modeling of incomplete an-
notations for named entity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 729–734, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Di Jin, Zhijing Jin, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Peter
Szolovits. 2020. Is BERT really robust? A strong
baseline for natural language attack on text clas-
siﬁcation and entailment.
In The Thirty-Fourth
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI
2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The
Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY,
USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 8018–8025. AAAI
Press.
Pratik Joshi, Sebastin Santy, Amar Budhiraja, Kalika
Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. 2020. The state and
fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion in the NLP
world.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 6282–6293, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Armand Joulin, Piotr Bojanowski, Tomas Mikolov,
Hervé Jégou, and Edouard Grave. 2018.
Loss in
translation: Learning bilingual word mapping with a
retrieval criterion. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.
Jakob Jungmaier, Nora Kassner, and Benjamin Roth.
2020.
Dirichlet-smoothed word embeddings for
low-resource settings. In Proceedings of The 12th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
pages 3560–3565, Marseille, France. European Lan-
guage Resources Association.
Katharina Kann, Ophélie Lacroix, and Anders Søgaard.
2020.
Weakly supervised POS taggers perform
poorly on Truly low-resource languages.
In The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Ap-
plications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI
2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New
York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 8066–
8073. AAAI Press.
Giannis Karamanolakis, Daniel Hsu, and Luis Gra-
vano. 2019.
Leveraging just a few keywords for
ﬁne-grained aspect detection through weakly super-
vised co-training. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 4611–4621, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Giannis Karamanolakis, Daniel Hsu, and Luis Gravano.
2020. Cross-lingual text classiﬁcation with minimal
resources by transferring a sparse teacher. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3604–3622, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Giannis Karamanolakis, Subhabrata (Subho) Mukher-
jee, Guoqing Zheng, and Ahmed H. Awadallah.
2021.
Leaving no valuable knowledge behind:
Weak supervision with self-training and domain-
speciﬁc rules. In NAACL 2021. NAACL 2021.
Jungo Kasai, Kun Qian, Sairam Gurajada, Yunyao
Li, and Lucian Popa. 2019.
Low-resource deep
entity resolution with transfer and active learning.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
5851–5861, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Talaat Khalil, Kornel Kiełczewski, Georgios Chris-
tos Chouliaras, Amina Keldibek, and Maarten Ver-
steegh. 2019. Cross-lingual intent classiﬁcation in
a low resource industrial setting. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 6419–6424, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Douwe Kiela, Changhan Wang, and Kyunghyun Cho.
2018. Dynamic meta-embeddings for improved sen-
tence representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1466–1477, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Joo-Kyung Kim, Young-Bum Kim, Ruhi Sarikaya, and
Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2017.
Cross-lingual transfer
learning for POS tagging without cross-lingual re-
sources. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2832–2838, Copenhagen, Denmark. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Jan-Christoph Klie, Michael Bugert, Beto Boullosa,
Richard Eckart de Castilho, and Iryna Gurevych.
2018.
The inception platform: Machine-assisted
and knowledge-oriented interactive annotation. In
COLING 2018, The 27th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: System Demonstra-
tions, Santa Fe, New Mexico, August 20-26, 2018,
pages 5–9. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sosuke Kobayashi. 2018.
Contextual augmentation:
Data augmentation by words with paradigmatic re-
lations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 452–457,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sandra Kübler and Desislava Zhekova. 2016. Multilin-
gual coreference resolution. Language and Linguis-
tics Compass, 10(11):614–631.
Varun Kumar, Ashutosh Choudhary, and Eunah Cho.
2020.
Data augmentation using pre-trained trans-
former models. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop
on Life-long Learning for Spoken Language Systems,
pages 18–26, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Lukas Lange, Heike Adel, and Jannik Strötgen. 2019a.
NLNDE: Enhancing neural sequence taggers with
attention and noisy channel for robust pharmacologi-
cal entity detection. In Proceedings of The 5th Work-
shop on BioNLP Open Shared Tasks, pages 26–32,
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Lukas Lange, Heike Adel, and Jannik Strötgen. 2019b.
Nlnde:
The neither-language-nor-domain-experts’
way of spanish medical document de-identiﬁcation.
In IberLEF@ SEPLN, pages 671–678.
Lukas Lange, Heike Adel, and Jannik Strötgen. 2020a.
On the choice of auxiliary languages for improved
sequence tagging. In Proceedings of the 5th Work-
shop on Representation Learning for NLP, pages 95–
102, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Lukas Lange, Heike Adel, Jannik Strötgen, and Di-
etrich Klakow. 2020b.
Adversarial learning of
feature-based meta-embeddings.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.12305.
Lukas Lange, Michael A. Hedderich, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2019c. Feature-dependent confusion matri-
ces for low-resource NER labeling with noisy labels.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3554–
3559, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Lukas Lange, Anastasiia Iurshina, Heike Adel, and Jan-
nik Strötgen. 2020c. Adversarial alignment of mul-
tilingual models for extracting temporal expressions
from text. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
Representation Learning for NLP, pages 103–109,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Anne Lauscher, Vinit Ravishankar, Ivan Vuli´c, and
Goran Glavaš. 2020.
From zero to hero: On the
limitations of zero-shot language transfer with multi-
lingual Transformers. Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 4483–4499.
Phong Le and Ivan Titov. 2019. Distant learning for
entity linking with automatic noise detection.
In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 4081–
4090, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jieh-Sheng Lee and Jieh Hsiang. 2020. Patent classi-
ﬁcation by ﬁne-tuning bert language model. World
Patent Information, 61:101965.
Jinhyuk
Lee,
Wonjin
Yoon,
Sungdong
Kim,
Donghyeon Kim,
Sunkyu Kim,
Chan Ho So,
and Jaewoo Kang. 2020.
Biobert: a pre-trained
biomedical
language
representation
model
for
biomedical text mining.
Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England), 36(4):1234—1240.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Xiaodong He, Lei Zhang, and Linjun
Yang. 2018.
Cleannet: Transfer learning for scal-
able image classiﬁer training with label noise. In
2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, June 18-22, 2018, pages 5447–5456. IEEE
Computer Society.
Junnan Li, Richard Socher, and Steven C. H. Hoi.
2020.
Dividemix: Learning with noisy labels as
semi-supervised learning. In 8th International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenRe-
view.net.
Shen Li, João Graça, and Ben Taskar. 2012. Wiki-ly
supervised part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 1389–1398, Jeju
Island, Korea. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Wen Li, Limin Wang, Wei Li, Eirikur Agustsson, and
Luc Van Gool. 2017. Webvision database: Visual
learning and understanding from web data. CoRR,
abs/1708.02862.
Yu-Hsiang Lin, Chian-Yu Chen, Jean Lee, Zirui Li,
Yuyan Zhang, Mengzhou Xia, Shruti Rijhwani,
Junxian He, Zhisong Zhang, Xuezhe Ma, Antonios
Anastasopoulos, Patrick Littell, and Graham Neubig.
2019. Choosing transfer languages for cross-lingual
learning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 3125–3135, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Pierre Lison, Jeremy Barnes, Aliaksandr Hubin, and
Samia Touileb. 2020.
Named entity recognition
without labelled data: A weak supervision approach.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1518–1533, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
D. Liu, N. Ma, F. Yang, and X. Yang. 2019. A survey
of low resource neural machine translation. In 2019
4th International Conference on Mechanical, Con-
trol and Computer Engineering (ICMCCE), pages
39–393.
Pengfei Liu, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2017.
Adversarial multi-task learning for text classiﬁca-
tion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2017, Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers, pages 1–10. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Qianchu Liu, Diana McCarthy, Ivan Vuli´c, and Anna
Korhonen. 2019a. Investigating cross-lingual align-
ment methods for contextualized embeddings with
token-level evaluation. In Proceedings of the 23rd
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL).
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019b.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Shayne Longpre, Yu Wang, and Chris DuBois. 2020.
How effective is task-agnostic data augmentation for
pretrained transformers? In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020,
pages 4401–4411, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Melinda Loubser and Martin J Puttkammer. 2020. Vi-
ability of neural networks for core technologies for
resource-scarce languages. Information, 11(1):41.
Jose Lozano, Waldir Farfan, and Juan Cruz. 2013. Syn-
tactic analyzer for quechua language.
Bingfeng Luo, Yansong Feng, Zheng Wang, Zhanxing
Zhu, Songfang Huang, Rui Yan, and Dongyan Zhao.
2017. Learning with noise: Enhance distantly super-
vised relation extraction with dynamic transition ma-
trix. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 430–439, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shuming Ma, Pengcheng Yang, Tianyu Liu, Peng Li,
Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. 2019. Key fact as pivot: A
two-stage model for low resource table-to-text gen-
eration.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 2047–2057, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Manuel Mager, Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Gerardo
Sierra, and Ivan Meza-Ruiz. 2018. Challenges of
language technologies for the indigenous languages
of the Americas. In Proceedings of the 27th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 55–69, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Alexandre Magueresse, Vincent Carles, and Evan Heet-
derks. 2020.
Low-resource languages: A review
of past work and future challenges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.07264.
Dhruv Mahajan, Ross Girshick, Vignesh Ramanathan,
Kaiming He, Manohar Paluri, Yixuan Li, Ashwin
Bharambe, and Laurens van der Maaten. 2018. Ex-
ploring the limits of weakly supervised pretraining.
Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV).
Ana Marasovi´c, Mengfei Zhou, Alexis Palmer, and
Anette Frank. 2016. Modal sense classiﬁcation at
large: Paraphrase-driven sense projection, semanti-
cally enriched classiﬁcation models and cross-genre
evaluations. In Linguistic Issues in Language Tech-
nology, Volume 14, 2016 - Modality: Logic, Seman-
tics, Annotation, and Machine Learning. CSLI Pub-
lications.
Carmen Martínez-Gil, Alejandro Zempoalteca-Pérez,
Venustiano
Soancatl-Aguilar,
María
de
Jesús
Estudillo-Ayala, José Edgar Lara-Ramírez, and
Sayde Alcántara-Santiago. 2012.
Computer sys-
tems for analysis of nahuatl.
Res. Comput. Sci.,
47:11–16.
Thomas Mayer and Michael Cysouw. 2014. Creating
a massively parallel Bible corpus. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pages 3158–
3163, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Stephen Mayhew, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Chen-Tse Tsai,
and Dan Roth. 2019.
Named entity recognition
with partially annotated training data. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 645–655,
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Stephen Mayhew and Dan Roth. 2018. TALEN: Tool
for annotation of low-resource ENtities. In Proceed-
ings of ACL 2018, System Demonstrations, pages
80–86, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Stephen Mayhew, Chen-Tse Tsai, and Dan Roth. 2017.
Cheap translation for cross-lingual named entity
recognition. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 2536–2545, Copenhagen, Denmark. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Dheeraj Mekala, Xinyang Zhang, and Jingbo Shang.
2020. META: Metadata-empowered weak supervi-
sion for text classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 8351–8361,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Oren Melamud, Mihaela Bornea, and Ken Barker.
2019. Combining unsupervised pre-training and an-
notator rationales to improve low-shot text classiﬁ-
cation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
3884–3893, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Tomas Mikolov, Quoc V. Le, and Ilya Sutskever. 2013.
Exploiting similarities among languages for ma-
chine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.4168.
Junghyun Min, R. Thomas McCoy, Dipanjan Das,
Emily Pitler, and Tal Linzen. 2020.
Syntactic
data augmentation increases robustness to inference
heuristics. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 2339–2352, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Daniel Ju-
rafsky. 2009.
Distant supervision for relation ex-
traction without labeled data.
In Proceedings of
the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of
the ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP,
pages 1003–1011, Suntec, Singapore. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
John Morris, Eli Liﬂand, Jin Yong Yoo, Jake Grigsby,
Di Jin, and Yanjun Qi. 2020. TextAttack: A frame-
work for adversarial attacks, data augmentation, and
adversarial training in NLP. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 119–126, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Benjamin Müller, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah.
2020. Can multilingual language models transfer to
an unseen dialect? A case study on north african ara-
bizi. CoRR, abs/2005.00318.
Kaili Müürisep and Pilleriin Mutso. 2005.
Estsum-
estonian newspaper texts summarizer. In Proceed-
ings of The Second Baltic Conference on Human
Language Technologies, pages 311–316.
Wilhelmina Nekoto, Vukosi Marivate, Tshinondiwa
Matsila,
Timi
Fasubaa,
Taiwo
Fagbohungbe,
Solomon Oluwole Akinola, Shamsuddeen Muham-
mad, Salomon Kabongo Kabenamualu, Salomey
Osei, Freshia Sackey, Rubungo Andre Niyongabo,
Ricky Macharm, Perez Ogayo, Orevaoghene Ahia,
Musie
Meressa
Berhe,
Mofetoluwa
Adeyemi,
Masabata Mokgesi-Selinga, Lawrence Okegbemi,
Laura Martinus, Kolawole Tajudeen, Kevin Degila,
Kelechi Ogueji, Kathleen Siminyu, Julia Kreutzer,
Jason Webster, Jamiil Toure Ali, Jade Abbott,
Iroro Orife,
Ignatius Ezeani,
Idris Abdulkadir
Dangana, Herman Kamper, Hady Elsahar, Good-
ness Duru,
Ghollah Kioko,
Murhabazi Espoir,
Elan van Biljon, Daniel Whitenack, Christopher
Onyefuluchi, Chris Chinenye Emezue, Bonaventure
F. P. Dossou, Blessing Sibanda, Blessing Bassey,
Ayodele Olabiyi, Arshath Ramkilowan, Alp Öktem,
Adewale Akinfaderin, and Abdallah Bashir. 2020.
Participatory research for low-resourced machine
translation:
A case study in African languages.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020,
pages 2144–2160,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Jan Hajic, Christopher D. Manning, Sampo
Pyysalo, Sebastian Schuster, Francis M. Tyers, and
Daniel Zeman. 2020.
Universal dependencies v2:
An evergrowing multilingual treebank collection.
In Proceedings of The 12th Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference, LREC 2020, Marseille,
France, May 11-16, 2020, pages 4034–4043. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association.
Farhad Nooralahzadeh, Jan Tore Lønning, and Lilja
Øvrelid. 2019.
Reinforcement-based denoising of
distantly supervised NER with partial annotation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Deep Learning
Approaches for Low-Resource NLP (DeepLo 2019),
pages 225–233, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Christopher Norman, Mariska Leeﬂang, René Spijker,
Evangelos Kanoulas, and Aurélie Névéol. 2019. A
distantly supervised dataset for automated data ex-
traction from diagnostic studies. In Proceedings of
the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task, pages
105–114, Florence, Italy. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Fredrik Olsson. 2009. A literature survey of active ma-
chine learning in the context of natural language pro-
cessing.
Yasumasa Onoe and Greg Durrett. 2019. Learning to
denoise distantly-labeled data for entity typing. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
2407–2417, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Juri Opitz. 2019.
Argumentative relation classiﬁca-
tion as plausibility ranking. In Proceedings of the
15th Conference on Natural Language Processing,
KONVENS 2019, Erlangen, Germany, October 9-11,
2019.
Hille Pajupuu, Rene Altrov, and Jaan Pajupuu. 2016.
Identifying polarity in different text types. Folklore:
Electronic Journal of Folklore, 64:126–138.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2009. A survey on
transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
and data engineering, 22(10):1345–1359.
Xiaoman Pan, Boliang Zhang, Jonathan May, Joel
Nothman, Kevin Knight, and Heng Ji. 2017. Cross-
lingual name tagging and linking for 282 languages.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1:
Long Papers), pages 1946–1958, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shantipriya Parida and Petr Motlicek. 2019. Abstract
text summarization: A low resource challenge. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 5994–
5998, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Debjit Paul, Mittul Singh, Michael A. Hedderich, and
Dietrich Klakow. 2019. Handling noisy labels for
robustly learning from self-training data for low-
resource sequence labeling. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Stu-
dent Research Workshop, pages 29–34, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Minlong Peng, Xiaoyu Xing, Qi Zhang, Jinlan Fu, and
Xuanjing Huang. 2019. Distantly supervised named
entity recognition using positive-unlabeled learning.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
2409–2419, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Barbara Plank and Željko Agi´c. 2018. Distant super-
vision from disparate sources for low-resource part-
of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 614–620, Brussels, Belgium. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Barbara Plank, Anders Søgaard, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016. Multilingual part-of-speech tagging with bidi-
rectional long short-term memory models and auxil-
iary loss. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL 2016, August 7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany, Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers. The Association for Computer
Linguistics.
Kun Qian, Poornima Chozhiyath Raman, Yunyao Li,
and Lucian Popa. 2020. Learning structured repre-
sentations of entity names using ActiveLearning and
weak supervision. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 6376–6383, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Xipeng Qiu, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao,
Ning Dai, and Xuanjing Huang. 2020. Pre-trained
models for natural language processing: A survey.
Science China Technological Sciences, pages 1–26.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former.
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21:1–67.
Afshin Rahimi, Yuan Li, and Trevor Cohn. 2019. Mas-
sively multilingual transfer for NER.
In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 151–164, Flo-
rence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jonathan Raiman and John Miller. 2017. Globally nor-
malized reader.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1059–1069, Copenhagen, Den-
mark. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alan Ramponi and Barbara Plank. 2020. Neural un-
supervised domain adaptation in NLP—A survey.
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 6838–6855.
Alexander Ratner, Stephen H. Bach, Henry Ehrenberg,
Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher Ré. 2017.
Snorkel: Rapid training data creation with weak su-
pervision. Proc. VLDB Endow., 11(3):269–282.
Ines Rehbein and Josef Ruppenhofer. 2017.
Detect-
ing annotation noise in automatically labelled data.
In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1:
Long Papers), pages 1160–1170, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wendi Ren, Yinghao Li, Hanting Su, David Kartchner,
Cassie Mitchell, and Chao Zhang. 2020. Denoising
multi-source weak supervision for neural text classi-
ﬁcation. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3739–3754,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2010. Modeling relations and their mentions
without labeled text.
In Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 148–163,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2021. A primer in bertology: What we know about
how bert works. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 8:842–866.
Benjamin Roth, Tassilo Barth, Michael Wiegand, and
Dietrich Klakow. 2013. A survey of noise reduction
methods for distant supervision. In Proceedings of
the 2013 workshop on Automated knowledge base
construction, pages 73–78.
Sebastian Ruder. 2019. The 4 biggest open problems
in nlp.
Sebastian Ruder, Ivan Vuli´c, and Anders Søgaard.
2019. A survey of cross-lingual word embedding
models. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,
65:569–631.
Gözde Gül ¸Sahin and Mark Steedman. 2018. Data aug-
mentation via dependency tree morphing for low-
resource languages.
In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 5004–5009, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick, Helmut Schmid, and Hinrich Schütze.
2020.
Automatically identifying words that can
serve as labels for few-shot text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pages 5569–5578,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee
on Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2020. Exploiting
cloze questions for few-shot text classiﬁcation and
natural language inference. CoRR, abs/2001.07676.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2020.
It’s
not just size that matters:
Small language mod-
els are also few-shot learners.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.07118.
Tal Schuster, Ori Ram, Regina Barzilay, and Amir
Globerson. 2019. Cross-lingual alignment of con-
textual word embeddings, with applications to zero-
shot dependency parsing.
In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers).
Burr Settles. 2009. Active learning literature survey.
Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Computer Sciences.
Yong Shi, Yang Xiao, and Lingfeng Niu. 2019.
A
brief survey of relation extraction based on distant
supervision. In International Conference on Com-
putational Science, pages 293–303. Springer.
Alisa Smirnova and Philippe Cudré-Mauroux. 2018.
Relation extraction using distant supervision: A sur-
vey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(5):1–35.
Ralf Steinberger. 2012. A survey of methods to ease
the development of highly multilingual text mining
applications.
Language resources and evaluation,
46(2):155–176.
Stephanie
Strassel
and
Jennifer
Tracey.
2016.
LORELEI language packs:
Data,
tools,
and
resources
for
technology
development
in
low
resource languages.
In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16),
pages 3273–3280,
Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).
Mihai Surdeanu, Julie Tibshirani, Ramesh Nallapati,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2012. Multi-instance
multi-label learning for relation extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 455–
465, Jeju Island, Korea. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, Slav Petrov, Ryan Mc-
Donald, and Joakim Nivre. 2013. Token and type
constraints for cross-lingual part-of-speech tagging.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1:1–12.
Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang
Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. 2018. A sur-
vey on deep transfer learning. In International con-
ference on artiﬁcial neural networks, pages 270–279.
Springer.
Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and inter-
faces in OPUS.
In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 2214–2218, Istanbul,
Turkey. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Alexander Tkachenko, Timo Petmanson, and Sven
Laur. 2013. Named entity recognition in Estonian.
In Proceedings of the 4th Biennial International
Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 78–83, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jennifer Tracey and Stephanie Strassel. 2020.
Ba-
sic language resources for 31 languages (plus En-
glish): The LORELEI representative and incident
language packs.
In Proceedings of the 1st Joint
Workshop on Spoken Language Technologies for
Under-resourced languages (SLTU) and Collabo-
ration and Computing for Under-Resourced Lan-
guages (CCURL), pages 277–284, Marseille, France.
European Language Resources association.
Tatiana Tsygankova, Francesca Marini, Stephen May-
hew, and Dan Roth. 2020. Building low-resource
ner models using non-speaker annotation.
CoRR,
abs/2006.09627.
Aminu Tukur, Kabir Umar, and Anas Saidu Muham-
mad. 2019.
Tagging part of speech in hausa sen-
tences. In 2019 15th International Conference on
Electronics, Computer and Computation (ICECCO),
pages 1–6. IEEE.
Clara Vania, Yova Kementchedjhieva, Anders Søgaard,
and Adam Lopez. 2019. A systematic comparison
of methods for low-resource dependency parsing on
genuinely low-resource languages. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1105–1116, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30, pages 5998–6008. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Hao Wang, Bing Liu, Chaozhuo Li, Yan Yang, and
Tianrui Li. 2019.
Learning with noisy labels for
sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 6286–6292, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Jason Wei and Kai Zou. 2019. EDA: Easy data aug-
mentation techniques for boosting performance on
text classiﬁcation tasks.
In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 6382–6388, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Karl Weiss, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing
Wang. 2016. A survey of transfer learning. Journal
of Big data, 3(1):9.
Garrett Wilson and Diane J Cook. 2020.
A survey
of unsupervised deep domain adaptation.
ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST), 11(5):1–46.
Guillaume Wisniewski,
Nicolas Pécheux,
Souhir
Gahbiche-Braham, and François Yvon. 2014. Cross-
lingual part-of-speech tagging through ambiguous
learning. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1779–1785, Doha, Qatar. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Shijie Wu and Mark Dredze. 2020. Are all languages
created equal in multilingual BERT? In Proceedings
of the 5th Workshop on Representation Learning for
NLP, pages 120–130, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiao-
gang Wang. 2015. Learning from massive noisy la-
beled data for image classiﬁcation. In IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
CVPR 2015, Boston, MA, USA, June 7-12, 2015,
pages 2691–2699. IEEE Computer Society.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Minh-Thang Lu-
ong, and Quoc V. Le. 2020. Unsupervised data aug-
mentation for consistency training. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020,
virtual.
Hu Xu, Bing Liu, Lei Shu, and Philip Yu. 2020.
DomBERT: Domain-oriented language model for
aspect-based sentiment analysis. Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2020, pages 1725–1731.
Yaosheng
Yang,
Wenliang
Chen,
Zhenghua
Li,
Zhengqiu He, and Min Zhang. 2018. Distantly su-
pervised NER with partial annotation learning and
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 2159–2169, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ze Yang, Wei Wu, Jian Yang, Can Xu, and Zhoujun
Li. 2019.
Low-resource response generation with
template prior.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 1886–1897, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
David Yarowsky, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicen-
towski. 2001.
Inducing multilingual text analysis
tools via robust projection across aligned corpora. In
Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Human Language Technology Research.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Jungo Kasai, and Dragomir
Radev. 2018.
Robust multilingual part-of-speech
tagging via adversarial training. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers), pages 976–986, New Orleans, Louisiana. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Qinyuan Ye, Liyuan Liu, Maosen Zhang, and Xiang
Ren. 2019.
Looking beyond label noise: Shifted
label distribution matters in distantly supervised re-
lation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 3841–3850, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jihene Younes, Emna Souissi, Hadhemi Achour, and
Ahmed Ferchichi. 2020.
Language resources for
maghrebi arabic dialects’ nlp:
a survey.
LAN-
GUAGE RESOURCES AND EVALUATION.
Mo Yu, Xiaoxiao Guo, Jinfeng Yi, Shiyu Chang, Saloni
Potdar, Yu Cheng, Gerald Tesauro, Haoyu Wang,
and Bowen Zhou. 2018. Diverse few-shot text clas-
siﬁcation with multiple metrics. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers), pages 1206–1215, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
BI Yude. 2011. A brief survey of korean natural lan-
guage processing research. Journal of Chinese In-
formation Processing, 6.
Meishan Zhang, Yue Zhang, and Guohong Fu. 2019a.
Cross-lingual dependency parsing using code-mixed
TreeBank. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 997–1006, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Rui Zhang, Caitlin Westerﬁeld, Sungrok Shim, Gar-
rett Bingham, Alexander Fabbri, William Hu, Neha
Verma, and Dragomir Radev. 2019b. Improving low-
resource cross-lingual document retrieval by rerank-
ing with deep bilingual representations. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 3173–3179,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Shun Zheng, Xu Han, Yankai Lin, Peilin Yu, Lu Chen,
Ling Huang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Wei Xu. 2019.
DIAG-NRE: A neural pattern diagnosis framework
for distantly supervised neural relation extraction.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1419–1429, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Joey Tianyi Zhou, Hao Zhang, Di Jin, Hongyuan Zhu,
Meng Fang, Rick Siow Mong Goh, and Kenneth
Kwok. 2019.
Dual adversarial neural transfer for
low-resource named entity recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 3461–3471,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Mengfei Zhou, Anette Frank, Annemarie Friedrich,
and Alexis Palmer. 2015.
Semantically enriched
models for modal sense classiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the First Workshop on Linking Computa-
tional Models of Lexical, Sentential and Discourse-
level Semantics, pages 44–53, Lisbon, Portugal. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Yi Zhu, Benjamin Heinzerling, Ivan Vuli´c, Michael
Strube, Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen. 2019. On
the importance of subword information for morpho-
logical tasks in truly low-resource languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 216–
226, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
A
Existing Surveys on Low-Resource
Topics and Languages
There is a growing body of task- and language-
speciﬁc surveys concerning low-resource topics.
We list these surveys in Table 2 as a starting point
for a more in-depth reading regarding speciﬁc top-
ics.
B
Complexity of Tasks
While a large number of labeled resources for En-
glish are available for many popular NLP tasks,
this is not the case for the majority of low-resource
languages. To measure (and visualize as done in
Figure 1 in the main paper) which applications are
accessible to speakers of low-resource languages
we examined resources for six different languages,
ranging from high- to low-resource languages for
a ﬁxed set of tasks of varying complexity, ranging
from basic tasks, such as tokenization, to higher-
level tasks, such as question answering. For this
short study, we have chosen the following lan-
guages. The number of speakers are the combined
L1 and L2 speakers according to Eberhard et al.
(2019).
(1) English: The most high-resource language
according to the common view and literature
in the NLP community.
(2) Yoruba: An African language, which is spo-
ken by about 40 million speakers and con-
tained in the EXTREME benchmark (Hu et al.,
2020). Even with that many speakers, this lan-
guage is often considered as a low-resource
language and it is still discussed whether
this language is also endangered (Fabuni and
Salawu, 2005).
(3) Hausa: An African language with over 60 mil-
lion speakers. It is not covered in EXTREME
or the universal dependencies project (Nivre
et al., 2020).
(4) Quechua: A language family encompassing
about 8 million speakers, mostly in Peru.
(5) Nahuatl and (6) Estonian: Both have between
1 and 2 million speakers, but are spoken in
very different regions (North America & Eu-
rope).
All speaker numbers according to Eberhard et al.
(2019) reﬂecting the total number of users (L1 +
L2). The tasks were chosen from a list of popular
NLP tasks3. We selected two tasks for the lower-
lever groups and three tasks for the higher-level
groups, which reﬂects the application diversity with
increasing complexity. Table 3 shows which tasks
were addressed for each language.
Word segmentation, lemmatization, part-of-
speech tagging, sentence breaking and (semantic)
parsing are covered for Yoruba and Estonian by
treebanks from the universal dependencies project
(Nivre et al., 2020). Cusco Quechua is listed as an
upcoming language in the UD project, but no tree-
bank is accessible at this moment. The WikiAnn
corpus for named entity recognition (Pan et al.,
2017) has resources and tools for NER and sen-
tence breaking for all six languages. Lemmati-
zation resources for Nahuatl were developed by
Martínez-Gil et al. (2012) and Lozano et al. (2013)
developed resources for part-of-speech tagging, to-
kenization and parsing of Quechuan. The CoNLL
conference and SIGMORPHON organized two
shared tasks for morphological reinﬂection which
provided lemmatization resources for many lan-
guages, including Quechuan (Cotterell et al., 2018).
Basic resources for simple semantic role label-
ing and entity linking were developed during the
LORELEI program for many low-resource lan-
guages (Strassel and Tracey, 2016; Tracey and
Strassel, 2020), including resources for Yoruba and
Hausa (even though the latter "fell short" accord-
ing to the authors). Estonian coreference resolu-
tion is targeted by Kübler and Zhekova (2016), but
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Natural_language_processing#Common_NLP_
Tasks
Low-resource surveys
Cieri et al. (2016) , Magueresse et al. (2020)
Method-speciﬁc
Active learning
Olsson (2009), Settles (2009), Aggarwal et al. (2014)
Distant supervision
Roth et al. (2013), Smirnova and Cudré-Mauroux (2018), Shi et al. (2019).
Unsupervised domain adaptation
Wilson and Cook (2020), Ramponi and Plank (2020)
Meta-Learning
Hospedales et al. (2020)
Multilingual transfer
Steinberger (2012), Ruder et al. (2019)
LM pre-training
Rogers et al. (2021), Qiu et al. (2020)
Machine translation
Liu et al. (2019)
Label noise handling
Frénay and Verleysen (2013), Algan and Ulusoy (2021)
Transfer learning
Pan and Yang (2009), Weiss et al. (2016), Tan et al. (2018)
Language-
African languages
Grover et al. (2010), De Pauw et al. (2011)
Arabic languages
Al-Ayyoub et al. (2018), Guellil et al. (2019), Younes et al. (2020)
American languages
Mager et al. (2018)
South-Asian languages
Daud et al. (2017), Banik et al. (2019), Harish and Rangan (2020)
East-Asian languages
Yude (2011)
Table 2: Overview of existing surveys on low-resource topics.
the available resources are very limited. Estonian
sentiment is done by Pajupuu et al. (2016). All
languages are covered by the multilingual fasttext
embeddings (Bojanowski et al., 2017) and byte-
pair-encoding embeddings (Heinzerling and Strube,
2018). Yoruba, Hausa and Estonian are covered by
mBERT or XLM-RoBERTa as well.
Text summarization is done for Estonian by
Müürisep and Mutso (2005) and for Hausa by
Bashir et al. (2017). The EXTREME benchmark
(Hu et al., 2020) covers question answering and
natural language inference tasks for Yoruba and Es-
tonian (besides NER, POS tagging and more). Pub-
licly available systems for optical character recog-
nition support all six languages (Hakro et al., 2016).
All these tasks are supported for the English lan-
guage as well, and most often, the English datasets
are many times larger and of much higher quality.
Some of the previously mentioned datasets were au-
tomatically translated, as in the EXTREME bench-
mark for several languages. As outlined in the
main paper, we do not claim that all tasks marked
in the Table yield high-performance model, but we
instead indicate if any resources or models can be
found for a language.
Group
Task
Yoruba
Hausa
Quechuan
Nahuatl
Estonian
Num-Speakers
40 mil.
60 mil.
8 mil.
1.7 mil.
1.3 mil.
Text processing
Word segmentation





Optical character recognition
Hakro et al. (2016)
Hakro et al. (2016)
Hakro et al. (2016)
Hakro et al. (2016)
Hakro et al. (2016)
Morphological analysis
Lemmatization / Stemming
Cotterell et al. (2018)
Cotterell et al. (2018)
Cotterell et al. (2018) Martínez-Gil et al. (2012)
Cotterell et al. (2018)
Part-of-Speech tagging
Nivre et al. (2020)
Tukur et al. (2019)
Lozano et al. (2013)

Nivre et al. (2020)
Syntactic analysis
Sentence breaking





Parsing
Nivre et al. (2020)

Nivre et al. (2020)

Nivre et al. (2020)
Distributional semantics Word embeddings
FT, BPEmb
FT, BPEmb
FT, BPEmb
FT, BPEmb
FT, BPEmb
Transformer models
mBERT
XLM-R


mBERT, XLM-R
Lexical semantics
Named entity recognition
Adelani et al. (2020)
Adelani et al. (2020)
Pan et al. (2017)
Pan et al. (2017)
Tkachenko et al. (2013)
Sentiment analysis




Pajupuu et al. (2016)
Relational semantics
Relationship extraction





Semantic Role Labelling
Tracey and Strassel (2020) Tracey and Strassel (2020)



Semantic Parsing
Nivre et al. (2020)



Nivre et al. (2020)
Discourse
Coreference resolution




Kübler and Zhekova (2016)
Discourse analysis




Textual entailment
Hu et al. (2020)



Hu et al. (2020)
Higher-level NLP
Text summarization

Bashir et al. (2017)


Müürisep and Mutso (2005)
Dialogue management





Question answering (QA)
Hu et al. (2020)



Hu et al. (2020)
SUM
13
10
8
6
15
Table 3: Overview of tasks covered by six different languages. Note that this list is non-exhaustive and due to space reasons we only give one reference per language and task.
