Title: Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12603v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:2107.12603v1  [cs.CL]  27 Jul 2021
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language
Processing: A Survey
Ming Liu, Stella Ho, Mengqi Wang, Longxiang Gao, Yuan Jin, He Zhang
Deakin University
Abstract. Federated Learning aims to learn machine learning models
from multiple decentralized edge devices (e.g. mobiles) or servers with-
out sacriﬁcing local data privacy. Recent Natural Language Processing
techniques rely on deep learning and large pre-trained language models.
However, both big deep neural and language models are trained with
huge amounts of data which often lies on the server side. Since text
data is widely originated from end users, in this work, we look into re-
cent NLP models and techniques which use federated learning as the
learning framework. Our survey discusses major challenges in federated
natural language processing, including the algorithm challenges, system
challenges as well as the privacy issues. We also provide a critical review
of the existing Federated NLP evaluation methods and tools. Finally, we
highlight the current research gaps and future directions.
Keywords: Federated Learning · Natural Language Processing · Lan-
guage Modelling · Privacy.
1
Introduction
Modern machine learning algorithms rely on big amounts of data, especially
when training deep neural models from high dimensional data such as text and
image. Most data naturally come from end users, which are distributed and
separated by diﬀerent end devices. It is necessary to learn well performed ma-
chine learning models while preserving users’ privacy. Federated learning (FL)
has become a new machine learning paradigm to train a model across multiple
decentralized edge devices or servers holding local data samples without ex-
changing them. The term federated learning was ﬁrst proposed in 2016 by [40]:
”We term our approach Federated Learning, since the learning task is solved by
a loose federation of participating devices (which we refer to as clients) which
are coordinated by a central server.” In the real world scenario, organizations
such as diﬀerent hospitals hold conﬁdential data, while these hospitals would like
to train a disease classiﬁcation model for common use, it is hard to ask them
to upload their own data to the cloud. Even within the same hospital, diﬀerent
departments often save patients’ information locally. Another example is human
beings create lots of text data by their smartphones, these data are building
blocks for now-days big language models. However, it is shown that most lan-
guage models suﬀer from ethic problems, since they may leak users’ personal
information in an unexpected way.
2
L. Ming et al.
Recent eﬀorts in federated learning have been devoted to interdisciplinary ar-
eas: not only machine learning is required, but also techniques from distributed
optimization, statistics, cybersecurity, communication, systems, cryptography
and many more. Meanwhile, the data ranges from structured to unstructured
format, which is not limited to tabulars, time series and images. Among most
federated learning studies, Google has led the use of federated learning in Nat-
ural Language Processing through Gboard mobile keyboard, Pixel phones and
Android Messages. While Google has launched several applications on langauge
modeling tasks, Apple is using FL for wake-up word detection in Siri, doc.ai
is developing cross-device FL solutions for biomedical research, and Snips has
introduced cross-device FL for hotword detection.
In this paper, we take a survey on the existing FL algorithms for Natural
Language Processing (NLP). Starting from language modeling, we will review
current federated learning algorithms on various NLP tasks: classiﬁcation, rec-
ommendation, speech recognition and health text mining and others . We or-
ganize the survey as follows: in Section 2, basic federated learning concepts,
frameworks, optimization toward non-IID data, privacy are discussed. Section
3 reviews federated learning in NLP. Section 4 discusses the common evalua-
tion aspects and tools. Section 5 highlights current research challenges and some
future directions. Section 6 gives the conclusion.
2
Federated learning
In this section, we ﬁrst review basics of federated learning, including the prob-
lem setup, non-iid data distribution, frameworks, optimization algorithms and
privacy preservation. Then, we extend federated learning to other distributed
machine learning paradigms and discuss their diﬀerence.
Problem formulation In this wrok, we consider the following distributed opti-
mization process:
minw{L(w) = PN
k=1 pkLk(w)},
where N is the total number of user devices, pk is the weight of the k-th device
such that pk ≥0 and PN
k=1 pk = 1. Suppose the k-th device has the amount of
nk training data: xk = (xk,1, xk,2, ..., xk,nk). The local training objective Lk(.)is
deﬁned by:
Lk(w) =
1
nk
Pnk
j=1 l(w; xk,j),
where l(.; .) is a user-speciﬁed loss function.
Non-IID data and Learning Strategies Typical centralized supervised learning
algorithms have the IID assumption, i.e., the training and test data is indepen-
dently identically distributed. In decentralized settings like federated learning,
non-IID poses a challenge because the diﬀerent data distribution result in signiﬁ-
cant skewness across devices or locations. Non-IID data among devices/locations
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
3
encompass many diﬀerent forms. There can be skewed distribution of features
(probability P(x)), labels (probability P(y)), or the relationship between features
and labels (e.g., varying P(y|x) or P(x|y)) among devices/locations. Previous
reviews categorized this this as horizontal, vertical and hybrid data partitions
in Federated Learning. In this review, we focus on skewed distribution of labels,
i.e., PPi(y) ̸= PPj(y) for diﬀerent data partitions Pi and Pj.
Previous study has shown DNN models with batch normalization suﬀer from
Non-IID data [25], the accuracy of FL reduces signiﬁcantly by up to 55% for
neural networks trained for highly skewed non-IID data [69], where each clinet
device trains only on a single class of data.
Common techiniques to deal with non-IID include:
– data augmentation: create a common dataset which can be shared globally,
the dataset can come from a publicly available proxy data source [69], or
perhaps a distillation of the raw data following [61].
– schedule client participation during training : FedFMC, FedCD, cluster sim-
ilar devices / multi-center/ hirarchical clustering of local updates, FedPD,
adapts the communication frequency of decentralized learning algorithms to
the (skew-induced) accuracy loss between data partitions [25]
– greater number of models, but more communication cost:
– ensemble: similar to scheduling
– regularization on the server, e.g. FedAwS, server imposes a geo- metric reg-
ularizer after each round to encourage classes to be spreadout in the embed-
ding space
– personalized FL/ continual local training, based on MAML
Optimization While a variety of studies have made assumptions for the per-
client optimization functions in the IID setting, we review basic convergence
results for H-smooth convex functions under the assumption that the variance
of the stochastic gradients is bounded by σ2. Given the following notations in
a standard FL setting: N is the total number of clients, M is the number of
participated clients per round, T is the total number of communication rounds,
K is the local SGD steps per round. Federated averaging can conducted in either
of the following two settings: one is to keep x ﬁxed in local updates during each
round and compute a total of KM gradients at the current x, in order to run
accelerated minibatch SGD, the convergence rate is then upper bounded by
O( H
T 2 +
µ
√
T KM ). The other is to ignore all but 1 of the M active clients, which
allows sequential SGD to run for KT steps, this approach has an upper bound of
O(
H
(T K)2 +
µ
√
T K ). As in the non-IID settings, key assumptions are given for inter-
client gradient, local functions on each client and other participation constraints.
A detailed discussion of diﬀerent convergence rates for non-IID setting can be
found in [30].
Frameworks There are three basic frameworks for FL: centralized, decentral-
ized and heterogeneous. In the centralized federated learning setting, a central
server is used to orchestrate the diﬀerent steps of the algorithms and coordinate
4
L. Ming et al.
all the participating nodes during the learning process. The server is responsi-
ble for the nodes selection at the beginning of the training process and for the
aggregation of the received model updates. Since all the selected nodes have
to send updates to a single entity, the server may become a bottleneck of the
system. Most NLP applications like keyboard word prediction is using the ce-
tralized setting. In the decentralized federated learning setting, the nodes are
able to coordinate themselves to obtain the global model. This setup prevents
single point failures as the model updates are exchanged only between intercon-
nected nodes without the orchestration of the central server. Nevertheless, the
speciﬁc network topology may aﬀect the performances of the learning process.
Most blockchain-based federated learning falls into the decentralized setting. An
increasing number of application domains involve a large set of heterogeneous
clients, e.g., mobile phones and IoT devices. Most of the existing Federated learn-
ing strategies assume that local models share the same global model architecture.
Recently, a new federated learning framework named HeteroFL was developed
to address heterogeneous clients equipped with very diﬀerent computation and
communication capabilities. The HeteroFL technique can enable the training of
heterogeneous local models with dynamically-varying computation complexities
while still producing a single global inference model.
Privacy In most FL settings, privacy preservation is conducted to make sure
users’ information is not leaked during the learning process. Physically, local
data is not allowed to leave end users’ devises. However, it is still possible to re-
construct the original data by taking the model weights or gradients. Therefore,
we consider privacy preservstion on three aspects in FL: users’ personal informa-
tion, local data and machine learning models. Take the smart phone keyboard
next word prediction as an example, users personal information refers to facts
about their location, name, sex as well as hidden information like keyboard typ-
ing pattern. Local data then concludes the messages, photos and videos in their
phones, while a machine learning model could be the a language model which
predicts the next word given some preceding words. Users’ personal information
is often correlated with the local data, e.g., a person’s age can be inferred with
his/her chat messages.
Common techniques for privacy preservation of user data includes: diﬀerential
privacy [10], secure Multi-Party Computation [15], homomorphic encryption [43]
and trusted execution environments [11]. Veriﬁability enables parties to prove
that they have executed their parts of a computation faithfully. Techniques for
veriﬁability include both zero knowledge proofs (ZKPs) [13] and trusted ex-
ecution environments (TEEs) [11]. As for model attack, adversarial learning
techniques can be leveraged in FL setting,
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
5
3
Federated learning in NLP
3.1
Language modeling
A language model (LM) refers to a model that provides probabilities of word
sequences through an unsupervised distribution estimation. As an essential com-
ponent for NLP systems, LM is utilised in a variety of NLP tasks, i.e., machine
translation, text classiﬁcation, relation extraction, question-answering, etc. In
FL, most LMs are deployed on a virtual mobile keyboard, i.e., the Google Key-
board (Gboard). Thereby, recent literature are mostly produced by authors from
Google, LLC. Recent works on language modelling in Federated NLP mainly
target on solving a word-level LM problem in mobile industry. That is mobile
keyboard suggestion, which is a well representative of federated NLP applica-
tions. To improve mobile keyboard suggestions, federated NLP models aim to be
more reliable and resilient. Existing models oﬀer quality improvements in typing
or even expression (e.g., emoji) domains, such as next-world predictions, emoji
predictions, query suggestions, etc.
Considering the characteristics of mobile devices, a decentralized computa-
tion approach is constrained by computation resource and low-latency require-
ment. A mobile device has limited RAM and CPU budgets, while we expect
keyboards to provide a quick and visible response of an input event within 20
milliseconds. Thereby, the model deployed in client sides should perform fast
inference.
Most works [67,20,47,5,29,52,58] consider variants of LSTMs [24] as the client
model. Given the limited computation budget on each device, we expect the pa-
rameter space of a neural language model to be as small as possible without
degrading model performance. CIFG [17] is a promising candidate to diminish
LM’s complexity and inference-time latency. It employs a single gate to harness
both the input and recurrent cell self-connections. In such a way, the amount of
parameters is downsized by 25 % [17]. [20] leverages CIFG for next word pre-
dictions, and simpliﬁes the CIFG model by removing peephole connections. To
further optimise the model in size and training time, they ties input embedding
and CIFG output projection matrices. [47] applies a pretrained CIFG network
as an emoji prediction model. In particular, the pretraining process involves all
layers, excluding the output projection layer, using a language learning task. To
enhance performance, the authors enable embedding sharing between inputs and
outputs. The pretraining of LM exhibits fast convergence for the emoji model.
[5] employs a character-level RNN [63], targeting on out-of-vocabulary(OOV)
learning tasks, under FL settings. Speciﬁcally, they use CIFG with peephole con-
nections and a projection layer. The projection layer diminishes the dimension
of output and accelerates the training. They use multi-layer LSTMs to enhance
the representation power of the model, which learns the probability of word oc-
currence. GRU [8] is another simpler variant of the LSTM. [29] leverage GRU as
the neural language model for mobile keyboard next-word predictions. Similar
to CIFG, it reduces the model complexity on parameter spaces without hurting
the model performance. To downsize the amount of trainable parameters, they
6
L. Ming et al.
also apply tied embedding in the embedding layer and output layer by share of
the weights and biases.
[67] proposes another LM for keyboard query suggestions to reduce the bur-
den of training LSTMs. Speciﬁcally, they train a LSTM model on the server for
generating suggestion candidates, while merely federated training a triggering
model, that decides the occurrence of the candidates. The triggering model uses
logistic regression to infer the probability of a user click, signiﬁcantly lessening
the computation budgets in comparison of RNN models. [6] also states the di-
rect use of RNN is not the proper means to decode due to its large parameters
size, which further causes slow inference. Hereby, they propose to leverage a n-
gram LM that derived from a federated RNN for decoding. In particular, they
overcome large memory footprints problem and enhance model performance by
introducing an approximation algorithm based on SampleApprox [57]. It approx-
imates RNN models into n-gram models. Still, they use CIFG and group-LSTM
(GLSTM) [32] for approximation. While, GPT2 [46] is one of the state-of-the-art
transformer-based LMs with 1.5 billion parameters. Considering its performance
on centralized language modeling tasks, [52] uses GPT2 as LM. They propose
a dimensionality reduction algorithm to downsize the dimension of GPT2 word
embedding to desired values (100 and 300).
For federated optimization, existing federated optimization algorithms diﬀer
in client model aggregation on the server-side. In federated language modeling,
most existing works [67,20,6,47,5,52,58] use FedAvg as the federated optimiza-
tion algorithm. Another optimization strategy, called FedAtt, has also shown its
feasibility and validity in language models [29].
In FedAvg, gradients, that computed locally over a large population of clients,
are aggregated by the server to build a novel global model. Every client is trained
by locally stored data and computes the average gradient with the current global
model via one or more steps of SGD. Then, it communicates model updates with
the server. The server performs the weighted aggregation of the client updates
to build a novel global model. Client updates are immediately abandoned on
the sever once the accumulation is completed. [20] trains the global model from
scratch in the server, using FedAvg. Speciﬁcally, the initial global model has
either been randomly initialized or pretrained on proxy data. However, it in-
creases the federated training rounds on clients. Thereby, it leads to a high
communication and computation costs in FL. They also use SGD as the server-
sided optimizer for training. They found Adam and AdaGrad provide no ben-
eﬁcial improvement on convergence. [52] introduces a novel federated training
approach, called central pre-training with federated ﬁne-tuning. To address the
drawback in [20], the server pretrains a model with centralized and public data
as the global model at the initial time. Each clients then obtains the pretrained
weights as the initial weights, and later trained on local data in a federated
fashion. But the improvement is limited to large network, i.e., GPT2. They also
propose a pretrained word embedding layer for federated training, which only
enhance accuracy for the large word embedding network (i.e., GPT2). Whereas,
with the combination of pretraining models, it harms the performance. They
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
7
leverage Adam as the optimizer for training. [5] uses momentum and adaptive
L2-norm clipping on each client’s gradient in FedAvg, leading to a faster con-
vergence. The authors argue momentum and adaptive clipping performed on
gradients improves the robustness of model convergence and performance. [58]
also uses clipping for regularization in FedAvg by setting the upper bound of
user updating to constrain each client contribution (i.e., clipping). In addition,
[47] founds using momentum with Nesterov accelerated gradients signiﬁcantly
outperforms using SGD as server optimizer, in terms of convergence rate and
model performance. [6] applies Nesterov momentum as both the local and the
server optimizer.
[29] ﬁrst introduces the attention mechanism into federated aggregation of
client models. This optimization algorithm is referred as Attentive Federated
Aggregation (FedAtt). It is a layer-wise soft attention mechanism applied on
the trained parameters of the NN model. Intuitively, the federated optimization
algorithm learns to optimize the global model by providing a good generalization
on each client model for a quick local adaptation. Hereby, it reduces local training
rounds and saves the computation budgets, further accelerating the learning
process. The generalization in FedAtt is decided by the similarity between each
client and the server, and the relative importance of each client. For a good
generalization, they minimise the weighted summed distance of each client model
and the global model on parameters spaces. They introduce attentive weights
as the weights of the client models. Particularly, the attentive weight of each
client model is a non-parametric attention score derived from each layer of NN.
Diﬀer from pre-trained FedAvg, FedAtt ﬁnds a well-generalized global model on
each federated training round by iteratively updating parameters. Consequently,
it further lessens the federated communication budgets. For local training, the
client-sided optimizer is momentum. While, for global parameters updates, they
uses SGD.
The existing works on federated language modeling mainly contribute on
optimizing model aggregation process, but not focusing on privacy preserving
approach. Adding privacy preserving techniques into federated optimization pro-
cess is seen as a bonus, rather than an essential means of privacy guarantees. In
Federated LMs, the commonly used privacy preserving technique is diﬀerential
privacy (DP) [9]. A DP algorithm is expected to characterize the underlying
probability distribution without compromising personally identiﬁable data. In
general, it injects calibrated noise into the aggregated data while not aﬀecting
the outcomes. Most DP approaches are used for user-level privacy guarantees.
In FL, we deﬁne user-level DP as a privacy guarantees, to preserve the trained
models with or without the presence of any one client’s data. DP usually serves
on the client sides before model aggregation [62]. [29] integrates a randomized
mechanism in FedAtt optimization by introducing a white noise with the mean
of 0 and the standard deviation σ. They also introduce a magnitude coeﬃcient
β ∈(0, 1] to govern the eﬀect of the randomization in FL. However, the level of
its DP guarantees is unrevealed. Hereby, it fails to show the trade-oﬀbetween
data utility and privacy protection for its privacy-preserving countermeasure im-
8
L. Ming et al.
plementation. [58] incorporates the Gaussian mechanism in FedAvg to cope with
the user-based heterogeneity of data in language models. In particular, it per-
form DP guarantees by adding Gaussian noise with a noise multiplier of 1, after
clipping. They argue a high level of DP guarantees exhibits a notable reduction
in unintended memorization, caused by heterogeneity of training data.
3.2
Classiﬁcation
Text Classiﬁcation is procedure of identifying the pre-deﬁned Text Classiﬁca-
tion is the procedure of identifying the pre-deﬁned category for varied-length
of text [1]. It can be extended to many NLP applications including sentiment
analysis, question answering and topic labeling . Traditional text classiﬁcation
tasks can be deconstructed into four steps: text preprocessing, dimension re-
duction, classiﬁcation and evaluation. Though the deep learning models have
achieved state-of-the-art results in text classiﬁcation [41], uploading or sharing
text data to improve model performance is not always feasible due to diﬀer-
ent privacy requirements of clients. For example, ﬁnancial institutions that wish
to train a chatbot for their clients cannot be allowed to upload all text data
from the client-side to their central server due to strict privacy protection state-
ments. Then applying the federated learning paradigm is an approach to solve
the dilemma due to its advances in privacy preservation and collaborative train-
ing. In which, the central server can train a powerful model collaboratively with
diﬀerent local labeled data at client devices without uploading the raw data
considering increasing privacy concerns in public.
However, there are several challenges for applying federated learning to text
classiﬁcation tasks in NLP. One is to design proper aggregating algorithms to
handle the gradients or weights uploaded by diﬀerent client models. Traditional
federated learning can be considered as a special paradigm of distributed learn-
ing, thus aggregating algorithms, such as FedAvg [40], FedAtt [29] has been
proposed to generalize the model on the central server. Considering the un-
evenly distributed data at diﬀerent client devices and diﬀerent amounts of data
at the diﬀerent local datasets. [71] has attempted the text classiﬁcation using the
standard FedAvg algorithm to update the model parameter with local trained
models. It uses diﬀerent local datasets to pre-train the word embeddings, and
then concatenate all word embeddings. After ﬁltering the widths and feature
maps from the concatenated word embeddings, the max-over-time pooling was
used to aggregate the features, thus getting vectors with the same length. Fi-
nally, they use softmax activation on the fully connected layer, it will translate
the vectors to the ﬁnal sentence classiﬁcation results (categories). Later, scien-
tists from the Machine learning area brought in new approaches of uploading
and aggregating, for example, using Knowledge distillation [23]. [22] however
use ﬁne-tuning instead of FedAvg to update parameters. [36] average the logits
outputs from the last layer of the model instead of directly take the average of
model parameters. It then uses knowledge distillation to learn the knowledge
from the client devices instead of traditional.
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
9
In addition, model compression has been introduced to federated text clas-
siﬁcation tasks due to the dilemma of computation restraints on the client-side.
They attempted to reduce the model size on the client-side to enable the real ap-
plication of federated learning. The computation restriction on the client devices
limits the application of traditional FL. For example, 4-layer BERT or 6-layer
BERT is still too large for mobile devices such as smartphones. The scholars
then focus to perform the model compression while still following the federated
learning paradigm. The knowledge distillation then has been applied to transfer
local model information while keeping the model size small at the local devices
in [48]. It utilises knowledge distillation instead of model parameter fusion to up-
date parameters. The soft-label predictions on a public distillation dataset are
sent to the central model to be distilled. Thus, the central model can learn the
local knowledge on client devices through distilling the logits of diﬀerent client
models without sharing or uploading the local model parameters and gradients.
To ensure the privacy preservation of FL while keeping the communication,
the encryption of data is one of the top priority considerations in applying fed-
erated learning in NLP. Encryption on communication between edge-device and
central server is a standard approach in federated learning to preserve privacy
for end-users on edge devices. [71] adds encryption on client-central server com-
munication using diﬀerential privacy. It used the approach [60] proposed the
attack-adaptive aggregation which prevent the attack at the central server ag-
gregation module.
To overcome the communication dilemma of FL, one-shot or few-shot feder-
ated learning was proposed to allow the central server can successfully train the
central model with only one or a few rounds of communication under poor com-
munication scenarios. However, the shared data restriction of federated learning
is still left to be solved. Considering the trend of higher restriction of data shar-
ing and uploading, it will be harder to get a suﬃcient size of data shared to
both central servers and client servers. In this way, the knowledge distillation
cannot be used to solve the model compression problem in federated learning.
[70] reduced the communication of previous federated learning by utilising the
soft labels dataset distillation mentioned in [18] and [54]. It thus successfully
extend the soft-labeling methods to two new techniques: soft-reset and random
masking, and then successfully using the dataset distillation [61] to realise the
one-round communication federated learning for text classiﬁcation tasks. Each
client in [70] distils their local dataset to a much smaller synthetic one, and then
only uploads the small-sized synthetic dataset to the server. Thus, no gradients
or weights is transmitting from the client model to the central server model. The
distilled dataset can be as small as one data sample per category, in this way
the communication in federated learning can be reduced to as low as one round.
3.3
Speech Recognition
Speech recognition is the task of recognising speech within audio and converting
it into text. Voice assistants such as Amazon Alexa or Apple Siri use on-device
processing to detect wake-up words (e.g. ”Hey Siri”), which is a typical usage
10
L. Ming et al.
for speech recognition on smartphones. Only when the wake-up words are de-
tected, further processing like information retrieval or question answering will
be running on the cloud. Methods for speech recognition include dynamic time
wraping [42], Hidden Markov Models [45] and modern end-to-end deep neural
models [16]. More recently, wav2vec [3] masks the speech input in the latent
space and solves a contrastive task deﬁned over a quantization of the latent rep-
resentations which are jointly learned, this method demonstrates the feasibility
of speech recognition with limited amounts of labeled data.
On device wake-up word detectors face two main challenges: First, it should
run with minimal memory footprint and computational cost. Second, the wake
word detector should behave consistently in any usage setting, and show robust-
ness to background noise. [68] performed neural network architecture evaluation
and exploration for running keyword spotting on resource-constrained microcon-
trollers, they showed that it is possible to optimize these neural network archi-
tectures to ﬁt within the memory and compute constraints of microcontrollers
without sacriﬁcing accuracy. [34] investigated the use of federated learning on
crowdsourced speech data to learn a resource-constrained wake word detector.
They showed that a revisited Federated Averaging algorithm with per-coordinate
averaging based on Adam in place of standard global averaging allows the train-
ing to reach a target stopping criterion of 95% recall per 5 FAH within 100 com-
munication rounds on their crowdsourced dataset for an associated upstream
communication costs per client of 8MB. They also open sourced the Hey Snips
wake word dataset 1. [65] proposed a decentralized feature extraction approach
in federated learning to address privacy-preservation issues for speech recog-
nition, which is built upon a quantum convolutional neural network (QCNN)
composed of a quantum circuit encoder for feature extraction, and a recurrent
neural network (RNN) based end-to-end acoustic model (AM). The proposed
decentralized framework takes advantage of the quantum learning progress to
secure models and to avoid privacy leakage attacks. [19] introduced a framework
for speech recognition by which the degree of non-IID-ness can be varied, con-
sequently illustrating a trade-oﬀbetween model quality and the computational
cost of federated training. They also showed that hyperparameter optimization
and appropriate use of variational noise are suﬃcient to compensate for the
quality impact of non-IID distributions, while decreasing the cost.
3.4
Sequence Tagging
Sequence tagging, e.g. POS tagging, Named Entity Recognition, plays an impor-
tant role in both natural language understanding and information extraction.
Statistical models like Hidden Markov Model and Conditional Random Fields
were heavily used, modern approaches rely on deep representations from Recur-
rent Neural Net, Convolution Neural Net or transformer like architectures. A few
recent works focus on biomedical Named Entity Recognition in the federated set-
ting. [39] pretrained and ﬁne tuned BERT models for NER tasks in a federated
1 http:// research.snips.ai/datasets/keyword-spotting
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
11
manner using clinical texts, their results suggested that conducting pretraining
and ﬁne tuning in a federated manner using data from diﬀerent silos resulted
in reduced performance compared with training on centralized data. This loss
of performance is mainly due to separation of data as ”federated communica-
tion loss” . Given the limit of data access, the experiments were conducted with
clinical notes from a single healthcare system to simulate diﬀerent silos. [14]
proposed a FedNER method for medical NER, they decomposed the medical
NER model in each platform into a shared module and a private module. The
private module was updated in each platform using the local data to model the
platform-speciﬁc characteristics. The shared module was used to capture the
shareable knowledge among diﬀerent platforms, and was updated in a server
based on the aggregated gradients from multiple platforms. The private module
consists of two top layers in our medical NER model, i.e, Bi-LSTM and CRF,
which aim to learn platform-speciﬁc context representations and label decoding
strategies. The private module was only trained with local data and exchange
neither its parameters nor gradients. The shared module consisted of the other
bottom layers in our NER model, such as the word-level CNN and all types of
embedding. Diﬀerent from the private module, the shared one mainly aims to
capture the semantic information in texts. [56] introduced a privacy preserving
medical relation extraction model based on federated learning, they leveraged
a strategy based on knowledge distillation. Such a strategy uses the uploaded
predictions of ensemble local models to train the central model without requiring
uploading local parameters.
3.5
Recommendation
Recommendation systems are heavily data-driven. Typical recommendation mod-
els use collaborative ﬁltering methods [55], in which past user item interactions
are suﬃcient to detect similar users and/or similar items and make predictions
based on these estimated proximities. Collaborative ﬁltering algorithms can be
further divided into two sub-categories that are generally called memory based
and model based approaches. Memory based approaches directly works with
values of recorded interactions, assuming no model, and are essentially based
on nearest neighbours search (for example, ﬁnd the closest users from a user of
interest and suggest the most popular items among these neighbours). Model
based approaches assume an underlying “generative” model that explains the
user-item interactions and try to discover it in order to make new predictions.
Unlike collaborative methods that only rely on the user-item interactions, con-
tent based approaches [44] use additional information about users and/or items.
If we consider the example of a movies recommendation system, this additional
information can be, for example, the age, the sex, the job or any other personal
information for users as well as the category, the main actors, the duration or
other characteristics for the movies (items).
Given diﬀerent partitions of users and items, federated recommendation mod-
els can be horizontal, vertical or transfered. In horizontal federated recommen-
dation systems, items are shared but users belong to diﬀerent parties. A typical
12
L. Ming et al.
work is Federated Collaborative Filter (FCF) [2] proposed to use a central server
to keep the item latent factor matrix, while the user latent factors are stored
locally on each device. In the training time, the server distributes the item la-
tent factor to each party, the participants update their user latent factor by
local rating matrix data and send the item latent factor updates back to the
server for aggregation. To avoid the inter trust problem, [21] introduced a fully
decentralized setting where participants have full access to the item latent factor
and communicate with each other to update the model. Moreover, meta learn-
ing has been used for personalized federated recommendation. [12] designed a
meta learner to learn generalized model parameters for each participant, then
each participant’s recommendation is regarded as a personalized task where a
support set is used to generate the recommendation model and the gradient is
computed on a query set. [28] introduced another fedrated meta learning algo-
rithm for recommendation, in which separate support and query sets are not
necessary. Their approach performs relatively well within less amount of train-
ing episodes. Besides, [35] proposed DiFacto, which is a distributed factorization
method and addressed the eﬃciency problem when it comes to large scale user
item matrices. In comparison, vertical federated systems have been designed for
feature distributed learning problem where participants hold diﬀerent feature
sets. [26] proposed an asynchronous stochastic gradient descent algorithm. Each
party could use an arbitrary model to map its local features to a local prediction.
Then local predictions from diﬀerent parties are aggregated into a ﬁnal output
using linear and nonlinear transformations. The training procedure of each party
is allowed to be at various iterations up to a bounded delay. This approach does
not share any raw data and local models. Therefore, it has fewer privacy risks.
Besides, for a higher level of privacy, it can easily incorporate the DP technique.
Similar to horizontal FedRec, there are also works that further utilize cryptog-
raphy techniques. [7] presented a secure gradient-tree boosting algorithm. This
algorithm adopts HE methods to provide lossless performance as well as pre-
serving privacy. And [51] proposed a secure linear regression algorithm. MPC
protocols are designed using garbled circuits to obtain a highly scalable solu-
tion. Parties of vertical FedRec could also be two recommenders with diﬀerent
item sets. For instance, a movie RecSys and a book RecSys have a large user
overlapping but diﬀerent items to recommend. It is assumed that users share a
similar taste in movies with books. With FedRec, the two parties want to train
better recommendation algorithms together in a secure and privacy-preserving
way. [50] proposed a secure, distributed item-based CF method. It jointly im-
proves the eﬀect of several RecSys, which oﬀer diﬀerent subsets of items to the
same underlying population of users. Both the predicted ratings of items and
their predicted rankings could be computed without compromising privacy nor
predictions’ accuracy. We refer readers to [66] for more detailed discussion for
federated recommendation systems.
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
13
3.6
Health Text Mining
Federated learning has emerged as an important framework for health text min-
ing, due to the privacy concern among diﬀerent hospitals and medical organi-
zations. Besides, most health data exhibits systemic bias towards some speciﬁc
groups or patterns, e.g. hospitals, diseases and communities. Again, this non-IID
issue raises big challenges when applying federated learning into heath text min-
ing tasks. There have been some tasks that were studied in federated learning
setting in healthcare, including patient similarity learning [33], patient repre-
sentation learning and phenotyping [31,38], predictive or classiﬁcation modeling
[4,27,49], biomedical named entity recognition.
Speciﬁcally, [38] designed a two-stage federated approach for medical record
classiﬁcation. In the ﬁrst stage, they pre-trained a patient representation model
by training an neural network to predict ICD and CPT codes from the text of the
notes. In the second stage, a phenotyping machine learning model was trained in
a federated manner using clinical notes that are distributed across multiple sites
for the target phenotype. In this stage, the notes mapped to ﬁxed-length rep-
resentations from stage one are used as input features and whether the patient
has a certain disease is used as a label with one of the three classes: presence,
absence or questionable. [37] proposed a simple federated architecture for early
detection of Type-2 diabetes. After comparing the proposed federated learning
model against the centralised approach, they showed that the federated learning
model ensures signiﬁcant privacy over centralised learning model whereas com-
promising accuracy for a subtle extend. To cope with the imbalanced and non-IID
distribution inherent in user’s monitoring data, [64] designed a generative convo-
lutional autoencoder (GCAE), which aims to achieve accurate and personalized
health monitoring by reﬁning the model with a generated class-balanced dataset
from user’s personal data. It is noticed that GCAE is lightweight to transfer
between the cloud and edges, which is useful to reduce the communication cost
of federated learning in FedHome. [53] described a federated approach on a brain
age prediction model on structural MRI scans distributed across multiple sites
with diverse amounts of data and subject (age) distributions. In these heteroge-
neous environments, a Semi-Synchronous protocol provides faster convergence.
3.7
Other NLP Tasks
More recently, FedNLP provided a research-oriented benchmarking framework
for advancing federated learning (FL) in natural language processing (NLP). It
uses FedML repository as the git submodule. In other words, FedNLP only fo-
cuses on adavanced models and dataset, while FedML supports various federated
optimizers (e.g., FedAvg) and platforms (Distributed Computing, IoT/Mobile,
Standalone). A text generation example can also be found in TensorFlow Tuto-
rial 2. So far, we have not found any work on other generation works on Machine
Translation and Summatization.
2 https://colab.research.google.com/github/tensorﬂow/federated/blob/master/docs/tutorials
/federated learning for text generation.ipynb#scrollTo=iPFgLeZIsZ3Q
14
L. Ming et al.
4
Benchmarks
4.1
Evaluation Aspects
Model Evaluation In principle, FL based NLP models should not only be evalu-
ated against traditional performance metrics (such as model accuracy), but also
the change of model performance with diﬀerent system and data settings. Vari-
ous systems settings consider the number of nodes, the weight of the nodes, the
quality of the nodes. While the data setting focus on diﬀerent data distribution
caused by either label bias or feature bias.
Communication Evaluation There is no doubt that the communication rounds of
nodes play an important role in the performance of the model. Due to the uncer-
tainty of the federated network, communication is huge resource consumption.
There is always a natural trade oﬀbetween computation and communication
among the nodes and server.
Privacy Evaluation The goal of privacy metrics is to measure the degree of
privacy enjoyed by users in a system and the amount of protection oﬀered by
privacy-enhancing technologies. [59] discussed a selection of over eighty privacy
metrics and introduce categorizations based on the aspect of privacy they mea-
sure, their required inputs, and the type of data that needs protection. In general,
privacy metrics can be classiﬁed with four common characteristics: adversary
models, data sources, inputs and output meatures.
User Response Evaluation Apart from the above automatic evaluation meth-
ods, on-line FL-based NLP models also consider the response from users, e.g.
FL language models take next word click rate as an important metric, FL rec-
ommendation systems would not only like to keep old customers but also attract
new customers.
4.2
Tools
There are a few tools for common federated learning, including PySyft 3, TFF
4, FATE 5, Tensor/IO 6, FedML 7 and FedNLP 8. PySyft decouples private
data from model training using federated learning, DP and MPC within Py-
Torch. With TFF, TensorFlow provides users with a ﬂexible and open framework
through which they can simulate distributed computing locally. FATE support
the Federated AI ecosystem, where a secure computing protocol is implemented
based on homomorphic encryption and MPC. Tensor/IO is a lightweight cross-
platform library for on-device machine learning, bringing the power of Tensor-
Flow and TensorFlow Lite to iOS, Android, and React native applications.
3 https://github.com/OpenMined/PySyft
4 https://www.tensorﬂow.org/federated
5 https://github.com/FederatedAI/FATE
6 https://doc-ai.github.io/tensorio/
7 https://github.com/FedML-AI/FedML
8 https://github.com/FedML-AI/FedNLP
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
15
5
Challenges and Future Directions
5.1
Algorithm-Level
Big language models Since the paradigm pre-training + ﬁne tuning has domi-
nated most NLP tasks, pre-trained language models such as BERT and GPT are
useful and transferable to develop downstream tasks. Often times the larger the
pre-trained language model is, the more likely it will be for downstream model
performance. However, in the FL setting, it is not possible to allocate large size
language models like GPT-3 on the participants. Technique like knowledge dis-
tillation could be useful, it remains unknown whether downsized language can
maintain the performance.
Non-iid Data distributions Real world data from diﬀerent participants is always
non-iid, the challenge is how to learn from high quality data and labels. Given
a ﬁxed annotation budget, active learning may be leveraged to not only select
signiﬁcant data points, but also actively choose worthwhile participants. Fur-
thermore, weakly supervised learning and meta learning algorithms may also be
used to use more unlabeled data from diﬀerent participants.
Personalization Personalized FL can be viewed as an intermediate paradigm be-
tween the server-based FL paradigm that produces a global model and the local
model training paradigm. The challenge is to strike a careful balance between
local task-speciﬁc knowledge and shared knowledge useful for the generaliza-
tion properties of FL models. For most deep NLP models, techniques like early
shaping, sample weighing and transfer learning can be explored.
5.2
System-Level
Spatial Adaptability This refers to the ability of the FL system to handle varia-
tions across client data sets as a result of (i) the addition of new clients, and/or
(ii) dropouts and stragglers. These are practical issues prevalent in complex
edge computing environments, where there is signiﬁcant variability in hardware
capabilities in terms of computation, memory, power and network connectivity
Computation Communication Trade-oﬀFrequent and large scale deployment
of updates, monitoring, and debugging for FL NLP models is challenging. The
trade-oﬀbetween local and global update frequency, as well as the communica-
tion frequency can be explored.
Privacy concern Even though FL assumes the data never leave the device, it
is still possible to reconstruct the original data by taking the model weights or
gradients. Privacy preservation on three aspects in FL can be explored: users’
personal information, local data and machine learning models.
16
L. Ming et al.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we review common NLP tasks in the FL setting, including language
modeling, text classiﬁcation, speech recognition, sequence tagging, recommenda-
tion, health text mining and other tasks. In general, the performance federated
NLP models still lie behind that of centralized ones. Also, large scale pre-trained
language models and advanced privacy preservation techniques have not widely
been used in the FL based NLP, which could be the potentials for future re-
search. We point out both algorithm and system level challenges for FL based
NLP models. In the future, we will further evaluate representative NLP models
(e.g. transformers) in the FL environment and give more comparable insights on
real world applications.
References
1. Aggarwal, C.C., Zhai, C.: A survey of text classiﬁcation algorithms. In: Mining
text data, pp. 163–222. Springer (2012)
2. Ammad-Ud-Din, M., Ivannikova, E., Khan, S.A., Oyomno, W., Fu, Q., Tan, K.E.,
Flanagan, A.: Federated collaborative ﬁltering for privacy-preserving personalized
recommendation system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09888 (2019)
3. Baevski, A., Zhou, H., Mohamed, A., Auli, M.: wav2vec 2.0: A framework for
self-supervised learning of speech representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11477
(2020)
4. Brisimi, T.S., Chen, R., Mela, T., Olshevsky, A., Paschalidis, I.C., Shi, W.: Feder-
ated learning of predictive models from federated electronic health records. Inter-
national journal of medical informatics 112, 59–67 (2018)
5. Chen, M., Mathews, R., Ouyang, T., Beaufays, F.: Federated learning of out-of-
vocabulary words. ArXiv abs/1903.10635 (2019)
6. Chen,
M.,
Suresh,
A.T.,
Mathews,
R.,
Wong,
A.,
Allauzen,
C.,
Beau-
fays,
F.,
Riley,
M.:
Federated
learning
of
n-gram
language
models.
In:
Proceedings
of
the
23rd
Conference
on
Computational
Natural
Language
Learning
(CoNLL).
pp.
121–130.
Association
for
Computational
Linguis-
tics, Hong Kong, China (Nov 2019). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/K19-1012,
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/K19-1012
7. Cheng, K., Fan, T., Jin, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, T., Yang, Q.: Secureboost: A lossless
federated learning framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08755 (2019)
8. Cho, K., Merrienboer, B.V., Gulcehre, C., Ba Hdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk,
H., Bengio, Y.: Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
statistical machine translation. Computer Science (2014)
9. Dwork, C., Mcsherry, F., Nissim, K., Smith, A.: Calibrating noise to sensitivity
in private data analysis. In: Proceedings of the Third conference on Theory of
Cryptography (2006)
10. Dwork, C.: Diﬀerential privacy: A survey of results. In: International conference
on theory and applications of models of computation. pp. 1–19. Springer (2008)
11. Ekberg, J.E., Kostiainen, K., Asokan, N.: Trusted execution environments on mo-
bile devices. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer
& communications security. pp. 1497–1498 (2013)
12. Fallah, A., Mokhtari, A., Ozdaglar, A.: Personalized federated learning: A meta-
learning approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07948 (2020)
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
17
13. Feige, U., Fiat, A., Shamir, A.: Zero-knowledge proofs of identity. Journal of cryp-
tology 1(2), 77–94 (1988)
14. Ge, S., Wu, F., Wu, C., Qi, T., Huang, Y., Xie, X.: Fedner: Privacy-preserving
medical named entity recognition with federated learning. arXiv e-prints pp. arXiv–
2003 (2020)
15. Goldreich, O.: Secure multi-party computation. Manuscript. Preliminary version
78 (1998)
16. Graves, A., Jaitly, N.: Towards end-to-end speech recognition with recurrent neural
networks. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 1764–1772. PMLR
(2014)
17. Greﬀ, K., Srivastava, R., Koutn´ık, J., Steunebrink, B., Schmidhuber, J.: Lstm:
A search space odyssey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems 28, 2222–2232 (2017)
18. Guha, N., Talwalkar, A., Smith, V.: One-shot federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.11175 (2019)
19. Guliani, D., Beaufays, F., Motta, G.: Training speech recognition models with fed-
erated learning: A quality/cost framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15965 (2020)
20. Hard, A., Rao, K., Mathews, R., Beaufays, F., Augenstein, S., Eichner, H., Kid-
don, C., Ramage, D.: Federated learning for mobile keyboard prediction. ArXiv
abs/1811.03604 (2018)
21. Heged˝us, I., Danner, G., Jelasity, M.: Decentralized recommendation based on
matrix factorization: a comparison of gossip and federated learning. In: Joint Eu-
ropean Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases.
pp. 317–332. Springer (2019)
22. Hilmkil, A., Callh, S., Barbieri, M., S¨utfeld, L.R., Zec, E.L., Mogren, O.: Scal-
ing federated learning for ﬁne-tuning of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.00875 (2021)
23. Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., Dean, J.: Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2015)
24. Hochreiter, Sepp, Schmidhuber, Jurgen: Long short-term memory. Neural Compu-
tation (1997)
25. Hsieh, K., Phanishayee, A., Mutlu, O., Gibbons, P.: The non-iid data quagmire of
decentralized machine learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
pp. 4387–4398. PMLR (2020)
26. Hu, Y., Niu, D., Yang, J., Zhou, S.: Fdml: A collaborative machine learning frame-
work for distributed features. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. pp. 2232–2240 (2019)
27. Huang, L., Shea, A.L., Qian, H., Masurkar, A., Deng, H., Liu, D.: Patient clustering
improves eﬃciency of federated machine learning to predict mortality and hospi-
tal stay time using distributed electronic medical records. Journal of biomedical
informatics 99, 103291 (2019)
28. Jalalirad, A., Scavuzzo, M., Capota, C., Sprague, M.: A simple and eﬃcient fed-
erated recommender system. In: Proceedings of the 6th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Big Data Computing, Applications and Technologies. pp. 53–58
(2019)
29. Ji, S., Pan, S., Long, G., Li, X., Jiang, J., Huang, Z.: Learning private neural
language modeling with attentive aggregation. 2019 International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IJCNN) pp. 1–8 (2019)
30. Kairouz, P., McMahan, H.B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A.N.,
Bonawitz, K., Charles, Z., Cormode, G., Cummings, R., et al.: Advances and open
problems in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977 (2019)
18
L. Ming et al.
31. Kim, Y., Sun, J., Yu, H., Jiang, X.: Federated tensor factorization for compu-
tational phenotyping. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 887–895 (2017)
32. Kuchaiev, O., Ginsburg, B.: Factorization tricks for lstm networks (2017)
33. Lee, J., Sun, J., Wang, F., Wang, S., Jun, C.H., Jiang, X.: Privacy-preserving
patient similarity learning in a federated environment: development and analysis.
JMIR medical informatics 6(2), e20 (2018)
34. Leroy, D., Coucke, A., Lavril, T., Gisselbrecht, T., Dureau, J.: Federated learning
for keyword spotting. In: ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). pp. 6341–6345. IEEE (2019)
35. Li, M., Liu, Z., Smola, A.J., Wang, Y.X.: Difacto: Distributed factorization ma-
chines. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining. pp. 377–386 (2016)
36. Lin, T., Kong, L., Stich, S.U., Jaggi, M.: Ensemble distillation for robust model
fusion in federated learning (2021)
37. Lincy, M., Kowshalya, A.M.: Early detection of type-2 diabetes using federated
learning (2020)
38. Liu, D., Dligach, D., Miller, T.: Two-stage federated phenotyping and patient rep-
resentation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05596 (2019)
39. Liu, D., Miller, T.: Federated pretraining and ﬁne tuning of bert using clinical
notes from multiple silos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08562 (2020)
40. McMahan, H.B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., y Arcas, B.A.: Federated learn-
ing of deep networks using model averaging. CoRR abs/1602.05629 (2016),
http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05629
41. Minaee, S., Kalchbrenner, N., Cambria, E., Nikzad, N., Chenaghlu, M., Gao, J.:
Deep learning–based text classiﬁcation: A comprehensive review. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 54(3), 1–40 (2021)
42. M¨uller, M.: Dynamic time warping. Information retrieval for music and motion pp.
69–84 (2007)
43. Naehrig, M., Lauter, K., Vaikuntanathan, V.: Can homomorphic encryption be
practical? In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Cloud computing security
workshop. pp. 113–124 (2011)
44. Pazzani, M.J., Billsus, D.: Content-based recommendation systems. In: The adap-
tive web, pp. 325–341. Springer (2007)
45. Rabiner, L., Juang, B.: An introduction to hidden markov models. ieee assp mag-
azine 3(1), 4–16 (1986)
46. Radford, A.: Language models are unsupervised multitask learners
47. Ramaswamy, S.I., Mathews, R., Rao, K., Beaufays, F.: Federated learning for emoji
prediction in a mobile keyboard. ArXiv abs/1906.04329 (2019)
48. Sattler, F., Marban, A., Rischke, R., Samek, W.: Communication-eﬃcient federated
distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00632 (2020)
49. Sharma, P., Shamout, F.E., Clifton, D.A.: Preserving patient privacy while training
a predictive model of in-hospital mortality. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00354 (2019)
50. Shmueli, E., Tassa, T.: Secure multi-party protocols for item-based collaborative
ﬁltering. In: Proceedings of the eleventh ACM conference on recommender systems.
pp. 89–97 (2017)
51. Slavkovic, A.B., Nardi, Y., Tibbits, M.M.: ” secure” logistic regression of horizon-
tally and vertically partitioned distributed databases. In: Seventh IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW 2007). pp. 723–728. IEEE
(2007)
Federated Learning Meets Natural Language Processing: A Survey
19
52. Stremmel, J., Singh, A.: Pretraining federated text models for next word prediction.
ArXiv abs/2005.04828 (2020)
53. Stripelis, D., Ambite, J.L., Lam, P., Thompson, P.: Scaling neuroscience research
using federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08440 (2021)
54. Sucholutsky, I., Schonlau, M.: Soft-label dataset distillation and text dataset dis-
tillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02551 (2019)
55. Suganeshwari, G., Ibrahim, S.S.: A survey on collaborative ﬁltering based rec-
ommendation system. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Big
Data and Cloud Computing Challenges (ISBCC–16’). pp. 503–518. Springer (2016)
56. Sui, D., Chen, Y., Zhao, J., Jia, Y., Xie, Y., Sun, W.: Feded: Federated learning via
ensemble distillation for medical relation extraction. In: Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). pp.
2118–2128 (2020)
57. Suresh, A.T., Roark, B., Riley, M., Schogol, V.: Approximating probabilistic mod-
els as weighted ﬁnite automata. ArXiv abs/1905.08701 (2019)
58. Thakkar, O., Ramaswamy, S.I., Mathews, R., Beaufays, F.: Understanding unin-
tended memorization in federated learning. ArXiv abs/2006.07490 (2020)
59. Wagner, I., Eckhoﬀ, D.: Technical privacy metrics: a systematic survey. ACM Com-
puting Surveys (CSUR) 51(3), 1–38 (2018)
60. Wan, C.P., Chen, Q.: Robust federated learning with attack-adaptive aggregation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05257 (2021)
61. Wang, T., Zhu, J.Y., Torralba, A., Efros, A.A.: Dataset distillation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.10959 (2018)
62. Wei, K., Li, J., Ding, M., Ma, C., Yang, H.H., Farhad, F., Jin, S., Quek, T.,
Poor, H.: Federated learning with diﬀerential privacy: Algorithms and performance
analysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 15, 3454–3469
(2020)
63. Williams, R.J., Zipser, D.: A learning algorithm for continually running fully re-
current neural networks. Neural Computation 1(2) (1998)
64. Wu, Q., Chen, X., Zhou, Z., Zhang, J.: Fedhome: Cloud-edge based personalized
federated learning for in-home health monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing (2020)
65. Yang, C.H.H., Qi, J., Chen, S.Y.C., Chen, P.Y., Siniscalchi, S.M., Ma, X., Lee,
C.H.: Decentralizing feature extraction with quantum convolutional neural network
for automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13309 (2020)
66. Yang, L., Tan, B., Zheng, V.W., Chen, K., Yang, Q.: Federated recommendation
systems. In: Federated Learning, pp. 225–239. Springer (2020)
67. Yang, T., Andrew, G., Eichner, H., Sun, H., Li, W., Kong, N., Ramage, D., Beau-
fays, F.: Applied federated learning: Improving google keyboard query suggestions.
ArXiv abs/1812.02903 (2018)
68. Zhang, Y., Suda, N., Lai, L., Chandra, V.: Hello edge: Keyword spotting on mi-
crocontrollers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07128 (2017)
69. Zhao, Y., Li, M., Lai, L., Suda, N., Civin, D., Chandra, V.: Federated learning
with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582 (2018)
70. Zhou, Y., Pu, G., Ma, X., Li, X., Wu, D.: Distilled one-shot federated learning
(2020)
71. Zhu, X., Wang, J., Hong, Z., Xiao, J.: Empirical studies of institutional federated
learning for natural language processing. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Findings. pp. 625–634 (2020)
