Title: Multi-task learning for natural language processing in the 2020s: where are we going?
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.16008v1
--------------------------------------------------

Multi-task learning for natural language processing in the 2020s:
where are we going?
Joseph Worsham
University of Colorado Colorado Springs
Jugal Kalita
University of Colorado Colorado Springs
Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) signiﬁcantly pre-dates the
deep learning era, and it has seen a resurgence in
the past few years as researchers have been apply-
ing MTL to deep learning solutions for natural lan-
guage tasks. While steady MTL research has always
been present, there is a growing interest driven by
the impressive successes published in the related ﬁelds
of transfer learning and pre-training, such as BERT,
and the release of new challenge problems, such as
GLUE and the NLP Decathlon (decaNLP). These
eﬀorts place more focus on how weights are shared
across networks, evaluate the re-usability of network
components and identify use cases where MTL can
signiﬁcantly outperform single-task solutions.
This
paper strives to provide a comprehensive survey of
the numerous recent MTL contributions to the ﬁeld
of natural language processing and provide a forum
to focus eﬀorts on the hardest unsolved problems in
the next decade. While novel models that improve
performance on NLP benchmarks are continually pro-
duced, lasting MTL challenges remain unsolved which
could hold the key to better language understanding,
knowledge discovery and natural language interfaces.
1
Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a collection of tech-
niques intended to improve generalization, strengthen
latent representations and enable domain adapta-
tion within the ﬁeld of machine learning (Caruana,
1997).
It has been applied to feed-forward neural
networks (Caruana, 1997), decision trees (Caruana,
1997), random forests (Wang et al., 2008), Gaussian
Processes (Bonilla et al., 2008), support-vector ma-
chines (Jebara, 2004) and, most recently, deep neural
networks (Ruder, 2017) across a broad range of do-
mains. This includes speciﬁc deep learning architec-
tures such as MTL seq2seq models (Velay and Daniel,
2018) and MTL transformers (Liu et al., 2019a). It
has been shown that under certain circumstances, and
with well-crafted tasks, MTL can help models achieve
state-of-the-art performance on a range of diﬀerent
tasks (Standley et al., 2019). It has also been shown,
however, that MTL can be extremely fragile and sen-
sitive to both the selected tasks and the training pro-
cess which leads to models that signiﬁcantly under-
perform when compared to the best single-task mod-
els (Alonso and Plank, 2017). While MTL has been
a subject of research for multiple decades (Ruder,
2017), there still exist a number of unsolved prob-
lems, unexplored questions and shortcomings in pro-
duction systems which are addressed within.
This
survey will present a condensed summary of the large
library of current MTL research applied to natural
language processing (NLP) and present a set of goals
intended to help highlight the MTL problems that we
should strive to solve in the next decade.
2
Characterizing
Multi-Task
Learning
MTL introduces additional training objectives to a
learning system to bias the learner with a broader un-
derstanding through solving related tasks. The end-
goal is to improve performance on a set of primary
tasks through the inductive bias introduced by the
additional tasks (Caruana, 1997). The set of primary
tasks are referred to as the target task set, and addi-
tional tasks, which are used to improve performance
on the target set, belong to the auxiliary task set.
While this is the standard approach (Ruder, 2017),
c⃝2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1
arXiv:2007.16008v1  [cs.CL]  22 Jul 2020
others have also designed MTL models with no aux-
iliary focusing on competitively solving all the tasks
jointly (McCann et al., 2018).
In practice, MTL is closely related to Transfer
Learning (TL) (Baxter, 1998), as the goal of each is
to improve the performance of a target task or do-
main through the use of related tasks and domains.
A task is deﬁned as a speciﬁc operational capability,
such as Part of Speech Tagging or Question Answer-
ing. Tasks traditionally do not share the same output
features or solution space. A domain is a certain fea-
ture space and underlying data generating process.
When working with TL and MTL, commonly, diﬀer-
ent domains share the same feature space, but have
diﬀerent data generating processes.
While there is
no limit on how much variance can exist in diﬀerent
but related domains, a common example in NLP is to
treat diﬀerent languages as diﬀerent domains (Zoph
et al., 2016).
Both TL and MTL can make use of
diﬀering domains and diﬀering tasks.
Transfer Learning is broken down into three dif-
ferent categories based on what diﬀers between the
source and the target (Redko et al., 2019).
If the
source and target share the same task with diﬀerent
domains, this is called Transductive Transfer Learn-
ing, commonly known as Domain Adaptation. If the
source and target share the same domain with dif-
ferent tasks this is Inductive Transfer Learning which
learns to transfer via inductive bias. If the source and
target have diﬀerent domains and diﬀerent tasks this
is a form of unsupervised Transfer Learning which
learns common representations despite having no di-
rect similarities between the source and the target.
With this TL taxonomy, we formulate a related
breakdown for MTL. While MTL terminology is tra-
ditionally focused on varying tasks it is also pos-
sible to train jointly on diﬀerent domains.
If the
source task and auxiliary tasks are the same with
diﬀerent domains, we label this Transductive Multi-
Task Learning, or Domain Regularization. When the
source task and auxiliary tasks are diﬀerent but share
the same domain this is the standard form of MTL
which we formally identify as Inductive Bias MTL.
Finally, if the source and auxiliary tasks are diﬀer-
ent and do not share the same domain we call it
Multi-Task Feature Learning, originally introduced
by Romera-Paredes et al. (2012) Table 1 shows this
breakdown for both TL and MTL.
Table 1: TL / MTL Task and Domain Categories
Same Tasks
Diﬀerent Tasks
Same Domains
Standard Learning Setting
Inductive
Transfer
Learning
Inductive Bias
(standard) MTL
Diﬀerent Domains
Transductive
Transfer Learning
(Domain Adapation)
Transductive MTL
(Domain Reuglarization)
Unsupervised
Transfer Learning
Multi-Task
Feature Learning
A relational representation of these concepts is pro-
vided in Figure 1.
This shows that TL and MTL
share some overlap, indicating that these techniques
can be used together. While Standley et al. (2019)
show that there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the types
of tasks proven to be useful in MTL vs. TL, Bingel
and Søgaard (2017) argue that they produce similar
observed beneﬁts. Liu et al. (2019a) show that TL
and MTL are complementary to one another when
used in combination to train a complex model, which
is in contradiction to earlier work that showed, in dif-
ferent circumstances, this combination yielded no sig-
niﬁcant improvement (Mou et al., 2016). These tech-
niques also overlap with standard single-task learning
through a method called zero-shot learning.
Zero-
shot learners, or generalist agents, are capable of
jointly understanding many tasks or concepts with no
ﬁne-tuning on speciﬁc tasks (McCann et al., 2018).
3
When
to
Use
Multi-Task
Learning
One of the biggest needs for a successful machine
learning system is access to extremely large amounts
of labeled data.
MTL is proposed as a technique
to help overcome data sparsity by learning to jointly
solve related or similar problems to produce a more
generalized internal representation. Regardless of the
number of target tasks to solve, MTL can only be
considered useful when at least one target task is im-
proved upon when compared to a collection of single-
task models (Standley et al., 2019).
Along with enabling zero-shot learning (McCann
et al., 2018), MTL is commonly presented as a regu-
larization technique to aid in the generalization of a
task to unseen examples (Caruana, 1997; Luong et al.,
2015; Liu et al., 2019a; Radford et al., 2019). This be-
longs to the Transductive MTL class in Table 1.
Additionally, MTL has desirable traits when it
2
Figure 1: Relationship of Machine Learning Concepts with a Focus on Transfer Learning and Multi-Task
Learning
comes to eﬃciency. Stickland and Murray (2019) de-
scribe a well designed MTL model to be computa-
tionally less complex, to have fewer parameters lim-
iting the burden on memory and storage and to ul-
timately require less power consumption at inference
time. Standley et al. (2019) also point out the de-
sirable trait of quicker inferencing depending on the
architecture of the MTL model. These characteris-
tics pertain to neural network MTL implementations
which are less expensive than deploying a complete
model for each class individually.
4
MTL Implications and Dis-
coveries
Researchers have been studying the implications and
nuances of MTL when compared to traditional single-
task training since its introduction. Given the human
intuition of how MTL can help improve model perfor-
mance, practitioners are often surprised at how del-
icate and sensitive these algorithms can be (Alonso
and Plank, 2017; Standley et al., 2019). This section
will discuss MTL discoveries in this regard through
the topics of task relationship, dataset diversity,
model design considerations and training curriculum.
Techniques identiﬁed in this section are shown rela-
tionally in Figure 2.
4.1
Task Selection
The similarities between a set of tasks are commonly
cited as one of the most inﬂuential design factors in
building MTL systems. Through a series of exper-
iments, Caruana (1997) showed that the beneﬁt of
MTL is due to the direct knowledge learned from the
auxiliary tasks. He further showed that some induc-
tive bias can actually harm performance. A host of
other researchers have gone on to argue that task re-
latedness plays a key role in determining how knowl-
edge information is shared (Mou et al., 2016; Ben-
David and Borbely, 2008) and when an auxiliary task
will help and when it will hurt (Standley et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2019).
Standley et al. (2019) continued to explore this con-
cept and showed that tasks which seem related can of-
ten have underlying complex and competing dynam-
ics. They present a table showing how every factor-
ized task pair performed in relation to a single-task
model, and, via the hypothesis that related tasks im-
prove performance, show which tasks they believe to
be related. While this work was not performed on a
set of NLP tasks, it showed the importance of task
relationship and provided a novel way to measure re-
latedness.
Another unique observation published by Standley
et al. (2019) shows that tasks which are beneﬁcial in
a TL environment appear to perform poorly as auxil-
3
iary tasks in an MTL setting. This raises a question
on whether or not dissimilar tasks could be used in-
tentionally to help regularize a system or even protect
a system from adversarial attack. While this observa-
tion seems to disagree with the conventional wisdom
that only similar or related tasks can lead to improved
model performance (Ben-David and Borbely, 2008),
they are not alone. Romera-Paredes et al. (2012) have
also shown that unrelated tasks can still be beneﬁcial.
This poses a unique opportunity to further explore
task relationships and usefulness on the most recent
MTL benchmarks.
4.2
MTL Dataset Considerations
The datasets used for target tasks and auxiliary tasks
play an important role in building successful MTL
systems. The ﬁrst topic addressed considers how the
size and diversity of the datasets impact the learning
of a model. Luong et al. (2015) perform a set of ex-
periments to determine how the size of the datasets
for the target and auxiliary tasks impact the overall
results of the model on the target set.
They show
that the size ratio between a target task dataset and
an auxiliary task dataset does have an impact on per-
formance. They argue that when the target dataset
is large, the best MTL performance is achieved with
a small auxiliary dataset with a size ratio between
0.01 and 0.1. When this mixing ratio gets too high it
is shown that the model will overﬁt to the auxiliary
task at the cost of performance on the target task.
Other researchers agree that the best performance is
achieved with a small number of auxiliary task up-
dates compared to target task updates (Alonso and
Plank, 2017; Kim et al., 2019) and that adding more
data to a poorly selected auxiliary task can signiﬁ-
cantly harm the model (Kim et al., 2019).
Researchers have also considered the underlying
properties and statistics to determine how they im-
pact MTL performance. A theoretical deﬁnition of
MTL and task relatedness is presented by Ben-David
and Borbely (2008). The goal of this work is to de-
velop a formulated approach for determining when
MTL is advantageous and to what degree. They seek
a theoretical justiﬁcation for task relatedness based
on measurable similarities found within the under-
lying data generating processes of each task. While
their deﬁnition of task more closely relates to the def-
inition of a domain within this survey, they establish
formal error bounds to measure and learn task relat-
edness.
Recent work has gone on to argue that size is not
a useful metric for determining MTL gain (Bingel
and Søgaard, 2017). Research has shown that sim-
ple tasks, requiring few training iterations, and diﬃ-
cult tasks, which struggle to converge on a solution,
do not lead to the development of useful MTL rep-
resentations (Caruana, 1997; McCann et al., 2018).
Alonso and Plank (2017) argue that MTL task se-
lection should be addressed via data properties, not
intuition on what a human performer may consider
easy. They perform a set of studies that measure sta-
tistical distributions of supervised labels in auxiliary
task datasets and ﬁnd that the best performance is
achieved when the auxiliary tasks have compact mid-
entropy distributions. That is to say, the best aux-
iliary tasks are neither too easy to predict nor too
diﬃcult to learn.
Another perspective on underlying properties of the
auxiliary datasets is to consider the loss produced by
each task while learning. The magnitude of the task
loss can be considered a task similarity metric. Stand-
ley et al. (2019) show that imbalanced tasks in this re-
gard produce largely varied gradients which can con-
fuse model training. Oftentimes, task selection is not
something that can be changed, but Standley et al.
(2019) recommend using a task weighting coeﬃcient
to help normalize the gradient magnitudes across the
tasks. Similar to task loss, the learning curve, show-
ing how loss decreases over training, is also proposed
as a metric for task similarity.
It was found that
MTL gains are more likely when a target task’s learn-
ing curve plateaus early in training and the auxiliary
tasks do not plateau (Bingel and Søgaard, 2017).
It is also worth noting that Data Augmentation
is a proven technique to help overcome data spar-
sity and improve task performance in TL and MTL
settings.
Anaby-Tavor et al. (2019) propose LAM-
BADA, a language generator model ﬁne-tuned on
a small task-speciﬁc dataset, which generates semi-
supervised training data to augment the data avail-
able to a task speciﬁc language classiﬁcation task.
4.3
Model Selection and Design
There is a large body of research considering how
MTL inﬂuences model selection and design. While
the authors acknowledge the importance of other ma-
4
Figure 2: Relationships of Transfer Learning and Multi-Task Learning Techniques for Deep Learning
chine learning models, this section will focus solely on
neural networks due to recent deep learning trends.
Figure 2 shows the primary MTL techniques for Deep
Learning and their relationships. There are two pri-
mary families of MTL neural network approaches:
hard parameter sharing and soft parameter sharing
(Ruder, 2017).
Hard parameter sharing is the ap-
proach most closely related to traditional machine
learning techniques and the same mechanism used by
many transfer learning solutions. In hard parameter
sharing, full network layers and their parameters are
shared directly between tasks. Soft parameter sharing
is more specialized and instead creates separate layer
parameters for each task. These task-speciﬁc layers
are then regularized during training to reduce the dif-
ferences between shared layers. This encourages lay-
ers to have similar weights but allows each task to spe-
cialize speciﬁc components. Diagrams showing these
network concepts can be found in the MTL survey
by Ruder (2017). Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a
proven soft parameter technique which trains a stu-
dent network to imitate the full output of a trained
teacher network (Hinton et al., 2015).
An early study in MTL showed that auxiliary tasks
which help increase performance on a target task pre-
fer to share hidden layers and weights with the tar-
get task, while unhelpful auxiliary tasks prefer to use
weights not used by the target task (Caruana, 1997).
This intuition has laid the groundwork for deep learn-
ing models which focus on building an enhanced inter-
nal representation of a problem space through shared
hidden layers. It has been shown that pre-deﬁning
which layers to share can improve the performance of
a deep learning MTL model when the tasks are gen-
erally beneﬁcial, but this can break down if the wrong
task pairs are selected (Ruder, 2017). The study goes
on to argue for the beneﬁt of learning task hierarchies
internal to the model during training to help overcome
this problem. Research has also shown that the depth
of a layer and the beneﬁt of sharing the layer between
two tasks can be considered a measure of similarity
of the two tasks (Mou et al., 2016). They argue that
low-level layers, such as word embeddings, are gener-
ally useful for all NLP tasks, while higher level layers
become more speciﬁc and can only be shared among
more similar tasks. This suggests that model archi-
tectures can be built oﬀthis metric when combined
with other evaluations of task relatedness.
Another model consideration when building MTL
systems is the capacity of the network.
Radford
et al. (2019) prove that the capacity of a language
model is essential to good performance and that in-
creasing capacity produces a log-linear improvement.
This follows conventional neural network wisdom and
agrees with other research, such as BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019), whose performance appears to scale with
the model size, and T5 (Raﬀel et al., 2019), which
achieved state-of-the-art results when pushed to 11
5
billion parameters.
Ruder et al. (2017) show that hard-parameter shar-
ing, task-speciﬁc network layers, hierarchical NLP
layers and a regularizer to encourage tasks to share
only what is useful, called block-sparse regulariza-
tion, can be combined to create a powerful MTL net-
work called a Sluice network.
The Sluice network
consistently performed better than single-task multi-
layer perceptrons (MLPs) on all evaluation tasks and
outperformed traditional hard parameter sharing ap-
proaches (Caruana, 1997) on most NLP tasks.
An additional question that must be addressed is
how a task is represented within the model. It is com-
mon with Inductive Bias MTL that each task has a
speciﬁc set of output layers that can be queried to
return task speciﬁc results (Ruder, 2017). However,
McCann et al. (2018) present a novel idea in which the
task itself in included as input to the network, identi-
ﬁed within this survey as Context Tasking. While the
implementation may diﬀer across domains and tasks,
Context Tasking was implemented here by represent-
ing each task as a natural language question with a
natural language answer.
This avoids the need for
any task-specialized components and naturally sup-
ports zero-shot learning and open-set classiﬁcation
(Scheirer et al., 2014). Aralikatte et al. (2019) present
another interesting approach to Context Tasking by
casting the NLP tasks of ellipsis resolution and coref-
erence resolution as reading comprehension problems
and produced new state-of-the-art results using In-
ductive Bias MTL.
4.4
Training Curriculum
A ﬁnal topic of MTL training implications is the de-
sign of a training curriculum.
Given the research
above regarding mixing ratios, task weighting, shared
representations and sensitivities to task selection, it
seems natural that MTL should be addressed with
an intelligent training curriculum. The standard cur-
riculum for MTL tasks is to build mini-batches con-
taining examples for a single task and then alternate
between tasks during training. The ratio of task mini-
batches can be identical for all tasks or varied based
on task performance or dataset size (Caruana, 1997;
Luong et al., 2015; Ruder, 2017; Wang et al., 2018).
McCann et al. (2018) refer to this as a ﬁxed-order
round robin curriculum and prove that it works well
on tasks that require few iterations, but it struggles
with more complex tasks. They furthermore consider
hand-crafted curricula and show that beginning with
more diﬃcult tasks and slowly introducing additional
tasks performs the best. Other work has considered
including task-speciﬁc stopping conditions for TL and
MTL (Mou et al., 2016), and more recent research has
proposed a teacher-based annealing solution to dy-
namically control the auxiliary task impact with KD
(Clark et al., 2019). Other research has shown that
round robin training is most impactful towards the
end of the curriculum (Stickland and Murray, 2019).
They propose a technique called annealed sampling
in which batch sampling is originally based on the
ratio of dataset sizes and slowly anneals to an even
distribution across all tasks as the current epoch num-
ber increases. These discoveries, when combined with
curriculum research emerging from the ﬁeld of rein-
forcement learning (Svetlik et al., 2017), lead to a
wealth of new research opportunities towards the de-
sign of MTL curricula.
5
Learning Task Relationships
Beyond the research into measuring properties of
tasks and datasets to determine similarities, there
have been multiple eﬀorts to intrinsically learn task
relatedness through a learning process.
Caruana
(1997) showed that neural networks trained in an
MTL setting exhibited a behavior where related tasks
would share hidden nodes and unrelated tasks would
not. This discovery implies that neural networks are
able to determine what information is useful for shar-
ing between tasks without an explicit signal convey-
ing the task relationship. It is therefore reasonable
to believe that neural networks are able to learn, and
even describe, task relationship explicitly through the
MTL training process. Research has since explored
diﬀerent clustering techniques built on this discov-
ery which attempt to cluster network weights and pa-
rameters leading to a latent task relationship embed-
ded in the task clusters (Ruder, 2017). Not only do
these techniques inherently learn task relationships,
they also help to train neural networks by penalizing
them from diverging too much from a common set
of knowledge shared by similar tasks. Ruder (2017)
also presents the Deep Relationship Network and the
Cross-Stitch Network which are hard and soft param-
eter models, respectively, able to identify task rela-
6
tionship through training.
An approach called task2vec has been proposed
which learns an embedding vector for an entire task
that is agnostic to the size of the dataset (Achille
et al., 2019). The embedding attempts to capture se-
mantic similarities between tasks by training a model
to solve a task, and then probing the network to ap-
proximate the amount of information carried by the
weights. The proximities between two task embed-
ding vectors are theorized to represent task related-
ness while the magnitude of the embedding vector is
thought to correlate to the complexity of the task.
An alternative approach to learning directly from
the hidden nodes and gradients is to eﬃciently search
through task pairs to determine task similarities. De-
pending on the number of tasks an exhaustive search
very quickly becomes impossible, however, heuristic
based searches have been found to act as a good
stand-in to estimate when tasks may be related (Stan-
dley et al., 2019).
They show that there is a high
correlation between the validation loss of a network
trained on 20% of the data and the fully trained val-
idation loss of a network. Based on this claim, they
use the loss at 20% as a heuristic to lightly train
multi-task permutations for ﬁnding optimally per-
forming task sets.
They go on to show that given
three tasks, the average loss of every two-pair combi-
nation is an eﬀective approximation of the loss when
all three tasks are trained jointly. This acts as a good
search heuristic for ﬁnding optimized task sets. While
this work has focused on small task sets and relatively
small combinations, others have shown the beneﬁt of
having many auxiliary tasks to boost MTL perfor-
mance (Ruder, 2017; Ratner et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2019a). More research into the implications of these
ﬁndings is important to understanding the eﬀect of
the number of tasks present in an auxiliary task set.
6
MTL
Benchmarks
and
Leaderboards
While there are many research eﬀorts that evaluate
MTL model performance on custom task sets, there
exist several gold standard benchmarks which enable
comparative evaluation. The ﬁrst of these is the NLP
Decathlon (McCann et al., 2018), decaNLP, which
combines ten common NLP tasks/datasets:
Ques-
tion Answering, Machine Translation, Summariza-
tion, Natural Language Inference, Sentiment Anal-
ysis, Semantic Role Labeling, Zero-Shot Relation Ex-
traction, Goal-Oriented Dialog, Semantic Parsing and
Pronoun Resolution. Each task is assigned a scoring
metric between 0 and 100. An overall decaScore is
computed as the sum of all the task scores with the
highest possible being 1,000. Using the Context Task-
ing technique, every task is represented as a natural
language question, a context and an answer. The de-
caNLP leaderboard presents an opportunity for MTL
researchers to assess model performance.
One of the most popular evaluation benchmarks
used for TL and MTL alike is the General Language
Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) (Wang et al.,
2018). GLUE challenges models to solve the following
9 NLP tasks: Grammatical Acceptance Prediction,
Sentiment Analysis, Paraphrasing, Semantic Equiva-
lence, Semantic Similarity, Question Answering, Pro-
noun Resolution and two diﬀerent Textual Entailment
tasks. Each task has a deﬁned scoring metric to eval-
uate task-speciﬁc performance; F1 score is commonly
used among the tasks. GLUE does not require that all
tasks be solved by the same model, and, as such, many
top solutions have a ﬁne-tuned model per task. An
overall GLUE score, the macro-average of all tasks, is
computed for each model.
In order to keep challenging researchers to push
the state-of-the-art, an additional NLP benchmark,
called SuperGLUE, is presented which is designed to
be signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult (Wang et al., 2019).
The following 7 tasks are included in the Super-
GLUE: Binary Question Answering, Imbalanced 3-
Class Textual Entailment, Logical Causal Relation-
ship, Textual Entailment, Binary Word-Sense Dis-
ambiguation, Pronoun Resolution and two diﬀerent
Multiple-Choice Question Answering tasks. Textual
Entailment and Pronoun Resolution are the only two
tasks from the original GLUE benchmark retained in
SuperGLUE. These tasks were kept because they still
showed room for improvement and proved to be two
of the hardest tasks in GLUE.
7
MTL Solutions for NLP
There is a rich library of research presenting techni-
cal implementations and use cases for MTL models
and architectures. This section provides an overview
7
Table 2: MTL Model Comparison
Model
Params
GLUE
SuperGLUE
decaScore
MQAN
29M
-
-
609.0
MT-DNN
350M
87.6
-
-
BERTBase
110M
78.3
-
-
BERTLarge
340M
80.5
69.0
-
BERT with PALs
125M
-
-
-
BERT+BAM
335M
82.3
-
-
RoBERTa
375M
88.5
84.6
-
ALBERTxxl Ensemble
235M
89.4
-
-
GPT-2
1,542M
-
-
-
XLNet-Large
340M
88.4
-
-
T5-11B
11B
89.7
89.3
-
of recent state-of-the-art approaches. Table 2 shows
a comparison of model sizes and scores on common
benchmarks.
7.1
Multi-task
Question
Answering
Network
The
Multi-task
Question
Answering
Network
(MQAN), (McCann et al., 2018), is a natural lan-
guage Context Tasking network designed to jointly
learn over all tasks with no task speciﬁc weights or
parameters in the network.
All inputs and tasks
are modeled as natural language questions and
outputs in the form of a natural language answer.
This enables the network to learn to solve tasks
which traditionally have diﬀerent input and output
structures, such as machine translation and relation
extraction. The authors show that MQAN is able to
achieve performance comparable to ten single-task
networks with no ﬁne-tuning or task speciﬁc layers.
Due to the common contextualized input design,
MQAN is able to do zero-shot training and can even
adapt to unseen classes in classiﬁcation.
7.2
BERT and Related Models
Arguably one of the most important models re-
cently proposed is BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Rep-
resentations from Transformers (Devlin et al., 2019).
BERT pre-trains a transformer model (Vaswani et al.,
2017) with an unsupervised multi-task objective.
This pre-training objective trains the network to pre-
dict a random mask of hidden words in a text docu-
ment and to predict if a shown sentence is the logical
next sentence in the document via a binary classiﬁer.
Along with the novel pre-training objective, BERT
also presents a mechanism for contextualizing on both
the left and right text directions while other popular
models, such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018), are unidi-
rectional. BERT scored competitively on the GLUE
leaderboard and provided a base for researchers to
build upon.
Since the release of BERT, there have been a num-
ber of modiﬁcations which have surpassed the base-
line score on GLUE (Phang et al., 2018; Joshi et al.,
2019; Lan et al., 2019). BERT and PALs train a sin-
gle BERT model to be used for all tasks jointly, as
opposed to building a ﬁne-tuned model for each task
(Stickland and Murray, 2019).
Clark et al. (2019)
approach MTL with BERT from a diﬀerent angle by
doing multi-task ﬁne-tuning through knowledge dis-
tillation and a multi-teacher paradigm, called BAM.
The model is trained with a teacher annealing curricu-
lum that gradually transfers the target learner from
distillation through the teachers to a supervised MTL
signal. RoBERTa is an optimized take on BERT that
ﬁnds techniques which signiﬁcantly improve perfor-
mance (Liu et al., 2019b).
ALBERT replaces the
next sentence prediction task, proven ineﬀective by
Yang et al. (2019), with a sentence-order prediction
pre-training task (Lan et al., 2019).
One notable extension of BERT with true multi-
task learning across all 9 GLUE tasks is the Multi-
Task Deep Neural Network (MT-DNN) (Liu et al.,
2019a). The authors argue that MT-DNN has better
domain transfer across tasks than standard BERT.
The process begins with the regular BERT pre-
training, followed by multi-task training with hard
parameter sharing and a random round robin curricu-
lum and ﬁnally ends with task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning.
7.3
GPT/GPT-2
BERT is not the only type of language model that has
successfully performed in MTL environments. GPT
(Radford et al., 2018) is based on a multi-layer trans-
former network and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
extends this model with an unsupervised multi-task
pre-training objective. In inference settings GPT-2 is
ﬁrst task-conditioned to solve the desired task. This
zero-shot type of learning can outperform the current
state-of-the-art on a majority of NLP tasks. GPT-
2 is also shown to perform competitively when used
in a traditional pre-training and ﬁne-tuning process.
The authors have indicated that in future work they
plan to assess GPT-2 performance on decaNLP and
8
GLUE benchmarks.
7.4
XLNet
XLNet is proposed as a next-generation model which
is intended to leverage the best features found in
BERT and GPT while overcoming their intrinsic
shortcomings (Yang et al., 2019). The authors claim
that BERT suﬀers from a pre-train/ﬁne-tune discrep-
ancy due to the masked words introduced in pre-
training.
While the masked words are helpful for
building a latent understanding of language, masked
words are never seen in practice and thus there is a
distinct diﬀerence in the training data and real-world
inputs. While this simpliﬁcation has worked well for
BERT, Yang et al. (2019) attempt to improve per-
formance by estimating the joint probability of the
words seen in a piece of text. The authors also em-
pirically show that BERT’s next sentence prediction
pre-training objective did not improve model perfor-
mance and, hence, was dropped from the XLNet pre-
training regimen.
7.5
T5
T5 (Raﬀel et al., 2019) (Text-to-Text Transfer Trans-
former) is a reﬁnement to the traditional transformer
which boasts an unsupervised pre-training corpus of
roughly 750 GB and uses natural language Context
Tasking. The highest performing model designed by
the authors contains 11 billion parameters, far more
than what any other model has considered, and has
beaten all other models addressed above on the GLUE
and SuperGLUE leaderboards.
This work provides
convincing evidence regarding the claim that model
capacity is an important factor in transfer learning
and MTL in NLP.
8
Current Challenges and Op-
portunities
Most challenges that are still faced today in MTL are
the same challenges that have existed for the past two
decades. Caruana (1997) proved that some inductive
bias can hurt, and while it is still generally believed
that task relatedness leads to good bias, there is no
strong general notion of measuring this (Ben-David
and Borbely, 2008; Ruder, 2017).
Standley et al.
(2019) begin to address this by confronting the un-
derlying challenge of crosstalk, in which MTL suf-
fers from complex and competing objectives. Addi-
tional studies have researched task relationship and
performance on earlier model generations, such as bi-
LSTMs (Bingel and Søgaard, 2017; Luong et al., 2015;
Alonso and Plank, 2017). Studies applying similar in-
depth analysis to the most recent multi-task bench-
marks with the latest transformer-based models are
prime research opportunities to understand better the
tasks to solve and the implications of the selected
models.
Standley et al. (2019) present several interesting
claims which are worth exploring and applying to
known MTL benchmarks. The ﬁrst is that it could be
better to train dissimilar tasks as opposed to semanti-
cally similar tasks. Additionally they argue that MTL
performance estimates can be made by averaging the
results of lesser-order task pairs. Both claims present
research opportunities that could lead to better un-
derstanding of the impact of auxiliary task selection.
The new set of MTL deep learning models should also
be explored through probing in a manner similar to
that of Kim et al. (2019) to understand better the
impact of NLP task selection. There still is a need
for deeper and more general techniques for task selec-
tion and task assessment. As research dives deeper
into the implications of MTL it is important to con-
tinue strengthening the current understanding of task
relationship and selection.
Curriculum learning is continuing to gain popu-
larity and will likely become of larger interest with
the introduction of standardized MTL benchmarks.
Curriculum learning has not been explored much in
NLP or MTL, however, it has a rich history in re-
inforcement learning (RL) where curriculum is used
to guide trained agents to more complex and real-
istic behaviors (Svetlik et al., 2017; Florensa et al.,
2017). The curriculum is often generated in RL set-
tings and it would be interesting to expand on these
capabilities for MTL curriculum generation.
These
generations could leverage some form of relatedness
(Liu et al., 2019a) or be driven by unsupervised or la-
tent signals (Achille et al., 2019). Other research into
lifelong learning and continuous learning (Mitchell
et al., 2018; Parisi et al., 2019) present new ideas and
paradigms which are related to MTL and can be uti-
lized to help solve the MTL tasks mentioned in this
9
survey.
Although many unsupervised natural language un-
derstanding tasks have recently been used in a pre-
training setting, Luong et al. (2015) pose the ques-
tion of how unsupervised objectives may impact MTL
performance as auxiliary tasks. Building oﬀthe TL
process there are open questions on how an MTL
model can leverage the same unsupervised datasets.
They argue that an auxiliary task must be compatible
with the target task, and both intrinsic (perplexity)
and extrinsic (accuracy) metrics must be improved on
the target task when trained with the auxiliary task.
Alonso and Plank (2017) pose an additional question:
most auxiliary tasks are classiﬁcation tasks, how do
regression tasks fare as auxiliary tasks?
Gonz´alez-
Garduno and Søgaard (2018) provide an example of
this with text readability prediction and an auxiliary
gaze prediction task.
They showed that they only
needed small samples from the auxiliary task, the
selection of the auxiliary task was robust to small
changes in the domain and the shared feature rep-
resentation provably enhanced model performance.
This work shows that further research into regression
auxiliary tasks could help to advance MTL state-of-
the-art. Finally, Liu et al. (2019a) present a unique
opportunity to study how MTL architectures perform
against adversarial tasks which could potentially lead
to a new set of hardened auxiliary tasks.
We hy-
pothesize that Domain Regularization or Multi-Task
Feature Learning could help machine learning models
better withstand adversarial attacks.
Most recent advancements in TL and MTL are
based oﬀhard parameter sharing. How do model ar-
chitectures, such as the transformer, perform when
regularized with an MTL-based soft parameter shar-
ing?
How would this compare to standard models
such as BERT and GPT and what other techniques
can be borrowed from Ruder (2017) for the latest gen-
eration of deep learning models?
Lastly, the biggest challenge faced in current MTL
research is that ﬁne-tuned single-task models consis-
tently outperform non-ﬁne-tuned MTL models that
share layers (McCann et al., 2018; Clark et al.,
2019). MTL pre-training followed by single-task ﬁne-
tuning is able to leverage the rich knowledge ac-
quired through inductive bias, but the impact of the
strong supervised signal creates narrow experts which
are able to outperform the generalized experts pro-
duced by MTL. While this is ﬁne for narrow systems
designed to solve problems with expansive training
datasets, this gap needs to be closed to improve per-
formance on data sparse tasks and domains. A long-
term goal that will continue to persist is to develop
general experts which can compete with their single-
task counterparts (Clune, 2019).
Ultimately we ﬁnd this ambitious task before us.
To ﬁnd ways to build robust and capable MTL mod-
els and help to enable the next generation of general
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
References
Achille, A., Lam, M., Tewari, R., Ravichandran,
A., Maji, S., Fowlkes, C., Soatto, S., Perona, P.,
2019. Task2vec: Task embedding for meta-learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03545 .
Alonso, H.M., Plank, B., 2017. When is multitask
learning eﬀective?
semantic sequence prediction
under varying data conditions, in: EACL Vol. 1,
pp. 44–53.
Anaby-Tavor, A., Carmeli, B., Goldbraich, E., Kan-
tor, A., Kour, G., Shlomov, S., Tepper, N., Zw-
erdling, N., 2019. Not enough data? deep learning
to the rescue! arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03118 .
Aralikatte, R., Lamm, M., Hardt, D., Søgaard, A.,
2019. Ellipsis and coreference resolution as question
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.11141 .
Baxter, J., 1998. Theoretical models of learning to
learn, in: Learning to learn. Springer, pp. 71–94.
Ben-David, S., Borbely, R.S., 2008. A notion of task
relatedness yielding provable multiple-task learning
guarantees. Machine learning 73, 273–287.
Bingel, J., Søgaard, A., 2017. Identifying beneﬁcial
task relations for multi-task learning in deep neural
networks, in: EACL Vol. 2, pp. 164–169.
Bonilla, E.V., Chai, K.M., Williams, C., 2008. Multi-
task gaussian process prediction, in:
NIPS, pp.
153–160.
Caruana, R., 1997.
Multitask learning.
Machine
learning 28, 41–75.
10
Clark, K., Luong, M.T., Khandelwal, U., Manning,
C.D., Le, Q., 2019. Bam! born-again multi-task
networks for natural language understanding, in:
ACL, pp. 5931–5937.
Clune, J., 2019. Ai-gas: Ai-generating algorithms, an
alternate paradigm for producing general artiﬁcial
intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10985 .
Devlin,
J.,
Chang,
M.W.,
Lee,
K.,
Toutanova,
K., 2019.
Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding, in:
NAACL-HLT Vol 1, pp. 4171–4186.
Florensa, C., Held, D., Wulfmeier, M., Zhang, M.,
Abbeel, P., 2017.
Reverse curriculum genera-
tion for reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.05300 .
Gonz´alez-Garduno, A.V., Søgaard, A., 2018. Learn-
ing to predict readability using eye-movement data
from natives and learners, in: Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., Dean, J., 2015.
Distilling
the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531 .
Jebara, T., 2004. Multi-task feature and kernel selec-
tion for svms, in: ICML, p. 55.
Joshi, M., Chen, D., Liu, Y., Weld, D.S., Zettle-
moyer, L., Levy, O., 2019. Spanbert: Improving
pre-training by representing and predicting spans.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10529 .
Kim, N., Patel, R., Poliak, A., Xia, P., Wang,
A., McCoy, T., Tenney, I., Ross, A., Linzen, T.,
Van Durme, B., et al., 2019. Probing what diﬀer-
ent nlp tasks teach machines about function word
comprehension, in: SEM, pp. 235–249.
Lan, Z., Chen, M., Goodman, S., Gimpel, K.,
Sharma, P., Soricut, R., 2019. Albert: A lite bert
for self-supervised learning of language representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942 .
Liu, X., He, P., Chen, W., Gao, J., 2019a. Multi-task
deep neural networks for natural language under-
standing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11504 .
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M.,
Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L.,
Stoyanov, V., 2019b.
Roberta: A robustly opti-
mized bert pretraining approach.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692 .
Luong, M.T., Le, Q.V., Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O.,
Kaiser, L., 2015. Multi-task sequence to sequence
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06114 .
McCann, B., Keskar, N.S., Xiong, C., Socher, R.,
2018.
The natural language decathlon:
Multi-
task learning as question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08730 .
Mitchell, T., Cohen, W., Hruschka, E., Talukdar, P.,
Yang, B., Betteridge, J., Carlson, A., Dalvi, B.,
Gardner, M., Kisiel, B., et al., 2018. Never-ending
learning.
Communications of the ACM 61, 103–
115.
Mou, L., Meng, Z., Yan, R., Li, G., Xu, Y., Zhang, L.,
Jin, Z., 2016. How transferable are neural networks
in nlp applications?, in: EMNLP, pp. 479–489.
Parisi, G.I., Kemker, R., Part, J.L., Kanan, C.,
Wermter, S., 2019. Continual lifelong learning with
neural networks: A review. Neural Networks .
Phang, J., F´evry, T., Bowman, S.R., 2018.
Sen-
tence encoders on stilts: Supplementary training
on intermediate labeled-data tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.01088 .
Radford,
A.,
Narasimhan,
K.,
Salimans,
T.,
Sutskever, I., 2018.
Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training .
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei,
D., Sutskever, I., 2019. Language models are unsu-
pervised multitask learners .
Raﬀel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang,
S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., Liu, P.J., 2019.
Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a
uniﬁed text-to-text transformer.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683 .
Ratner, A., Hancock, B., Dunnmon, J., Goldman, R.,
R´e, C., 2018. Snorkel metal: Weak supervision for
multi-task learning, in: Workshop on Data Man-
agement for End-To-End Machine Learning, ACM.
p. 3.
11
Redko, I., Morvant, E., Habrard, A., Sebban, M.,
Bennani, Y., 2019. Advances in Domain Adapta-
tion Theory. Elsevier.
Romera-Paredes, B., Argyriou, A., Berthouze, N.,
Pontil, M., 2012.
Exploiting unrelated tasks in
multi-task learning, in: International conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, pp. 951–959.
Ruder, S., 2017.
An overview of multi-task learn-
ing in deep neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.05098 .
Ruder, S., Bingel, J., Augenstein, I., Søgaard, A.,
2017. Sluice networks: Learning what to share be-
tween loosely related tasks. stat 1050, 23.
Scheirer, W.J., Jain, L.P., Boult, T.E., 2014. Proba-
bility models for open set recognition. IEEE trans-
actions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
gence 36, 2317–2324.
Standley, T., Zamir, A.R., Chen, D., Guibas, L., Ma-
lik, J., Savarese, S., 2019. Which tasks should be
learned together in multi-task learning?
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.07553 .
Stickland, A.C., Murray, I., 2019. Bert and pals: Pro-
jected attention layers for eﬃcient adaptation in
multi-task learning, in: ICML, pp. 5986–5995.
Svetlik, M., Leonetti, M., Sinapov, J., Shah, R.,
Walker, N., Stone, P., 2017. Automatic curriculum
graph generation for reinforcement learning agents,
in: AAAI.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J.,
Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,  L., Polosukhin, I.,
2017. Attention is all you need, in: NIPS, pp. 5998–
6008.
Velay, M., Daniel, F., 2018.
Seq2seq and multi-
task learning for joint intent and content extrac-
tion for domain speciﬁc interpreters. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.00423 .
Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y., Nangia, N., Singh,
A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., Bowman, S.R.,
2019. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-
purpose language understanding systems.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.00537 .
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O.,
Bowman, S., 2018. Glue: A multi-task benchmark
and analysis platform for natural language under-
standing, in:
EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pp. 353–355.
Wang, Q., Zhang, L., Chi, M., Guo, J., 2008. Mtfor-
est: Ensemble decision trees based on multi-task
learning., in: ECAI, pp. 122–126.
Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhut-
dinov, R., Le, Q.V., 2019. Xlnet: Generalized au-
toregressive pretraining for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08237 .
Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., Knight, K., 2016. Trans-
fer learning for low-resource neural machine trans-
lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02201 .
12
