Title: Natural Language Processing for Systems Engineering: Automatic Generation of Systems Modelling Language Diagrams
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05008v2
--------------------------------------------------

Natural Language Processing for Systems Engineering: Automatic
generation of Systems Modeling Language Diagrams
Shaohong Zhonga, Andrea Scarincib, Alice Cicirelloa,c,∗
aDepartment of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, United Kingdom
bUncertainty Quantiﬁcation Laboratory, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
cDepeartment of Engineering Structures, Delft University of Technology, Stevinweg 1, Delft, 2628 CN, The
Netherlands
Abstract
The design of complex engineering systems is an often long and articulated process that highly
relies on engineers’ expertise and professional judgment. As such, the typical pitfalls of activities
involving the human factor often manifest themselves in terms of lack of completeness or exhaustive-
ness of the analysis, inconsistencies across design choices or documentation, as well as an implicit
degree of subjectivity. An approach is proposed to assist systems engineers in the automatic gener-
ation of systems diagrams from unstructured natural language text. Natural Language Processing
(NLP) techniques are used to extract entities and their relationships from textual resources (e.g.,
speciﬁcations, manuals, technical reports, maintenance reports) available within an organisation,
and convert them into Systems Modelling Language (SysML) diagrams, with particular focus on
structure and requirement diagrams. The intention is to provide the users with a more standard-
ised, comprehensive and automated starting point onto which subsequently reﬁne and adapt the
diagrams according to their needs. The proposed approach is ﬂexible and open-domain. It consists
of six steps which leverage open-access tools, and it leads to an automatic generation of SysML
diagrams without intermediate modelling requirement, but through the speciﬁcation of a set of pa-
rameters by the user. The applicability and beneﬁts of the proposed approach are shown through six
case studies having diﬀerent textual sources as inputs, and benchmarked against manually deﬁned
diagram elements.
Keywords:
SysML diagram, NLP, Structure diagram, Requirement diagram, text-to-diagram,
automated diagrams from text
1. Introduction
Systems engineering is a crucial process in the design and management of complex systems [1, 2,
3, 4, 5]. An integral part of designing and architecting engineering systems involves producing formal
documentation to both record and support the development process (e.g. systems speciﬁcations
[6], codiﬁed system diagrams etc.). An open debate within the systems engineering community
∗Corresponding author
Email address: a.cicirello@tudelft.nl (Alice Cicirello)
Preprint submitted to Arxiv.org
November 22, 2022
arXiv:2208.05008v2  [cs.CL]  19 Nov 2022
exists about the notion of completeness of speciﬁcations (requirements in particular), and means to
“check” for it. In this paper, the authors are not concerned with establishing a new paradigm for
completeness veriﬁcation. Instead, the authors aim at facilitating a crucial step in achieving such a
goal: the processing of the large amounts of documentation and engineering knowledge from which
speciﬁcations are drawn. Maintaining document consistency and/or completeness while gathering
the necessary information to specify a system’s behaviour is both challenging and crucial to avoid
unexpected consequences that may result in uncontrolled hazards during the system’s operations
[7, 8]. Errors and omissions in the initial design stages in particular can lead to costly product
modiﬁcations after manufacturing [8].
Typically, the synthesis of available knowledge into appropriate engineering documentation and
formats (e.g. requirements, diagrams) is a manual process. With this comes a certain degree of
subjectivity and arbitrariness. In this paper, the authors propose a way of automating this manual
process by using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques: on the one hand, having machine
learning algorithms replacing manual work decreases costs and processing times; on the other hand,
systematizing the gathering of information and leaving the engineers with a purely supervisory task
could provide for better coverage and consistency.
As a testbed for the concept just described, the authors focus on automating the generation of
a very commonly used tool in systems design: SysML diagrams. SysML is a graphical modelling
language that is a subset of the Uniﬁed Modelling Language (UML) with extensions catered to
systems engineering [2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11]. It is able to support the speciﬁcation, analysis, and design
of complex systems such as hardware, software, and facilities [2]. SysML has also gained importance
in recent years as a critical enabler of Model-based Systems Engineering [2, 3]. Like many other
graphical modelling languages it still requires signiﬁcant manual input [2, 3, 4]. To the best of
the authors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that focuses on the automatic generation of SysML
diagrams from unstructured natural language text.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
• The design of a versatile automated approach to generate SysML diagrams from natural
language text documents;
• The combined use of NLP techniques and the lexical databases to facilitate and augment the
generation of SysML models;
• The mapping of textual entities (phrases and relationships) to SysML model elements using
NLP techniques and heuristic rules.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: a detailed overview of the current state-of-the-art
NLP-based strategies for automating systems engineering processes is provided in Section 2. The
proposed approach is presented in Section 3, and the steps for its implementation are summarised
in Section 4. The case studies and experimental procedures are then described in Section 5. In
Section 6, the results are discussed.
2. Review of state-of-the-art NLP-based techniques for automating System Engineer-
ing diagram generation
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the automatic generation of requirement diagrams and
structure diagrams has not been addressed in the literature yet. Therefore, this section focuses on
2
reviewing the state-of-the-art of three key topics: (i) NLP in System Engineering for the generation
of system engineering models; (ii) Automatic generation of Uniﬁed Modelling Language (UML)
diagrams; (iii) Ontology learning for automatic extraction of concepts, relations, attributes, and
hierarchies from text.
2.1. NLP in Systems Engineering for the generation of system engineering models
NLP techniques have been used in requirements engineering, where the majority of requirements
documents and their sources, such as user reviews, are written in natural language [12, 13, 14, 15].
Past studies have used NLP for requirement elicitation [16], requirement enrichment [17], require-
ments tracing [18], requirement classiﬁcation [19], requirement improvement [20, 21], identifying the
domain of requirement [22], ambiguity detection [23], generating test cases and use cases [24, 25, 26],
and detection of low-quality requirements [27]. A more detailed review is done in [12], which clas-
siﬁed the function of NLP in requirement engineering as detection, extraction, classiﬁcation, mod-
elling, tracing and relating, and search and retrieval. Of speciﬁc interest here are studies that have
attempted to extract requirements and construct models from natural language text, which are
brieﬂy reviewed in what follows.
Recent works, used NLP for mining concepts from a mix of textual requirement assets such as
documentation and manuals [28], product brochures [21], online reviews [13], app descriptions and
reviews [15]. However, these works rely on the user to specify relations between identiﬁed concepts
and to manually construct the system engineering models [21], even when the goal is to generate
structure features diagrams [21].
The state-of-the-art approaches for the generation of systems engineering models from natural
language text inputs are based on the speciﬁcation of a set of heuristics rules and by predeﬁning
either a set of association phrases [29], or a mix of manually speciﬁed sentence patterns [30, 14], or
a predeﬁned list of goal-speciﬁc keywords and syntactic patterns [31]. Other studies have also used
NLP techniques such as dependency parsing and coreference resolution to identify type dependen-
cies. The hierarchy was then identiﬁed using predeﬁned rules or classiﬁers [32, 33]. However, these
approaches are limited by their reliance on heuristics rules [32]. Additionally, they also tended to
put strict constraints on the forms of inputs, either specifying complex syntactic rules or restricting
inputs to be of a certain format, for example, requirement speciﬁcation documents [14, 29, 30, 31].
Such constraints limit the ﬂexibility of the approaches to adapt to the variety of textual assets avail-
able for a systems engineer and require a signiﬁcant amount of prior work to produce structured
requirement documents for processing.
2.2. Modelling in SysML and UML
Unlike requirement diagrams, which are unique to the SysML proﬁle, structure diagrams in
SysML bear a close resemblance to UML diagrams such as class diagrams and composite structure
diagrams [2, 11, 9]. Thus, past studies aimed at generating UML diagrams from natural language
text are also reviewed.
In [34], the authors proposed a method to automatically generate UML class diagrams from
natural language requirements by employing a Recursive Object Model (ROM) as the intermediate
step. The ROM is a graphical language that treats each word and each sentence as objects and
assigns semantic relations from a predeﬁned set to these objects using lexical and syntactic rules [35].
The ROM model was then traversed and converted to a class diagram using the noun objects and
their relations [35]. Additionally, in [36], the authors used PoS tagging and semantic role labelling
combined with manually deﬁned rules to generate class diagrams from requirement speciﬁcations.
3
However, similar to past studies on generating requirement models, these studies rely on using
structure requirement documents of speciﬁc formats as inputs and are thus limited in their ﬂexibility
[34, 36]. In contrast, in [37], the authors proposed a method to automatically generate UML class
diagrams from natural language stakeholder requests. They used a set of predeﬁned syntactic rules
to decompose the inputs into simple sentences, then parsed the resulting sentences and identiﬁed
classes and relations using a set of heuristic rules [37]. However, the reliance on predeﬁned rules on
syntactic features to classify relations also limit the wider applicability of this approach.
2.3. Ontology learning
Ontology learning refers to the automatic extraction of ‘concepts, relations, attributes, and
hierarchies’ from text [38, 39]. State-of-the-art methods to automatically extract ontology models
from natural language text include Text2Onto [40], OntoGain [41], a graph-based algorithm [42],
and CRCTOL [43]. Ontology Learning techniques could be used to enable the automatic generation
of SysML diagrams. This is because, similarly to Ontology Learning, System Engineering modelling
approaches employ an object-centred representation of the target domain and use similar constructs
such as classes/blocks and relations [44]. However, as highlighted in [44], the techniques in ontology
generation need to be adapted to suit systems engineering. For example, the primary source for
generating an informative diagram is a limited corpus, instead of relying on the web. Moreover, the
extracted structured information has to be classiﬁed into diﬀerent types of SysML diagrams [9].
2.4. An approach to overcome the limitations of the state-of-the-art
Based on the above review, it has been identiﬁed the need for the development of an automatic
approach to generate SysML diagrams from unstructured natural language text. The proposed
approach is based on natural language processing techniques and the semantic web, and goes
beyond the state-of-the-art by tackling the following research questions:
• How to extract information for developing system engineering models without specifying re-
strictive syntactic rules valid only for a speciﬁc domain?
• How to identify hierarchies with minimal reliance on heuristic rules and predeﬁned patterns?
• How to automate the generation of diﬀerent types of SysML diagrams with no human inter-
vention or intermediate modelling from a limited corpus of textual resources?
3. Automatic generation of Systems Modeling Language diagrams
The proposed approach focuses on automatically generating a subset of structure and require-
ments diagrams in SysML from a corpus of natural language text documents. Speciﬁcally, this
paper focuses on Block Deﬁnition Diagrams (BDD), Internal Block Diagrams (IBD), and Require-
ment Diagrams (REQ) [9]. The basic elements of these three diagrams include blocks and their
relationships.
A block is an elemental modelling construct in SysML that represents both real
entities, such as physical objects, and abstract entities, such as concepts [2]. Relationships between
blocks in SysML can be further classiﬁed into categories such as association or generalisation for
BDD, and trace or containment for REQ [2, 9, 10, 11].
To generate these diagram elements, a parallel architecture is proposed to extract two kinds of
textual entities from natural language text: 1) key phrases, where a key phrase is deﬁned as a list
of one or more words that represent an important entity described in the text. 2) key relationships
4
between the key phrases, where a key relationship is deﬁned as one that links two key phrases. The
key phrases and key relationships are used to generate blocks and the relationships between blocks,
respectively. The generated blocks and their relationships are then organised into desired SysML
diagrams.
The procedures for automatic diagram generation are summarised in Figure 1a and it consists
of six steps:
1. The ﬁrst step is the manual selection and upload of a corpus of text documents (Section 3.1).
2. The raw texts selected are then used as inputs for the key noun extraction (Section 3.2).
3. The raw texts selected are used also as inputs relation extraction (Section 3.3).
4. Steps 2 and 3 result in a collection of key nouns and a collection of relations, respectively. The
two collections are then used to generate the list of key phrases and key relations (Section 3.4).
5. The list of key phrases and key relations are subsequently used to generate corresponding
SysML model elements and augmented according to the required diagram type (Section 3.5).
6. Finally, the generated SysML model elements are then organised and plotted to the corre-
sponding SysML proﬁle (Section 3.6).
An illustrative example is provided in Figure 1b. Each step is discussed in detail in what follows.
Raw text
selection
Key noun
extraction
Relationship
extraction
Generation of SysML
model elements and
augmentation
SysML diagram
generation
Key phrase & key
relationship selection
(a) Steps for automatic SysML diagram generation
5
... Because the two displays
will often have different
resolutions, Windows will use
the lower resolution of the
two for both displays ...
... display, resolution ...
(the two displays, will have,
different resolutions),
(Windows, will use, the lower
resolution of the two for both
displays) ...
(display, have,
resolution)  (...) ...
(resolution —> display)
(taskbar display ---> display)
(display option ---> display)
...
display
taskbar
display
resolution
display
option
Raw text
selection
Relationship
extraction
Key noun
extraction
Key phrase & key relationship
selection
Generation of SysML model
elements (blocks & relationships)
and augmentation
SysML diagram generation
（dashed link indicating
augmented relationship)
(b) Illustration of automated diagram generation steps using an excerpt from a Windows manual as example
Figure 1: Procedures and examples for automatic SysML diagram generation
3.1. Raw texts selection
The algorithm takes as input a manually selected corpus of text documents. These documents
do not need to be structured or follow a predeﬁned writing style like requirement documents, and
the proposed approach can be applied to documents typically available to systems engineers, for
example manuals [2, 4]. Additionally, the corpus should be of suﬃcient size. Providing a universal
standard for the suﬃcient size of textual resources, covering diﬀerent domains and writing styles,
is a challenging task that goes beyond the present work. Nonetheless, based on the experiments
carried out by the authors (with the most salient ones reported in Section 5), it is recommended
that for the successful generation of diagrams, the document count should be larger than 100 and
the average word count per document should be larger than 500. A corpus can also be obtained
by splitting one large document, for example one manual book, into chapters and sections, as
illustrated in the case study on UK government reports and a Windows manual in Section 5.
6
3.2. Key nouns extraction
This step of the approach aims to select key nouns, which are nouns that represent important
entities and that can serve as constituents of the key phrases. The key nouns are automatically
extracted from the corpus by employing preprocessing and term frequency-inverse document fre-
quency (tf-idf) techniques [45].
3.2.1. Preprocessing
Preprocessing is needed to remove grammatical features in the text to support noun extraction
[45]. In this study, a combination of preprocessing methods is applied to the text inputs:
Tokenisation: Tokenisation breaks down large textual content, such as paragraphs or documents,
into smaller chunks [45]. In this study, the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) is used to tokenise
each input text document into individual sentences and then tokenise each sentence into individual
words. In particular, the adapted Punkt sentence segmenter for sentence tokenisation [46] and the
Penn Treebank Tokeniser for word tokenisation [47] available in NLTK are used. In this work, only
one-word unigrams are considered.
Part-of-speech (PoS) tagging: The NLTK package is used to classify each word of a sentence
into diﬀerent lexical categories. The PoS tagger assigns a PoS tag to each word based on its context
sentence [45]. The Greedy Averaged Perceptron tagger and the Penn Treebank tagset are used [47].
Examples of PoS tags include present tense verbs (‘VBP’) and adjectives (‘JJ’). After the PoS tag
for each word is assigned, the nouns are used for further processing and words of other types are
removed.
Lemmatisation: The individual nouns are further converted to lower case and reduced to their
root forms through the NLTK WordNet Lemmatiser, e.g. from ‘sensors’ to ‘sensor’. The WordNet
Lemmatiser employs a combination of predeﬁned rules and dictionary search in lemmatisation [47].
Stop word removal: As the last step, all stop words that are still in the text are removed, using
the NLTK list of English stop words as a reference [47].
3.2.2. Evaluation of term frequency-inverse document frequency
The term frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf) metric is employed to evaluate the
domain relevance of each noun after preprocessing [45, 48, 49]. Note that after the preprocessing
steps, the documents contain only nouns. Tf-idf treats each word as unigram, and word orders or
document orders are not considered. The tf-idf weighting w of a word t, in a document d belonging
to a corpus of documents c, is a value computed as [45, 48, 49]
wt,d = tft,d × idft,c
(1)
tft,d is given by
tft,d = log10(countt,d + 1)
(2)
where countt,d is the total count of a word t in a given document d, and the inverse document
frequency idft,c is given by [45, 49]
idft,c = log10(Nc/(1 + dft,c)) + 1
(3)
where Nc is the total number of documents in the corpus c, and the document frequency dft,c
is the number of documents in the corpus c that contain the word t [45]. In this study, the tf-idf
7
weighting is normalised to the range 0 ≤wt,d ≤1 by dividing by the largest tf-idf weighting in
a document. The inclusion of inverse document frequency discriminates against words that are
common across the corpus [45, 49], which are assumed to be less representative of the document’s
content, analogous to a set of domain-speciﬁc frequency-dependent stop words. The weighting wt,d
obtained for each word of a document is used to identify the collection of key nouns to be retained.
In particular, a tf-idf weighting threshold σtf−idf is speciﬁed by the user (usually in terms of a
user-deﬁned percentile), and nouns with tf-idf weighting higher than the threshold are added to the
collection of key nouns.
3.3. Relationship extraction
The input text is ﬁrst tokenised into sentences using the NLTK package. After sentence tokeni-
sation, open information extraction techniques are used to extract relationships from individual
sentences [45, 50].
3.3.1. Open Information Extraction (IE)
In this study, the OpenIE toolbox is used for relationship extraction [51, 52, 53, 54]. The toolbox
assigns a conﬁdence value to each extracted relation, and in the proposed approach, a conﬁdence
threshold σrelationship between 0 and 1 is manually deﬁned to preliminarily ﬁlter the extracted
relationships.
For each sentence, the toolbox generates a set of possible relations, where each relation is a
list of textual phrases r = (p1, p2, p3, p4, ..., pNr).
In an extracted relation r, p2 is the relation
phrase, p1 and p3 are akin to subject and object phrases, and p4 to pNr are secondary argument
phrases, sometimes appearing in long sentences, where Nr is the number of phrases in an extracted
relationship [50]. The OpenIE toolbox is implemented as a combination of four methods [51, 52,
53, 54], which are brieﬂy explained:
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) based IE SRL consists of detecting semantic arguments and their
roles associated with a verb in a sentence. For example, given the sentence ‘I ordered a cake’, SRL
identiﬁes ‘I’ and ‘cake’ as arguments for the verb ‘order’, where ‘I’ is the agent and ‘cake’ is the
patient. This component of the OpenIE tool is based on the SRL system by [55] and [56].
Relational noun based IE Relational noun based IE identiﬁes relations that are mediated by
nouns.
For example, given the phrase ‘Rowing Club President James’, it extracts the relation
(James, be President of, Rowing Club).
This is implemented by encoding a predeﬁned set of
relational nouns and nominal patterns in the OpenIE tool [52].
Numerical IE Numerical IE identiﬁes the numerical relations in a sentence. For example, given
the sentence ‘The company has 100,000 employees’, it extracts the relation (The company; has
number of employees; 100,000). This is implemented by a combination of machine-learned patterns
and customisations speciﬁc to numerical relations in the OpenIE tool [53].
Coordination analyser This method is used to split conjunctive sentences. It ﬁrst uses a depen-
dency parser to extract candidate conjuncts, and then score their coherence based on the Berkeley
Language Model [57]. Additional linguistic constraints are also imposed to improve selection results
[54].
3.4. Key phrases and key relationships selection
To obtain the key phrases and key relationships useful for generating SysML model elements, a
three-step selection mechanism is used. The ﬁrst step is to select and reﬁne candidate key phrases
using the key nouns obtained in Section 3.2. The second step is based on scoring the candidate
8
phrases based on a combination of metrics to obtain key phrases [45, 58, 59]. The third step is to
select key relationships based on the selected key phrases.
3.4.1. Selecting candidate key phrases
For simplicity, only subject and object phrases (p1 and p3) of the extracted relationships are
used for identifying the key phrase candidates. The phrases are ﬁrst preprocessed using procedures
described in Section 3.2.1. This results in tokenised phrases where p = (t1, t2, ..., tNp), and each
phrase comprises only nouns in root forms; Np refers to the number of nouns in a phrase. Then,
an intersection is taken between each processed phrase and the list of key nouns. Nouns in these
phrases that do not map to any key nouns are removed. The user is further able to determine the
speciﬁcity of the key phrases by setting a parameter Lphrase for the maximum number of nouns
in one key phrase, where length(p) ≤Lphrase. If the number of nouns in a candidate key phrase
exceeds Lphrase, the nouns are ranked according to tf-idf values and the top Lphrase key nouns are
kept. This results in a collection of candidate key phrases for further processing.
3.4.2. Key phrase selection based on tf-idf, WordNet depth, and phrase frequency
The candidate key phrases are further selected by using a metric based on the frequency of the
phrase, average tf-idf weighting, and average WordNet score [58, 59].
The count of a phrase, countp,d, refers to the total count of a phrase p in the ‘bag of phrases’ of
a document d, normalised with respect to the most frequent phrase in the document. This is used
to account for the importance of each phrase. Only the candidate key phrases that are outputs of
Section3.4.1 are considered.
The WordNet depth h′ of a word t refers to its semantic depth assigned by WordNet based
on its synsets, and is used to account for semantic meaning when evaluating a phrase [58, 59]. A
general term such as ‘entity’ would be assigned a small depth value, whereas a more speciﬁc term
such as ‘pancreas’ would be assigned a high depth value. The WordNet is a large lexical database
of English, where the meanings of each word are represented as a cognitive synonym set called
synsets [58, 59]. The LESK algorithm is used to identify the most relevant synset for words in the
input document based on the document as context [60]. For simplicity, it is assumed that each word
in one document has only one synset. The WordNet depth of each word is normalised to range
0 ≤h′ ≤1 by dividing by the largest depth value in a document, and the one complement of the
normalised depth h = 1 −h′ is used as the WordNet score.
As both tf-idf weighting w (already introduced in Section 3.2.2) and the WordNet score h are
assigned to individual words t, an average value is taken for each candidate key phrase. Hence,
for each candidate key phrase p, containing Np number of nouns, from a document d, a score λ is
computed by using the following formula:
λp,d =
Np
X
i
wti,d/Np +
Np
X
i
hti,d/Np + countp,d
(4)
The ﬁrst term computes the average tf-idf weighting, the second term computes the average
WordNet depth, and the last term refers to the normalised count of the phrase. A score threshold
σp can then be speciﬁed by the user, where candidates with scores higher than the threshold are
selected as key phrases. It is worth mentioning that when documents contain many broken sentences
(as in the document 7 of Table 2), many key phrases might not be found. Since this is an important
step in the procedure, in order to support the engineers using the proposed tool, it is recommended
9
to setup an alarm to warn the user when the tool fails to extract relations from more than 50% of
the sentence tokens in one document.
3.4.3. Key relationship selection
Relationships are selected as key relationships only when both their subject and object phrases
are key phrases.
This is to prevent open-ended relationships and ‘ﬂoating’ blocks that do not
connect to any other block in SysML diagrams.
3.5. Mapping and augmentation
The selected key phrases and key relationships are textual. For plotting SysML diagrams, they
need to be ﬁrst mapped to SysML model elements. The authors focus on the Block Deﬁnition
Diagrams (BDD), Internal Block Diagrams (IBD), and Requirement Diagrams (REQ) in this study.
The key phrases are used to generate blocks B, which form a fundamental unit of SysML [2]. The
textual relationships are ﬁrst classiﬁed into diﬀerent categories according to the SysML diagram
type, and then used to generate the diﬀerent types of relationships R between blocks. The textual
relationships are also used to generate requirements that the blocks satisfy.
To make diagrams more complete in both structure and semantics, the textual phrases and re-
lationships are also augmented according to the required SysML diagram type. The augmentations
are used to generate additional blocks and relationships for the diagrams.
3.5.1. Block Deﬁnition Diagrams
Block Deﬁnition Diagrams are the most common diagrams used in SysML and are used to deﬁne
the types of elements of other diagrams [2, 9]. Blocks in BDD can have many features such as parts,
references, and operations, whereas relations in BDD can belong to categories such as associations,
generalisations, and dependencies [2, 9]. For simplicity, the authors choose to focus on the composite
association, generalisation, and reference association, and on identifying the operations features of
blocks in BDD. The composite association relationship represents a structural composition where
one block is part of another block [2, 9]. On the other hand, generalisation relationship means an
inheritance relationship, where one block is the generalisation of the other, more specialised, block
[2, 9]. Additionally, reference association conveys a connection between blocks where one block can
access another [2, 9].
Relationship mapping for BDD
The steps used to map textual relationships to inter-block relationships in BDD are:
1. Identiﬁcation of operation: for every subject phrase p1 in the textual relationships, the relation
phrase p2 between the subject and its object phrase is considered as the operation of the block
Bp1 deﬁned by p1.
2. Classiﬁcation based on relation phrase: the textual relationships are ﬁrst classiﬁed according
to the meaning of the relation phrase p2 in the relationship. A pre-selected list of WordNet
synsets that deﬁne composite associations are used, for example ‘include.v.01’. If the relation
phrase’s synset belongs to the predeﬁned list, then the relation is mapped to a composite
association with the corresponding hierarchy.
3. Classiﬁcation based on overlap: the rest of the textual relationships are then classiﬁed by the
string representations of the subject and object phrases (p1, p3). If the string representation of
one phrase is contained in the other phrase in the relation (e.g. the phrase ‘prediction model’
includes the single word phrase ‘prediction’ in string representation), then the relationship is
10
mapped to a generalisation relationship, with the block deﬁned by the shorter phrase being
the generalisation (the other being specialisation).
4. Classiﬁcation based on score: the remaining textual relations are then classiﬁed according to
the score of the subject and the object phrase according to Equation 4. If the diﬀerence in
score is above a user-deﬁned threshold σrel−difference, the relation is mapped to a composite
relationship where blocks deﬁned by the lower-scored phrase is considered a part of the block
deﬁned by the higher-scored phrase.
5. Classiﬁcation of remaining relations: the remaining textual relations which are not yet clas-
siﬁed are then mapped to reference associations.
Augmentation for BDD
The steps used to augment the list of textual phrases and relationships for plotting BDDs are:
1. Identiﬁcation of top-level phrases: The key phrases whose corresponding blocks do not form
sub-blocks of another are ﬁrst compiled to a set P, where a sub-block is deﬁned as the block
at the part end of a composite relationship, or at the specialised end of a generalisation
relationship. These phrases are used for the next abstraction step.
2. Abstraction: Algorithm 1 is used to iteratively abstract higher-level phrases from the top-
level phrases based on a per-word score γ that is a combination of the tf-idf weighting w and
WordNet score h of a word t in a document d.
Algorithm 1: Phrase Abstraction
Identify set of top-level phrases P
for phrase p in P do
if length of phrase Np > 1 then
Initialise score set Γ
for noun t in p do
γt,d = wt,d + ht,d
Γp,d = Γp,d ∪{γt,d}
end
sort(Γp,d)
pabstract = p \ t, where γt,d is smallest in Γp,d
P = P ∪{pabstract}
end
end
Additionally, generalisation relationships are assigned to the blocks deﬁned by the top-level
phrases and their abstractions.
3. Relationship augmentation: After the abstraction step, all of the resultant sets of top-level
phrases are now unigrams. The WordNet is then used to identify hypernym/hyponym (corre-
sponding to generalisation) and holonym/meronym (corresponding to composite association)
relationships between these phrases and corresponding relationships are assigned between
their blocks [58, 59].
4. Phrase augmentation: As the ﬁnal step, the lowest common hypernyms between the phrases
that remain at the top level are found using WordNet [58, 59]. The blocks deﬁned by these
remaining top-level phrases are assigned a generalisation relationship with blocks deﬁned by
their hypernyms.
11
3.5.2. Internal Block Diagrams
Internal Block Diagrams are used to specify the internal structures of blocks, and display the
parts and references of a speciﬁc block as well as the connections between its parts and references
[2, 9]. In this study, the parts of a block are deﬁned as the block’s composites, and the references of
a block are deﬁned as other blocks connected to it through the reference association. A connection
means that two blocks are able to access each other in an operational system [2, 9]. To leverage the
connection between IBD diagrams and BDD diagrams, the augmented list of textual relationships
and phrases from the BDD are used as inputs to the IBD algorithm.
Relationship mapping for IBD
The steps to map textual relationships to inter-block relationships for IBD are:
1. Parent block generation: The user can ﬁrst choose to specify a parent block to draw the IBD
for. Then, all blocks that are sub-blocks or sub-sub-blocks of the user-speciﬁed block are
selected. If no parent block is manually selected, IBDs will be drawn for all blocks.
2. Relationship selection: The textual relationships whose subject or object phrases correspond
to a sub-block of the user-speciﬁed block are selected, except in cases where the phrase is in
the lower hierarchy in the textual relationship.
3. Connection classiﬁcation: For each of the selected textual relationship, if the relation phrase is
not empty, then blocks deﬁned by its subject and object phrases are assigned a port connection
between each other.
Augmentation for IBD
The steps used to augment the list of textual phrases and relationships for plotting IBDs are:
1. Phrase augmentation: Pairs of key phrases that share a non-empty intersection (i.e. include
one or more identical nouns) are identiﬁed and are added to the list of phrases for IBD, except
when the intersection corresponds to the user-speciﬁed block.
2. Relationship augmentation: After the phrase augmentation step, a generalisation relationship
is assigned to the block deﬁned by the intersection and the intersection’s parent blocks, with
the intersection block at the generalised end. The new relationships are added to the list of
IBD relationships.
Importantly, the augmentation mechanism used in IBD is diﬀerent to the abstraction mechanism
in BDD. This is done as a redundancy measure to ensure the completeness of the plotted diagrams.
For example, a phrase ‘prediction mode’ may be only abstracted to ‘prediction’ in the BDD step.
However, in the IBD step, it could be additionally abstracted to ‘model’ if any of the other selected
key phrases also include the word ‘model’.
3.5.3. Requirement Diagram
Requirement Diagrams are a unique feature of SysML diagrams that represent the requirements
of the system and its components [2, 9]. Relationships relevant to requirements in SysML include
containment, trace, derive, reﬁne, satisfy, and verify [2, 9]. For simplicity, the authors focus on the
satisfy relationships and the trace relationships between the requirements, which represents a weak
dependency where a change at one end may result in the need to modify the requirement at the
other end [2, 9].
Mapping for REQ
The following steps are used to map textual relationships to requirements and requirement
relationships for REQ diagrams.
12
1. Requirement identiﬁcation: For each of the key relationships, if the relation phrase is not
empty, then its corresponding raw relationship output from OpenIE is considered a require-
ment.
2. The requirements are assumed to be satisﬁed by their subject phrase blocks, and their re-
quirement blocks are named after the subject phrases. There can be multiple requirements
with the same subject phrase, and these are grouped together in the same requirement block.
3. Relationship identiﬁcation: A trace relationship is assigned to requirements whose correspond-
ing relationships share the same subject phrases or object phrases, or have subject phrases
equal to object phrases of other relationships, and vice versa.
Relationship augmentation for REQ
The WordNet is used to identify any hypernym, hyponym, entailment, and causes relationship
between the relation phrases of relationships that have been identiﬁed as a requirement [58, 59].
If a relationship is identiﬁed, the corresponding pair of requirements are considered to have a trace
relationship
3.6. Diagram Generation
Prior to plotting the diagram, the user can choose to select a parent block for plotting the desired
diagram. For IBD, this would be the parent block used to select sub-blocks and sub-sub-blocks.
For BDD, all blocks at a lower hierarchy than the parent block (e.g. the parent block’s sub-blocks
and their sub-blocks, etc.) will be iteratively selected, and the resultant selected blocks and their
relationships will be plotted instead of the full diagram comprising all generated blocks. For REQ,
all requirements that contain the phrase corresponding to the selected block, and the relationships
between these requirements, are extracted for plotting.
An open-source diagram generation tool (PlantUML [61, 62]) is used to plot the generated blocks
and their relationships. The augmented blocks and relationships are plotted with dotted lines to
indicate that these do not directly map to phrases and relationships in the input text documents.
The diagram generation tool uses GraphViz as its graphical engine [63].
4. Steps for the implementation of the proposed approach
The following steps are performed for the generation of SysML diagrams using the proposed
approach:
1. Select the corpus of textual materials;
2. Select the document to draw the SysML diagram for;
3. Set threshold values for ﬁve hyperparameters
(a) 0 < σtf−idf < 1 for key noun selection. This sets the tf-idf threshold for a noun to be
considered a key noun.
(b) 0 < σrelationship < 1 for relationship extraction.
This sets the conﬁdence threshold
for a relation extracted by OpenIE and can be used to remove an excessive number of
duplicated relationships.
(c) 0 < σp < 3 for key phrase selection. This sets the minimum score for a phrase to be
considered a key phrase via the proposed formula in Equation 4.
(d) 0 < σrel−difference < 3 for composite relationship classiﬁcation. This sets the minimum
score diﬀerence for connected phrases to be mapped to composite relationships.
13
(e) Lphrase > 0 for length of phrases. This sets the maximum number of words in a phrase;
4. Select the type of SysML diagram to generate (optional);
5. Select the phrase to deﬁne the parent block in the SysML diagram (optional);
6. Run the end-to-end six-steps approach as described in Section 3 to automatically generate
SysML diagrams, which will generate the following outputs in sequence:
(a) List of key nouns;
(b) List of extracted relationships;
(c) List of key phrases and key relationships;
(d) Mapping of key textual relationships to SysML relationships;
(e) Required diagrams.
7. Evaluate the quality of the results through the following steps:
(a) Evaluation of key phrase selection;
(b) Evaluation of key relation mapping;
(c) Evaluation of diagram generation.
4.1. Quantiﬁcation of the success of phrase extraction
To evaluate the success in key phrase extraction, manually selected lists of key phrases based on
OpenIE extractions are created for each of the selected documents and used as the ground truth.
The automatically extracted lists of phrases are then evaluated by precision and recall. Precision
is deﬁned as the percentage of extracted key phrases that match a phrase in the ground truth.
Recall refers to the percentage of ground truth phrases that match a phrase in the extracted list.
As the key relationships are extracted together with the key phrases, the key relationships are not
evaluated separately because it is strongly coupled with the key phrases.
4.2. Quantiﬁcation of the success of relationship mapping
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the approach in mapping textual relationships to SysML rela-
tionships, the ground truth for the type of relationship between blocks deﬁned by the subjects and
objects is deﬁned manually. This is used as a benchmark to evaluate the results from the rela-
tionship mapping algorithm. The algorithm is evaluated for its accuracy in determining the type
of SysML relationship (e.g. composite association, generalisation or reference association) and the
relative hierarchy between the blocks deﬁned by the subject and the object phrase in the textual
relationship (e.g. whether block deﬁned by the subject phrase is a composite of that deﬁned by the
object, or vice versa).
4.3. Hyperparameter selection
The following values for the hyperparameters are suggested, and applied to the six case studies
investigated:
1. σtf−idf = 0. This means that all the nouns in the input text are treated as key nouns. This
is done to illustrate the eﬀect of selection in the subsequent steps. However, it is envisioned
that the parameter can be adjusted according to the user’s needs;
2. σrelationship = 0.5.
This is to ﬁlter out relationships with low conﬁdence of being valid
relationships.
3. σp = 0.6. This implies most phrases are selected as key phrases, to ensure the completeness
of results.
4. σrel−difference = 0.5. This ensures that only connected phrases with a suﬃcient score diﬀer-
ence are mapped to composite relationships.
5. Lphrase = 3. This sets the maximum length of a phrase to be three nouns.
14
4.4. User Interface
An illustrative example of the user interface for the proposed tool is shown in Figure 2. The
main panel features the list of uploaded documents on the left. On the top, the users are able
to vary the hyperparameters according to need, and generate the desired SysML diagram at the
bottom, below the hyperparameters.
Figure 2: An example of the user interface for the proposed tool
5. Experiments
Six case studies are investigated to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach in auto-
matically generating SysML diagrams from texts. The details of the datasets used, the experimental
procedure, the evaluation procedure, and the choice of hyperparameters are discussed in this sec-
tion. The results from the extraction of key phrases and classiﬁcation of relationships are validated
against manually constructed benchmarks. Additionally, the generated diagrams are also compared
against manually designed ground truth diagrams.
It is worth emphasising here that the aim of the proposed approach is not to replace systems
engineers but rather to aid them in gaining an overview of the system. Therefore, the goal is not
a perfect extraction of phrases or relationships. Rather, it is to provide an overview of the selected
document and system through the proﬁles in SysML diagrams.
15
5.1. Datasets
The applicability of the proposed approach is tested on six case studies to cover diﬀerent dataset
sizes, domains, and writing styles:
1) Patent descriptions from the European Patent Oﬃce (EPO) [64]. Patent ﬁles in English
are downloaded from the EPO public database in txt format. Each patent includes sections such
as patent name, abstract, and patent description.
The patent ﬁles are ﬁrst parsed to remove
constructs such as HTML tags and ﬁgure references. Then, only the patent description section is
used as textual input to the algorithm. Each description is treated as a separate document, and
345 separate patent description documents are obtained. The patents cover areas such as data
transmission devices, devices for drug admission, and bioinformatics.
2) Windows manual. A digital book named Windows 10 Field Guide in pdf format is used [65].
The book is split into 28 sections according to the chapter, and converted to individual txt ﬁles
with images removed. Each ﬁle is treated as a separate document. The book is a manual for the
Microsoft operating system Windows 10 and describes its diﬀerent functions and applications, for
example Skype and Maps.
3) UK government report. A series of UK government report on the Future of Manufacturing is
downloaded as pdf ﬁles [66]. A total of 37 reports are downloaded, and each of them is further split
into diﬀerent chapters, with cover pages, acknowledgements, content pages and references removed.
This results in a total of 284 chapters. Each chapter is converted to txt format and treated as
a separate document. The contents cover areas such as technology trends in manufacturing and
investment in innovation.
4) App descriptions. App descriptions from the Apple App Store are downloaded from an online
public dataset [67]. A total of 346 app descriptions in txt format with a ﬁle size larger than 4KB
are selected from a dataset of 4075 app descriptions. This is done to ensure that each document has
suﬃcient length. Each description is treated as a separate document. The app descriptions included
apps of diﬀerent genres and included contents such as user reviews and feature descriptions.
5) Research publications from IEEE. 285 papers are downloaded using IEEE Xplore [68]. The
search criteria were to have the words ‘design’ and ‘manipulator’ in the title of the paper and the
range was from 2015 to 2021. The papers were downloaded as pdfs and converted to txt ﬁles.
Each paper is treated as a separate document. The papers covered areas in the design of robotic
manipulators, for example mechanics and control.
6) Description of countries on Wikipedia. 193 English Wikipedia pages about countries are
parsed from the parent Wikipedia page Member states of the United Nations [69]. Each page is
saved as a separate txt ﬁle and all formatting and images were removed. Each page is also treated
as a separate document. The descriptions include each country’s economy, geography, government,
etc.
Details of each dataset are summarised in the table below. Two documents are selected from
each of the datasets for demonstration1. The documents are selected based on their word counts
being close to the average word count of the dataset. Additionally, one block is selected for each
document as the parent block, and the phrases that correspond to the parent blocks are listed in
Table 1. The use of these phrases is explained in Section 3.6.
1The demonstration documents are available at https://github.com/ShaohongZ/NLP-for-Systems-Engineering
16
Doc.
no.
Word count
Selected phrase
EPO patent
8370 (average)
A state estimator
1
8418
Prediction
A body ﬂuid leakage detection
aqueous composition
2
8343
Starch
Windows manual
3027 (average)
Devices
3
3061
Display
Maps
4
2859
Map
UK government report
1982 (average)
Knowledge spillover - knowledge
sources manufacturing Part5
5
1993
Intangible asset
De-industrialisation and balance-of
payments Part3
6
1958
Manufacturing
App description
559 (average)
Inﬁnity Blade II
7
559
Entity
Ebates: Cash Back, Coupons &
Rebate Shopping App
8
559
Entity
Research paper
3414 (average)
Design of a weight-compensated and
coupled tendon-driven articulated
long-reach manipulator
9
3430
Actuator
Multi criteria design of a spherical
3-DoF parallel manipulator for
optimal dynamic performance
10
3413
Optimisation
Wikipages
9830 (average)
Bhutan
11
9867
Industry
India
12
9811
Religion
Table 1: Details of datasets, selected documents, and selected phrases
6. Results
6.1. Key phrase extraction
The results from the key phrase extraction are detailed in Table 2. It can be seen that the
number of phrases extracted from a document is around the same order of magnitude as the
number of unique nouns in the document. The possible reason why the number of phrases tends to
be less than the number of nouns, except for one case, is that many of the phrases are in descriptive
sentences or sentences with pronouns. For example, in a descriptive sentence such as ‘The device is
expensive’, the candidate phrase ‘device’ will not be considered as a key phrase as no relationship
can be extracted from the sentence. Additionally, in sentences that involve pronouns such as ‘You
can turn on the computer’ and ‘It is used to predict motion’, the candidate phrase ‘computer’ or
‘motion’ will not be selected because detecting pronoun references is out of the scope of this paper.
Requiring all key phrases to be related to at least one other phrase is useful because it avoids the case
of ‘ﬂoating blocks’ where a given block is not connected to any other block in the SysML diagram.
17
Such ﬂoating blocks are not conducive to helping the user understand the dependencies within the
system or the hierarchies between the diﬀerent blocks within the system, and may confuse the user.
Document
No.
Word
Count
Unique
nouns
No. of
key phrases
Precision %
Recall %
1
8418
345
401
80.8
76.8
2
8343
430
351
91.5
77.3
3
3061
214
141
70.2
57.9
4
2859
193
119
66.4
49.7
5
1993
214
157
55.4
81.3
6
1958
223
140
70.7
71.2
7
559
122
12
66.7
34.8
8
559
105
33
84.8
63.6
9
3430
216
131
61.8
54.0
10
3413
367
211
81.0
82.6
11
9867
1198
992
77.3
72.9
12
9811
1224
854
58.7
69.3
Table 2: Results from key phrase extraction
As can be seen from Table 2, the precision and recall rates indicate that the algorithm has
successfully extracted key phrases from the document.
The algorithm is especially useful with
documents that tend to be more carefully written, as can be seen from the higher success rates in
extracting phrases from patent descriptions. The failure case of key phrases that are not identiﬁed
includes those in descriptive sentences, those connected to pronouns, and incomplete sentences.
Incomplete sentences are probably the main reason for the low recall in extracting key phrases from
Document No.7 because the descriptions contained many broken sentences such as ‘The best game
ever’. Additionally, the algorithm is able to achieve relatively high precision, across most of the
document types, validating the proposed algorithm for selecting key phrases. The precision and
recall rates can be further improved by adjusting the hyperparameters. The success in extracting
key phrases contributes to helping the user gain an initial understanding of the system.
As no other approach automatically generates SysML diagrams directly from text, the compar-
ison with the literature can only be made by considering the extraction of key phrases for similar
purposes. It was observed, that the precision and recall results are comparable with or outper-
form most prior works. Speciﬁcally in [7], which aimed to extract domain terms as UML classes,
a precision of 40% and recall of 50% were reported. In the ontology domain, the CRCTOL [43]
reports more than 90% in precision and less than 5% in recall (in diﬀerent ablations). The pro-
posed method also achieves comparable results to [13] (precision of 62% and recall of 82.2%), [29]
(precision between 40% and 73%, and recall between 57% and 93%), and [70] (precision between
82.5% and 85.0%, and recall between 68.0% and 53.2%).
On the other hand, the proposed approach under-performs compared to [14] (precision and
recall rates around 90%) and [36] (precision of 83.82% and 91.01%). This is because, [14] assumes
a ﬁxed format for the user stories, thus making the extraction process much simpler. Similarly, [36]
assumes a structure in the input text, arguably simplifying the extraction.
18
Document
No.
No. of
sentences
No. of
extracted relations
No. of
key relations
1
409
670
425
2
463
681
309
3
186
257
102
4
174
289
107
5
92
286
137
6
98
158
100
7
20
21
7
8
34
43
25
9
301
251
115
10
217
207
150
11
508
1179
799
12
443
1106
689
Table 3: Results from key relationship extraction
6.2. Key relationship extraction
The results from key relationship extraction are detailed in Table 3.
As can be seen from
the table, the OpenIE tool extracts multiple semantic relations from the same sentence even after
applying a relation likelihood threshold of 0.5 on the OpenIE tool. This is likely attributed to the
combination of diﬀerent methods used in OpenIE [51, 52, 53, 54]. This is helpful in capturing the
complete semantic meaning of each sentence. It can also be seen that the key relation selection
algorithm is eﬀective in removing from 27% to 65% of the extracted relations. This can also be
manually adjusted by tuning the parameters sigmatf−idf, σp, and σrelationship. The use of multiple
parameters is aimed at giving the user more control over the completeness of the generated SysML
diagrams.
6.3. Relationship mapping
The results from the mapping of key relationships for BDD diagram are detailed in Table 4.
A majority of the extracted textual relationships are mapped to either composite associations or
reference associations. This is expected because a textual relationship is only mapped to general-
isation if one phrase contains another, which is assumed to be a stricter criterion. At a diﬀerence
threshold of 0.2, the number of composite associations and the number of reference associations are
around the same order of magnitude, with the number of composite associations generally larger.
At a diﬀerence threshold of 0.5, the number of composite and reference associations are around the
same order of magnitude, with the number of reference associations generally larger.
Having a suﬃcient number of composite relationships and generalisation relationships is useful
because they also serve as taxonomic relationships which provide structures to the SysML diagrams.
This helps the algorithm to identify the hierarchy between blocks and facilitates the graphic layout
algorithm. Having such a hierarchical structure is useful in helping the user understand the overall
structure of the system. Additionally, the algorithm can also be seen to have achieved high accuracy
in mapping the correct relationship types. The outlier in the app description dataset is potentially
due to the small number of key relations for the document. This contributes to creating a more
objective starting point in SysML diagrams for users.
19
Document
No.
Generalisation
Composite
association
Reference
association
Classiﬁcation
accuracy %
1
26
168
226
75.8
2
11
92
204
70.9
3
3
31
68
64.7
4
6
45
55
70.1
5
4
39
93
84.7
6
1
26
72
71.0
7
0
2
5
57.1
8
0
11
13
68.0
9
7
34
73
62.6
10
1
33
115
73.3
11
12
209
577
73.0
12
5
187
497
73.6
Table 4: Results from key relationship classiﬁcation
Due to the diﬀerences in the proposed approach, comparisons are made with methodologies
that aim to leverage NLP techniques for extracting/classifying requirements and relationships. For
extracting relationships, the results are comparable to those reported in [43] (F-score of around
69%) and [29] (F-score from 48.0% to 81.1%). Similar results were also obtained in [41], report-
ing results in taxonomy construction with F-scores of between 66.7% and 69.2%. The proposed
approach under-performs compared to [14], which reports a precision between 67.2% and 83.7% in
extracting relationships (F-score∼80%). This is because in [14] is assumed a ﬁxed input format,
thus making the extraction process simpler. Similarly, [33] reports results with F-score of 80.3%,
by making assumptions on the structure of the input documents. Additionally, when considering
requirement classiﬁcation results, the results obtained are comparable to [19] that uses 5%-15% of
the dataset for training.
6.4. Augmentation
The results from augmentation for BDD diagrams are detailed in Table 5. As can be seen,
the abstraction step adds a high number of augmented relationships and phrases. It helps provide
a higher-level overview of the entire system and more structure to the SysML diagrams through
taxonomic generalisation relationships. This also enables the user to quickly identify higher-level
phrases within the document to plot other diagrams, for example package diagrams. Additionally,
abstraction is based on the extracted phrases, ensuring that the abstracted phrases and relationships
are relevant to the original corpus. This provides users with a more complete starting point to
understand and design the complex system.
It can be seen that only a small number of relationships are identiﬁed between the top-level
unigram phrases after the abstraction step, potentially due to the criteria used as only WordNet
hypernyms/hyponyms and meronyms/holonyms relationship are identiﬁed [58, 59].
It can also
be seen that a large number of common hypernyms and hypernym relationships are augmented.
The common hypernyms are able to provide another level of abstraction to the selected phrases
based on semantics that are diﬀerent from the abstraction based on lexical terms, helping the
system engineer to gain a more complete high-level picture of the system and its diﬀerent abstract
categories in addition to contributing more structure to the SysML diagrams.
20
Document
No.
No. of
abstraction
relations
No. of
abstracted
phrases
No. of
augmented
top-level
relationships
No. of
lowest
common
hypernym
relationships
No. of
lowest
common
hypernyms
1
246
125
1
276
96
2
224
145
3
569
168
3
98
61
1
159
58
4
66
45
0
112
53
5
104
62
1
235
85
6
107
69
0
249
80
7
10
10
0
14
9
8
19
16
0
43
23
9
83
51
2
121
51
10
182
117
0
316
104
11
736
462
26
1678
403
12
595
376
37
1672
399
Table 5: Results from phrase and relationship augmentation
6.5. Requirement identiﬁcation
The results from requirement identiﬁcation are detailed in Table 6. The number of requirements
identiﬁed is the same as the number of key relationships, which is expected because the requirements
in this study are derived from relationships. This contributes to a more complete set of candidate
requirements for the user to consider. Additionally, it can also be seen that a large number of
relationships between requirements are identiﬁed and augmented through the algorithm.
This
leads to most of the requirements being connected using the augmented relationships, which is
useful because even though relationships between phrases may be found through using sentences
explicitly stated in the text, relationships between requirements, which are derived from sentences,
can be diﬃcult to identify.
The proposed algorithm is able to suggest candidate relationships
between requirements, allowing the user to build on the knowledge to classify relationships between
requirements further.
Additionally, the relationships also provide structure to the requirement
diagrams by connecting the requirements and bringing related requirements to the same cluster.
6.6. BDD diagram generation
A few examples of BDD diagrams generated in the case studies are illustrated in Figure 3
below. It can be seen that the augmentation steps were useful in building the structure of the BDD
diagrams. For example, many blocks have corresponding phrases that share the same abstracted
phrase, which deﬁnes the parent block that clusters these blocks together. This can also be tuned
by the choice of speciﬁcity Lphrase. This is useful because these phrases are not explicitly related in
the original document, yet they are connected via the parent blocks in the generated diagrams. For
example, in Figure 3b, the block deﬁned by the abstracted phrase ‘display’ clusters the sub-blocks
such as ‘display option’ and ‘taskbar display’ into one branch. In Figure 3a, the block deﬁned
by the abstracted phrase ‘prediction’ clusters multiple sub-blocks into one branch. Additionally,
blocks corresponding to top-level unigram phrases can also be connected to the same block deﬁned
21
Document
No.
No. of
requirements
No. of relationships
between requirements
1
425
636
2
309
450
3
102
84
4
107
52
5
137
85
6
100
56
7
7
1
8
25
2
9
115
149
10
150
161
11
799
469
12
689
575
Table 6: Results from requirement identiﬁcation and augmentation
by their common hypernyms such as ‘entity’ in Figure 3c, where ‘entity’ is a high-level common
hypernym for many synsets in the WordNet [58, 59].
22
bdd
«Block»
prediction
Part
matrix_operation_value
trajectory
embodiment_ﬁgure
Operation
include()
use()
make()
show()
predict()
reproduce()
provide()
«Block»
update_prediction_measurement
Operation
use()
«Block»
prediction_model
Part
equation_motion
Operation
include()
describe()
make()
undergone()
estimate()
«Block»
equation_motion
Operation
include()
«Block»
everything_prediction_model
Operation
correct()
«Block»
prediction_model_inaccuracy
Operation
use sensor measurement correct()
«Block»
matrix_operation_value
«Block»
trajectory
Operation
predict()
«Block»
embodiment_ﬁgure
Operation
provide()
«Block»
prediction_object
«Block»
prediction_model_object
Operation
predict()
«Block»
prediction_accuracy
«Block»
prediction_model_accuracy
Operation
trading()
«Block»
prediction_element
Part
prediction_model
include_prediction_ann
prediction
Operation
include()
estimate()
conﬁgure()
increase()
«Block»
include_prediction_ann
Operation
include()
«Block»
respective_prediction
Operation
correspond()
«Block»
respective_prediction_model
Operation
correspond()
«Block»
prediction_step
Operation
use()
«Block»
prediction_model_element
Part
prediction
Operation
include()
(a) EPO patent dataset, selected phrase = ‘prediction’
bdd
«Block»
display
Part
view
resolution
full_hd
taskbar
apps
Operation
run()
present()
duplicate()
title()
appear()
«Block»
view
Operation
present()
«Block»
second_display
Operation
duplicate()
use()
«Block»
resolution
«Block»
full_hd
«Block»
taskbar
Operation
appear()
«Block»
apps
Operation
run()
«Block»
display_adapter
Operation
support()
«Block»
display_page
«Block»
display_section_page
Operation
let()
«Block»
display_option
Operation
let()
«Block»
resolution_display
Operation
use()
«Block»
taskbar_display
Operation
appear()
«Block»
taskbar_second_display
Operation
display()
«Block»
display_taskbar
Operation
appear()
(b) Windows manual dataset, selected phrase = ‘display’
23
bdd
«Block»
reign
Part
editor_choice
editor
Operation
continues()
«Block»
entity
«Block»
editor_choice
Operation
continues()
«Block»
editor
Operation
continues()
«Block»
journey
«Block»
journey_siris
Operation
unfolds()
«Block»
experience
«Block»
new_experience
«Block»
new_game_experience
Operation
allow()
«Block»
social
«Block»
reward_social
Operation
allow()
(c) App description dataset, selected phrase = ‘entity’
augmented entity
extracted entity
extracted relation
augmented relation
generalisation
specialised
end
generalised
end
composite
association
part end
composite
end
reference association
Figure 3: Automatically generated BDD diagrams
These high-level phrases are augmented based on semantics, which ensures that they are relevant
to the document, in addition to providing a hierarchical structure that aids user understanding.
Without the augmented phrases, these extracted key phrases may become open-ended, which makes
it harder for the user to understand the structure of the system from the SysML diagrams. Addi-
tionally, the two levels of abstraction capabilities, both lexical and semantic, are useful to help the
systems engineer in gaining an overview of the higher-level abstract concepts in the system that
are not explicitly stated in the text, and oﬀer suggestions for candidate high-level phrases and their
corresponding blocks to the systems engineers.
It can also be seen that there is a mix of extracted relationships and augmented relationships in
the diagram, which implies that both steps are useful for the construction of the SysML diagrams.
By combining the taxonomy derived from both generalisation and composite association relation-
ships and both extracted and augmented relationships, the algorithm ensures a strong structure in
the generated diagrams.
24
6.7. IBD diagram generation
The IBD diagram speciﬁes the connection between diﬀerent sub-blocks of a given parent block.
An example of the IBD diagram is illustrated in Figure 4.
It is assumed that two blocks are
connected with ports if an action phrase exists in the relationship whose subject and object phrases
deﬁne these two blocks. The presence of action phrases and corresponding ports is useful to show
the interaction between diﬀerent blocks, in addition to their hierarchical relationship described by
the BDD diagram. Additionally, it can be seen that there are more blocks in the IBD than in the
BDD diagram, because the IBD diagram uses a diﬀerent algorithm to identify sub-blocks. This
acts as a redundancy measure for the identiﬁcation of sub-blocks that are not captured by the
BDD algorithm, to help generate a more complete overview of the system. Additionally, reference
relationships with blocks that are outside the user-speciﬁed block are also included in the IBD to
highlight potential interactions and communications with external blocks.
6.8. REQ diagram generation
The REQ diagram speciﬁes the requirements satisﬁed by the blocks and the relationships be-
tween diﬀerent requirements. An example of the REQ diagram is illustrated in Figure 5. It can
be seen that some of the requirements share the same name and. are satisﬁed by the same block,
implying that the algorithm has successfully clustered them together. Additionally, most of the
requirements are connected to each other via augmented trace relationships. These can serve as
candidates for more speciﬁc types of relationships for the user. The relationships also help cre-
ate a hierarchical structure in the requirement diagram, where the most connected requirement
is assumed to be placed higher in the hierarchy. Moreover, because the requirements are derived
from relationships extracted from individual sentences, they are mostly functional requirements.
The extraction of non-functional requirements is out of the scope of this study.
By presenting
the extracted relationships as requirements to the user, the algorithm is also able to provide more
sentence context to help the users understand the phrases and relationships presented in BDD and
IBD diagrams.
From the generated ﬁgures, it can be seen that the algorithm is able to generate structured
SysML diagrams that can potentially aid engineers in designing and architecting complex systems,
alongside any existing diagrams and documentations they already possess. By deﬁning the steps
and procedures in extracting key phrases and classifying relationships, the approach provides a
standardised, and arguably objective starting point for the user to understand and design diﬀerent
systems. Additionally, the approach also provides a degree of versatility in allowing the user to
freely choose and mix the textual materials to upload, and to adjust the multiple parameters to
achieve the desired speciﬁcity.
25
IBD_actuator
manipulator_actuator
introduction_manipulator
manipulator_actuator_base
position_joint
proximal
stainless_wire_rope
weight_actuator_model
investigation_actuator_design
coupled_mechanism_actuator
mechanism_joint_actuator
actuator_thick_tendon
total_weight_actuator
actuator_model
investigation_actuator
proximal_link
manipulator
joint
mechanism
advantage
tendon_mechanism
allow
reduce
reveal
allow
augmented entity
extracted entity
extracted relation
augmented relation/relation between
internal and external component
relation with ports
relation without ports
Figure 4: IBD diagram for research paper dataset, selected phrase = ‘actuator’
26
Requirement_display
«requirement»
pc
txt
many modern pcs include a or other ports for adding second wired display
«requirement»
window
txt
windows will use the lower resolution of two for both displays
«requirement»
option
txt
this option is titled extend these displays
«requirement»
button
txt
buttons appear on the taskbar for display
buttons appear on the primary display s taskbar
«requirement»
video_card
txt
a video card supports two display adapters
«requirement»
miracast
txt
miracast oﬀers another advantage over other display connection types
«requirement»
display
txt
both displays present the same view
primary display is duplicated to the second
the two displays will have diﬀerent resolutions
the smaller primary display is full hd
the display are running their apps
«requirement»
display_section_page
txt
a new multiple displays section towards the bottom of this page will let you choose between four display options
«requirement»
second_display
txt
only the second display is used in this conﬁguration
«requirement»
taskbar
txt
the taskbar will appear only on primary display
«requirement»
taskbar_second_display
txt
the taskbar on second display will not button labels
«requirement»
project_display_miracast
txt
wirelessly project to a secondary display with miracast need an hdmi or similar cable
requirement block
trace relationship
Figure 5: REQ diagram for Windows manual dataset, selected phrase = ‘display’
27
6.9. Time and space complexity of the SysML diagrams generation
The time taken for the automatic generation of SysML diagrams depends on the length of the
document and on the computational resources available. For example, in the patent documents with
around 9000 words and using a laptop machine with 8 GB RAM, the generation of SysML diagrams
took around 5 minutes. However, the majority of the time was spent on extracting relationships
using the OpenIE tool, which only needs to be done once for each document, and which does not
require human involvement. In deployment, once the relationships are extracted (and saved to
separate ﬁles), the time required to generate SysML diagrams is less than 1 minute, enabling the
user to adjust the hyperparameters and visualise updated SysML outputs quickly.
Additionally, in deployment, the operational space required for generating the SysML diagrams
is also minimal, as the intermediate ﬁles are all text documents, and the resolution of the generated
SysML images can be adjusted according to the user’s need. The space required is less than 9
GB in total. However, most of the space needed is from the OpenIE toolbox and language models
(8.76GB), which can live on a server and not necessarily on the user’s local machine.
7. Discussion
The work presented addresses the three research questions set in subsection 2.4 by yielding an
approach that is
• Flexible and open-domain. By using techniques from open information extraction, it does not
require the input document to follow speciﬁc syntactic rules or to belong to a speciﬁc domain.
Instead, it is able to extract the required information for plotting from free, unstructured
natural language text.
• Automated: Takes natural language text as input and directly generates diﬀerent types of
SysML diagrams with no human intervention or intermediate modelling required.
• Parameter-based: The proposed approach has minimal reliance on heuristic rules and prede-
ﬁned patterns to identify hierarchies. Instead, the approach parameterises the extraction of
key entities and relationships and allows the user to adjust the degree of speciﬁcity using a
set of parameters.
From the results presented in section 6 it is possible to state that according to both quantitative
and qualitative criteria the proposed approach is capable of outputting reasonable SysML diagrams,
similar enough to those that could emerge from an engineer-made ﬁrst draft. It is diﬃcult to directly
compare the results to similar work since, to the best of our knowledge, no attempts have been made,
so far, to automatically generate SysML diagrams from natural text documents. Nevertheless, we
regard this work as an encouraging ﬁrst step towards enabling further and better automation of
other systems engineering processes.
Some extensions of the current work could include:
• Development of an interactive tool from which engineers can correct and provide learning
feedback to the algorithm as to what constitutes a good result or not. Such a tool could also
allow for more explicit calibration and experimenting by the user of the various parameters
that need tuning in order for the results to achieve suﬃcient quality;
• Quantiﬁcation of the notion of completeness and consistency in some meaningful way to allow
comparison against human-designed diagrams;
28
• Adaptation of the method to other types of system modeling languages (e.g. Object Process
Methodology (OPM)) [71];
• Adaptation of the method to include Named Entity Recognition functionality.
One other aspect that is worth exploring (and that would perhaps call for an experimental setup
including actual engineers working on a given task) would be to test how much of a detrimental
impact could the reliance on automation have on the engineers’ capacity to acquire and, most
importantly, structure technical knowledge in the minds.
As often happens when a previously
manual task is automated, there is a risk of progressively deteriorating the level of preparation of
the involved operators.
8. Conclusions
In this study, an approach to automatically generate SysML diagrams end-to-end directly from
unstructured natural language text was proposed.
This approach consists of six steps, and it
leverages open-access tools such as NLTK, OpenIE, and PlantUML. One of the key strengths of
the proposed approach is the combined use of Natural Language Processing techniques and the
WordNet (available in NLTK) with the OpenIE toolbox. This enabled the automatic extraction
of key textual relationships and phrases, and for the ﬁrst time, the mapping and augmentation of
these phrases and relationships to SysML model elements. The results are successfully leveraged to
plot diﬀerent structured SysML diagrams, by using the PlantUML tool. This approach requires ﬁve
hyperparameters to be speciﬁed by the user, and it is open-domain. The versatility of the approach
was demonstrated through the use of six case studies from diﬀerent domains and using diﬀerent
writing styles. The results obtained with the proposed approach were validated against manually
extracted results, which achieved high recall and precision in key phrase extraction, high accuracy
in relationship classiﬁcation, and success in generation of high-quality SysML diagrams.
This approach would beneﬁt systems engineers in gaining a detailed graphical overview of the
system dependencies at the initial design phase, since it provides a standardised, comprehensive
and automated starting point from textual resources (e.g., speciﬁcations, manuals, technical reports,
maintenance reports). This will support systems engineers in understanding complex systems and
in quickly assessing and designing the SysML diagrams for these systems. As far as the authors are
aware, this study is the ﬁrst attempt at directly generating SysML diagrams from natural language
text.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Prof. Janet Pierrehumbert (University of Oxford) and Prof.
Youssef Marzouk (MIT) for the helpful comments and insights at the early stages of this project.
Part of this work was supported by the Department of Engineering Science at the University of
Oxford through the Engineering Undergraduate Research Opportunities (EUROP) in 2019 (recip-
ient SZ, supervisors AC and AS), and by Balliol College, University of Oxford through the Career
Development Fellowship in Engineering Science of AC and a research bursary to SZ.
29
9. APPENDIX
Appendix A. Table of symbols
Symbol
Meaning
w
Tf-idf weighting
t
Word
d
Document
c
Corpus of documents
wt,d
Tf-idf weighting of a word in a document
tft,d
Term frequency of a word in a document
idft,c
Inverse document frequency of a word in a corpus of documents
Nc
Total number of documents in a corpus
dft,c
Document frequency, the number of documents in the corpus that contain
a particular word
σtf−idf
Manually speciﬁed tf-idf weighting threshold for selection of key nouns
σrelationship
Manually speciﬁed conﬁdence threshold to preliminarily ﬁlter extracted
relationships
r
Textual relationships
p
Phrases
p1,2,3,...
Ordered phrases in a textual relationship
Nr
Number of phrases in an extracted relationship
t1,2,3,...
Ordered words in a phrase
Np
Number of words in a phrase
Lphrase
Manually speciﬁed maximum number of nouns in a key phrase
countp,d
Frequency of a phrase, referring to the total count of a phrase in a document
h′
WordNet depth, the semantic depth assigned by WordNet to an individual
word given a context
h
WordNet score, 1-complement of the normalised WordNet depth of a word
λp,d
Score of a candidate key phrase given a document
σp
Manually speciﬁed score threshold for selection of key phrases from candi-
date key phrases
B
SysML block
R
SysML relationship between blocks
Bp
SysML block deﬁned by a phrase
σrel−difference
Manually speciﬁed score threshold for classifying between composite and
reference relationships
P
Top level phrases, the set of key phrases whose corresponding blocks do
not form a sub-block of another
γ
Score of a word, which is a sum of tf-idf weighting and WordNet score
γt,d
Score of a word in a document
Γp,d
List of the scores of words in a phrase of a document
pabstract
Abstracted phrase
Table A.7: The deﬁnition of symbols used in the paper
30
References
[1] A. Kossiakoﬀ, W. Sweet, S. Seymour, S. Biemer, Systems Engineering Principles and
Practice, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2011.
doi:doi.org/10.1002/9781118001028.
[2] S. Friedenthal, A. Moore, R. Steiner, A Practical Guide to SysML, Third Edition: The
Systems Modeling Language, 3rd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 2014. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-14457-1.
[3] L. E. Hart, Introduction to model-based system engineering (mbse) and sysml, in: Delaware
Valley INCOSE Chapter Meeting, Vol. 30, Ramblewood Country Club Mount Laurel, New
Jersey, 2015.
[4] L. Delligatti, SysML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Systems Modeling Language, 1st
Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2013.
[5] E. Huang, R. Ramamurthy, L. F. McGinnis, System and simulation modeling using sysml, in:
2007 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, 2007, pp. 796–803, ISBN = 978-1-4244-1305-8.
ISSN = 1558-4305. INSPEC Accession Number = 9847802.
doi:10.1109/WSC.2007.4419675.
[6] D. Dori, N. Korda, A. Soﬀer, S. Cohen, Smart: System model acquisition from requirements
text, in: J. Desel, B. Pernici, M. Weske (Eds.), Business Process Management, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 179–194, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol 3080. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-25970-1_12.
[7] P. Sawyer, P. Rayson, K. Cosh, Shallow knowledge as an aid to deep understanding in early
phase requirements engineering, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 31 (11) (2005)
969–981, electronic ISSN: 1939-3520. INSPEC Accession Number: 8727391.
doi:10.1109/TSE.2005.129.
[8] A. Arellano, E. Zontek-Carney, M. A. Austin, Frameworks for natural language processing of
textual requirements, International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements 8
(2015) 230–240.
[9] Object Management Group, OMG System Modeling Language Version 1.6, Standard, Object
Management Group (OMG) (Dec. 2019).
URL https://www.omg.org/spec/SysML/1.6
[10] S. Friedenthal, A. Moore, R. Steiner, OMG Systems Modeling Language (OMG SysML)
Tutorial, INCOSE International Symposium 18 (2008) 1731–1862.
doi:10.1002/j.2334-5837.2008.tb00914.x.
[11] M. Hause, The SysML Modelling Language, in: Fifteenth European Systems Engineering
Conference, 2006.
[12] L. Zhao, W. Alhoshan, A. Ferrari, K. J. Letsholo, M. A. Ajagbe, E.-V. Chioasca, R. T.
Batista-Navarro, Natural language processing for requirements engineering: A systematic
mapping study, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (3). doi:10.1145/3444689.
31
[13] N. H. Bakar, Z. M. Kasirun, N. Salleh, H. A. Jalab, Extracting features from online software
reviews to aid requirements reuse, Applied Soft Computing 49 (2016) 1297–1315.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.07.048.
[14] M. Robeer, G. Lucassen, J. M. E. M. van der Werf, F. Dalpiaz, S. Brinkkemper, Automated
extraction of conceptual models from user stories via nlp, in: 2016 IEEE 24th International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2016, pp. 196–205, ISBN:978-1-5090-4121-3.
ISSN: 2332-6441. INSPEC Accession Number: 16519370. doi:10.1109/RE.2016.40.
[15] T. Johann, C. Stanik, A. M. Alizadeh B., W. Maalej, Safe: A simple approach for feature
extraction from app descriptions and app reviews, in: 2017 IEEE 25th International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2017, pp. 21–30, ISBN: 978-1-5386-3191-1.
ISSN: 2332-6441. INSPEC Accession Number: 17207660. doi:10.1109/RE.2017.71.
[16] Z. Shakeri Hossein Abad, V. Gervasi, D. Zowghi, B. H. Far, Supporting analysts by dynamic
extraction and classiﬁcation of requirements-related knowledge, in: 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2019, pp. 442–453,
ISBN:978-1-7281-0869-8. ISSN: 1558-1225. INSPEC Accession Number: 18938395.
doi:10.1109/ICSE.2019.00057.
[17] S. J. K¨orner, M. Landh¨außer, Semantic enriching of natural language texts with automatic
thematic role annotation, in: C. J. Hopfe, Y. Rezgui, E. M´etais, A. Preece, H. Li (Eds.),
Natural Language Processing and Information Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 92–99, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 6177.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-13881-2_9.
[18] J. Hayes, A. Dekhtyar, J. Osborne, Improving requirements tracing via information retrieval,
in: Proceedings. 11th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference, 2003., 2003,
pp. 138–147, ISBN:0-7695-1980-6. ISSN: 1090-705X. INSPEC Accession Number: 7913997.
doi:10.1109/ICRE.2003.1232745.
[19] A. Casamayor, D. Godoy, M. Campo, Identiﬁcation of non-functional requirements in textual
speciﬁcations: A semi-supervised learning approach, Information and Software Technology
52 (4) (2010) 436–445. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2009.10.010.
[20] D. V. Rodriguez, D. L. Carver, A. Mahmoud, An eﬃcient wikipedia-based approach for
better understanding of natural language text related to user requirements, in: 2018 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, 2018, pp. 1–16, ISBN:978-1-5386-2014-4.
doi:10.1109/AERO.2018.8396645.
[21] A. Ferrari, G. O. Spagnolo, F. Dell’Orletta, Mining commonalities and variabilities from
natural language documents, in: Proceedings of the 17th International Software Product Line
Conference, SPLC ’13, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2013, p.
116–120. doi:10.1145/2491627.2491634.
[22] J. S. Thakur, A. Gupta, Identifying domain elements from textual speciﬁcations, in:
Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, ASE 2016, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2016, p.
566–577, INSPEC Accession Number: 16358075. doi:10.1145/2970276.2970323.
32
[23] A. Ferrari, A. Esuli, An nlp approach for cross-domain ambiguity detection in requirements
engineering, Automated Software Engineering 26 (2019) 559–598.
doi:10.1007/s10515-019-00261-7.
[24] G. Carvalho, D. Falc˜ao, F. Barros, A. Sampaio, A. Mota, L. Motta, M. Blackburn, Test case
generation from natural language requirements based on scr speciﬁcations, in: Proceedings of
the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC ’13, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2013, p. 1217–1222.
doi:10.1145/2480362.2480591.
[25] B. C. F. Silva, G. Carvalho, A. Sampaio, Test case generation from natural language
requirements using cpn simulation, in: M. Corn´elio, B. Roscoe (Eds.), Formal Methods:
Foundations and Applications, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016, pp. 178–193.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-29473-5_11.
[26] S. Tiwari, D. Ameta, A. Banerjee, An approach to identify use case scenarios from textual
requirements speciﬁcation, in: Proceedings of the 12th Innovations on Software Engineering
Conference (Formerly Known as India Software Engineering Conference), ISEC’19,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019, pp. 1–11.
doi:10.1145/3299771.3299774.
[27] A. Ferrari, G. Gori, B. Rosadini, I. Trotta, S. Bacherini, A. Fantechi, S. Gnesi, Detecting
requirements defects with nlp patterns: An industrial experience in the railway domain,
Empirical Softw. Engg. 23 (6) (2018) 3684–3733. doi:10.1007/s10664-018-9596-7.
[28] N. Loughran, A. Sampaio, A. Rashid, From requirements documents to feature models for
aspect oriented product line implementation, in: J.-M. Bruel (Ed.), Satellite Events at the
MoDELS 2005 Conference, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 262–271,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 3844. doi:doi.org/10.1007/11663430_27.
[29] A. Sree-Kumar, E. Planas, R. Claris´o, Extracting software product line feature models from
natural language speciﬁcations, in: Proceedings of the 22nd International Systems and
Software Product Line Conference - Volume 1, SPLC ’18, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018, p. 43–53. doi:10.1145/3233027.3233029.
[30] L. A. Al-Safadi, Natural language processing for conceptual modeling, International Journal
of Digital Content Technology and its Applications 3 (3) (2009) 47–59.
[31] E. Casagrande, S. Woldeamlak, W. L. Woon, H. H. Zeineldin, D. Svetinovic, Nlp-kaos for
systems goal elicitation: Smart metering system case study, IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 40 (10) (2014) 941–956, ISSN: 1939-3520. INSPEC Accession Number: 14652000.
doi:10.1109/TSE.2014.2339811.
[32] U. Thayasivam, K. Verma, A. Kass, R. Vasquez, Automatically mapping natural language
requirements to domain-speciﬁc process models, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 25 (2) (2011) 1695–1700.
URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/18863
[33] T. H. Nguyen, J. Grundy, M. Almorsy, Rule-based extraction of goal-use case models from
text, in: Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering,
33
ESEC/FSE 2015, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2015, p.
591–601. doi:10.1145/2786805.2786876.
[34] L. Chen, Y. Zeng, Automatic generation of uml diagrams from product requirements
described by natural language, Vol. Volume 2: 29th Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference, Parts A and B of International Design Engineering Technical
Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, 2009, pp. 779–786.
doi:10.1115/DETC2009-86514.
[35] Y. Zeng, Recursive object model (rom)-modelling of linguistic information in engineering
design, Computers in Industry 59 (6) (2008) 612–625.
doi:10.1016/j.compind.2008.03.002.
[36] H. Afreen, I. S. Bajwa, Generating UML class models from SBVR software requirements
speciﬁcations, in: 23rd Benelux Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BNAIC 2011), Citeseer,
2011, pp. 23–32.
[37] D. K. Deeptimahanti, R. Sanyal, Semi-automatic generation of uml models from natural
language requirements, in: Proceedings of the 4th India Software Engineering Conference,
ISEC ’11, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2011, p. 165–174.
doi:10.1145/1953355.1953378.
[38] T. R. Gruber, Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing,
International journal of human-computer studies 43 (5-6) (1995) 907–928.
doi:10.1006/ijhc.1995.1081.
[39] M. N. Asim, M. Wasim, M. U. G. Khan, W. Mahmood, H. M. Abbasi, A survey of ontology
learning techniques and applications, Database 2018. doi:10.1093/database/bay101.
[40] P. Cimiano, J. V¨olker, Text2onto: A framework for ontology learning and data-driven change
discovery, in: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Natural Language
Processing and Information Systems, NLDB’05, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, p.
227–238. doi:10.1007/11428817_21.
[41] E. Drymonas, K. Zervanou, E. G. M. Petrakis, Unsupervised ontology acquisition from plain
texts: The ontogain system, in: Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing and
Information Systems, and 15th International Conference on Applications of Natural
Language to Information Systems, NLDB’10, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, p.
277–287. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-13881-2_29.
[42] P. Velardi, S. Faralli, R. Navigli, OntoLearn Reloaded: A Graph-Based Algorithm for
Taxonomy Induction, Computational Linguistics 39 (3) (2013) 665–707.
doi:10.1162/COLI_a_00146.
[43] X. Jiang, A.-H. Tan, CRCTOL: A Semantic-Based Domain Ontology Learning System,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 61 (1) (2010)
150–168. doi:10.1002/asi.21231.
[44] M. Mejhed Mkhinini, O. Labbani-Narsis, C. Nicolle, Combining uml and ontology: An
exploratory survey, Computer Science Review 35 (2020) 100223.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2019.100223.
34
[45] D. Jurafsky, J. H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing (2nd Edition), Prentice-Hall,
Inc., USA, 2009, ISBN = 0131873210.
[46] T. Kiss, J. Strunk, Unsupervised Multilingual Sentence Boundary Detection, Computational
Linguistics 32 (4) (2006) 485–525. arXiv:https://direct.mit.edu/coli/article-
pdf/32/4/485/1798345/coli.2006.32.4.485.pdf, doi:10.1162/coli.2006.32.4.485.
URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli.2006.32.4.485
[47] S. Bird, E. Klein, E. Loper, Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with
the natural language toolkit, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2009.
[48] H. P. Luhn, A statistical approach to mechanized encoding and searching of literary
information, IBM Journal of research and development 1 (4) (1957) 309–317.
[49] K. S. Jones, A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its application in retrieval,
Journal of documentation.
[50] M. Mausam, Open information extraction systems and downstream applications, in:
Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁfth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, 2016,
pp. 4074–4077.
[51] J. Christensen, Mausam, S. Soderland, O. Etzioni, An analysis of open information
extraction based on semantic role labeling, in: Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Knowledge Capture, K-CAP ’11, Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 2011, p. 113–120. doi:10.1145/1999676.1999697.
[52] H. Pal, Mausam, Demonyms and compound relational nouns in nominal open IE, in:
Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Automated Knowledge Base Construction, Association
for Computational Linguistics, San Diego, CA, 2016, pp. 35–39.
doi:10.18653/v1/W16-1307.
[53] S. Saha, H. Pal, Mausam, Bootstrapping for numerical open IE, in: Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 2017, pp. 317–323.
doi:10.18653/v1/P17-2050.
URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-2050
[54] S. Saha, Mausam, Open information extraction from conjunctive sentences, in: Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Association for
Computational Linguistics, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, 2018, pp. 2288–2299.
URL https://aclanthology.org/C18-1194
[55] V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, W.-t. Yih, The importance of syntactic parsing and inference in
semantic role labeling, Computational Linguistics 34 (2) (2008) 257–287.
[56] R. Johansson, P. Nugues, The eﬀect of syntactic representation on semantic role labeling, in:
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1,
COLING ’08, Association for Computational Linguistics, USA, 2008, p. 393–400.
35
[57] A. Pauls, D. Klein, Faster and smaller ¡i¿n¡/i¿-gram language models, in: Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ’11, Association for Computational Linguistics, USA, 2011, p.
258–267.
[58] C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database, Bradford Books, 1998.
[59] Princeton University, About WordNet (2010).
URL https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
[60] M. Lesk, Automatic sense disambiguation using machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a
pine cone from an ice cream cone, in: Proceedings of the 5th Annual International
Conference on Systems Documentation, SIGDOC ’86, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1986, p. 24–26. doi:10.1145/318723.318728.
[61] PlantUML Team, PlantUML (Oct 2021).
URL http://plantuml.com/
[62] PlantUML Team, Drawing UML with PlantUML: PlantUML Language Reference Guide
(2021).
URL http://plantuml.com/guide
[63] J. Ellson, E. Gansner, L. Koutsoﬁos, S. C. North, G. Woodhull, Graphviz— open source
graph drawing tools, in: P. Mutzel, M. J¨unger, S. Leipert (Eds.), Graph Drawing, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 483–484.
[64] European Patent Oﬃce, EP full-text data for text analytics, licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ (2021).
URL https://www.epo.org/searching-for-patents/data/bulk-data-sets/text-
analytics.html
[65] P. Thurrott, R. Riveram, M. McClean, Windows 10 Field Guide, Leanpub, 2021, [accessed
25-Mar-2021].
[66] Arup, S. Broadberry, T. Leunig, J. R. Bryson, J. Clark, R. Mulhall, H.-J. Chang,
A. Andreoni, M. L. Kuan, S. Deakin, et al., Future of manufacturing (2013), [accessed
25-Mar-2021].
URL https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/future-of-
manufacturing#project-report
[67] ﬁnnqiao, Apple Appstore Descriptions, [accessed 25-Mar-2021].
URL https://github.com/finnqiao/apple_appstore
[68] IEEE, IEEE Xplore, [accessed 19-Mar-2021].
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
[69] Wikipedia contributors, Member states of the united nations — Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia, [accessed 13-November-2020] (2021).
URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Member_states_of_the_United_
Nations&oldid=1052617810
36
[70] N. Hariri, C. Castro-Herrera, M. Mirakhorli, J. Cleland-Huang, B. Mobasher, Supporting
domain analysis through mining and recommending features from online product listings,
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 39 (12) (2013) 1736–1752.
[71] D. Dori, Object-process methodology, in: Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, Second
Edition, IGI Global, 2011, pp. 1208–1220.
37
