Title: Learning with Latent Structures in Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.00490v2
--------------------------------------------------

Learning with Latent Structures in Natural Language Processing:
A Survey
Zhaofeng Wu
University of Washington
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
zfw7@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
While end-to-end learning with fully differentiable models has enabled tremendous success in
natural language process (NLP) and machine learning, there have been signiﬁcant recent interests in
learning with latent discrete structures to incorporate better inductive biases for improved end-task
performance and better interpretability. This paradigm, however, is not straightforwardly amenable
to the mainstream gradient-based optimization methods. This work surveys three main families of
methods to learn such models: surrogate gradients, continuous relaxation, and marginal likelihood
maximization via sampling. We conclude with a review of applications of these methods and an
inspection of the learned latent structure that they induce.1
1
Introduction
With recent advances in deep learning, end-to-end differentiable modules such as LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997) and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), coupled with gradient-based optimization,
have become the mainstream paradigm in NLP and have helped achieve state-of-the-art results in NLP
without much task-speciﬁc, language-speciﬁc, or linguistically-inspired design (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020, inter alia).
On the other hand, human languages possess inherent structures, such as syntactic, semantic, and discourse
structures (Chomsky, 1965; Heim and Kratzer, 1998). Consequently, NLP systems have historically
leveraged such structures to improve their quality. This was traditionally done with pipelined systems,
where a separately trained parser is ﬁrst used to decode an intermediate structure, which is then used
as input for downstream tasks (Sennrich and Haddow, 2016; Eriguchi et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017,
inter alia). This paradigm, however, faces a few challenges. First, its disjoint modules tend to suffer
from cascading errors. Second, such parsers are usually trained in a supervised fashion which, in order
to ensure coverage for robustness, can require large amounts of annotated data. Such annotations often
require domain expertise and, despite recent efforts such as the Universal Dependencies project (Zeman
et al., 2021), remain difﬁcult and expensive to obtain, especially for low-resource languages and domains.
Even when sufﬁcient data exist to train a high-quality formalism-speciﬁc parser, this speciﬁc structural
formalism may not be the optimal one for the downstream task, and it is sometimes advantageous to
allow the model to discover the best structure targeting the downstream task (Kim et al., 2017; Choi et al.,
2018; Maillard et al., 2019, inter alia).
Therefore, previous studies have attempted to jointly train the parser and the downstream predictor and
allow the parser to induce the best task-speciﬁc structure without the need for structural supervision, a
1This work is inspired by Martins et al. (2019).
1
arXiv:2201.00490v2  [cs.CL]  11 Jan 2022
Family
Method
Structure Discrete Inference
or Not
Output
Algo.
Surrogate
STE (Hinton, 2012)
Both

MAP
SPIGOT (Peng et al., 2018)


MAP
Relaxation
softmax


sparsemax (Martins and Astudillo, 2016) + †


Part-Marginalization


Marg.
SparseMAP (Niculae et al., 2018a)


MAP
Sampling
Score Function Estimator (Williams, 1992)
Both

Sampling
Rectiﬁed Distributions (Louizos et al., 2018)

‡
Gumbel-Max (Gumbel, 1954)


Gumbel-softmax (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017)


Perturb-and-Parse (Corro and Titov, 2019a)


MAP
Direct Loss Minimization (McAllester et al., 2010)


Table 1: A high-level summary of the family and the methods reviewed in this survey. † sparsemax+ refers to
sparsemax and other related functions (see Section 5). We list if the methods are primarily used for inducing
structured or unstructured objects, or both. Methods marked with  may still be employed for structured induction
when the parser decisions are local, such as transition-based parsers (see Section 7). We also mark if the methods
yield discrete output, which can be desirable for, for example, interpretability, and sometimes enables specialized
algorithms (e.g., Hu et al., 2021). ‡Some rectiﬁed distributions still have a non-zero probability to output continuous
solutions, though they may be discretizable. Finally, we indicate the structured inference algorithms required for
all methods that are used for inducing structures: MAP, marginalization, or sampling. Depending on the problem,
there may not exist an efﬁcient version of a particular inference algorithm, affecting the choice of methods.
paradigm which we review in this survey. Such systems, however, suffer from one major difﬁculty. To
induce an intermediate discrete structure, the arg max function is usually used to make decisions as a
layer in the parser. However, the gradient of arg max is either zero (almost everywhere) or undeﬁned, so
it does not work well with gradient-based optimization methods, the dominant optimization scheme in
NLP and deep learning.
In this work, we survey three main families of approaches that tackle the non-differentiability of arg max.
The ﬁrst family uses biased estimators with some proxy to the true gradient. The second circumvents
discreteness using continuous relaxation. The last family casts the optimization problem as marginal
likelihood maximization and uses sampling to approximate the gradient. We summarize these methods
and several of their key properties in Table 1. We hope this work could catalyze future studies in
augmenting recent NLP models with structural inductive biases.
2
Background: Structure Prediction
The task of structure prediction aims to automatically extract structures that, in NLP, are often rooted
in linguistic theories (Smith, 2011). In this survey, we loosely deﬁne “structure” and consider any
collection of inter-dependent variables as a structure. Abstracting away from speciﬁc formalisms, we
generically denote any structure with z ∈Z where Z is the set of all possible structures and encodes
any structural constraints enforced by a formalism.2 As an example, for many bilexical dependency
formalisms, syntactic (Zeman et al., 2021) or semantic (Ivanova et al., 2012), z can be viewed as a
collection of binary parts z = [z1, · · · , zn] ∈{0, 1}n2 where each entry denotes the existence of an
2Z usually depends on x, but we drop this dependency notationally for clarity.
2
Surveys
0
0
1
are
0
0
1
great
0
0
0
Surveys        are          great
nsubj
cop
z
(a) Dependency structure. We show edge labels,
though they are ignored in z.
0
0
1
0
ᖓᬿ
0
1
0
0
உঅ
0
0
0
1
Surveys        are          great
z
✏
✏
ᖓᬿ              உঅ
✏
(b) Matching structure. A machine translation example is shown
here, though it can be seen in many other tasks.
Figure 1: Examples of structures as well as, after ﬂattening the binary entries in the tables, their associated z.
edge between a pair of words in a sentence. Here, the structural constraint encoded by Z could require,
for instance, the arborescence structure for syntactic dependencies. As another example, in matching
problems, the words in a source sentence with length m are matched with the words in a target sentence
with length n. Accounting for non-matched words by matching them with a special ϵ symbol, z can again
be viewed as consisting of binary parts, with length (m + 1)(n + 1), where each entry denotes if two
words are matched. These two types of structures are visualized in Figure 1, and more examples can be
found in Section 7.
A parser ﬁnds the highest-scoring structure ˆz = arg maxz∈Z S(z | x; θ) for some input x with some
scoring function S parameterized by θ. We use π(z | x; θ) to denote a normalized scoring function which
yields a probability distribution over all z ∈Z. For example, for dependency parsing, a graph-based
parser is commonly used to produce a score for every part (for the example in Figure 1a, this would be a
score for every cell), and the scores that correspond to the activated parts in a structure z are summed.
Speciﬁcally, we can write the scoring function as S(z | x; θ) = z⊤f(x; θ) = z⊤s where s := f(x; θ)
denotes the per-part score produced by some model f.
In this survey, for simplicity, we default to settings and terminologies for graph-based dependency parsing.
3
Latent Structure Prediction
As argued in Section 1, it is often desirable to model discrete structures latently as an intermediate
representation in a system. Speciﬁcally, we still have s = f(x; θ), ˆz = arg maxz∈Z z⊤s as the best
structure. We then feed ˆz to some downstream task-speciﬁc predictor ˆy = g(ˆz; φ) parameterized by φ
and incur some loss ℓ= L(ˆy, y). For some applications, the original input x is also used as an input to g
in addition to the intermediate structure ˆz, but we omit it for clarity.
g can be seen as a structure encoder. With linguistic structures, for example, it usually takes the form
of graph neural networks which encodes the structure ˆz. TreeLSTMs (Tai et al., 2015) have been
widely used (Maillard et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2018), including variants that use different composition
functions (Hu et al., 2021). With the advent of graph convolutional networks (Kipf and Welling, 2017),
more works have based themselves on this architecture and its variants (Corro and Titov, 2019b; Wu
et al., 2021).
In practice, g can be pretrained before serving as a frozen component in the ﬁnal system (Wu et al., 2019;
Marcheggiani and Titov, 2017; Wu et al., 2021), or jointly trained with f with separate loss signals using
multi-task learning (Bowman et al., 2016; Hashimoto et al., 2017). Nevertheless, driven by the desiderata
outlined in Section 1, in this survey, we only consider the case where f and g are jointly trained using
only the downstream loss.
The challenge associated with this paradigm lies in the gradient (or Jacobian, in the case of structured
output) of arg max, which is either zero (almost everywhere) or undeﬁned (Figure 2a). We hence do not
3
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
0
0.5
1
(a) arg max. The gradient is either zero (almost everywhere)
or undeﬁned.
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
0
0.5
1
(b) softmax. The gradient is well-deﬁned everywhere.
Figure 2: Plot of the (a) arg max and (b) softmax functions. Figure is taken from Corro and Titov (2019b).
have a meaningful gradient with respect to θ for optimization. Below, we introduce three main families
of methods that tackle this difﬁculty.
We note that the non-differentiability of arg max poses an issue not only for latent structure prediction,
but also for non-structural discrete latent decisions, such as in the context of quantization (Hubara et al.,
2017). Therefore, for most methodological families that we review below, we start with the unstructured
case. Nevertheless, structure prediction comes with additional difﬁculties. For example, the feasible set is
usually exponential in the number of structural parts, effectively ruling out enumeration, and it also often
comes with structural constraints. These methods, therefore, sometimes cannot be directly applied to the
structural setting and need modiﬁcations to overcome these challenges.
4
Surrogate Gradients
One family of approaches directly optimize L(g(ˆz; φ), y) by introducing some gradient-like quantity for
backpropagation. Backpropagating through the model described in Section 3 yields a well-deﬁned ∇ˆzℓ.
However, since arg max is used to obtain ˆz from s, ∇sℓ= 0, and hence ∇θℓ= 0 and the parameters of
the parser will not be updated.
In straight-through estimator (STE; Hinton, 2012; Bengio et al., 2013), ∇sℓis manually overridden. For
example, in the identity STE:
∇sℓ= ∇ˆzℓ
(1)
as if the identity activation ˆz = s were performed in the forward pass (cf. the actual ˆz = arg maxz∈Z z⊤s).
It effectively “skips” the arg max operation during the backward pass, hence the name “straight-through.”
Alternatives exist that override the gradient with that of other activation functions including sigmoid (Ben-
gio et al., 2013) and variants of the tanh (Hubara et al., 2016) and ReLU (Cai et al., 2017) functions.
This procedure results in a biased estimator for the true gradient. Nevertheless, despite this biased nature
and its simplicity, it empirically works well (Bengio et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2017). Much research
in understanding and justifying why such a mismatch between the objective and the learning algorithm
remains beneﬁcial is still underway. For example, Yin et al. (2019) showed that the gradients provided by
properly chosen STE variants correlate to the descent direction that minimizes the population loss.
Being mindful of the structural constraints for STE can help improve the learning process. To see this,
we ﬁrst examine an alternative formulation of STE as proposed by Mihaylova et al. (2020). Consider the
4
Figure 3: Left: When the gradient update yields a point outside of the convex polytope P, we perform a projection
back to P. Right: When the gradient update yields a point inside P, no projection is needed. Figure is taken from
Peng et al. (2018).
hypothetical case where the optimal structure z∗is accessible. It can be used to incur some intermediate
loss, such as the structured perceptron loss Lstructure(ˆz, z∗) = s⊤ˆz −s⊤z∗.3 This would allow a nonzero
gradient with respect to s: ∇sℓ= ˆz −z∗. In practice, however, such an optimal structure may not
always be accessible. Nevertheless, an approximation to the optimal structure can be induced using
the downstream loss ℓ. One can view ˆz as an “updatable” quantity and use ˜z = ˆz −∇ˆzℓ≈z∗
for this approximation. Effectively, this procedure performs a one-step gradient descent to induce an
approximation of the optimal structure. Mihaylova et al. (2020) noted that this formulation recovers the
identity STE in Equation (1):
∇sℓ= ˆz −z∗≈ˆz −˜z = ˆz −(ˆz −∇ˆzℓ) = ∇ˆzℓ
(2)
Peng et al. (2018) noted that this approximation ˜z can be outside of the feasible set Z or its convex hull
P = conv(Z). So ˜z can be an invalid, let alone optimal, structure. They proposed the method SPIGOT
that projects ˜z back to P when it is outside of P:
˜zSPIGOT = projP(ˆz −∇ˆzℓ) ≈z∗
(3)
Then the gradient with respect to s can be similarly calculated: ∇sℓ= ˆz −z∗≈ˆz −˜zSPIGOT. Compared
to the one-step gradient descent in the case of STE, SPIGOT can be viewed as performing one step of
projected gradient descent. This process is illustrated in Figure 3.
Inspired by SPIGOT, Mihaylova et al. (2020) explored more numbers of (projected) gradient update steps,
an alternative loss based on the CRF loss (Lafferty et al., 2001) in the place of the structured perceptron
loss, and exponentiated gradient updates (Kivinen and Warmuth, 1997). Nevertheless, they did not
observe signiﬁcant improvement in the structured case. They hypothesized that an optimal intermediate
approximation may not overall help learning.
5
Continuous Differentiable Relaxation
Another family of approaches relax the nondifferentiable arg max function with some continuous and
differentiable function. In general, rather than taking a single ˆz = arg maxz∈Z S(z | x; θ), they consider
ˆz = Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[z] (or ˆzi = Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[zi] for a speciﬁc part zi in the structure), where π(z | x; θ)
represents the normalized scores. Writing this out:
ˆz = Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[z] =
X
z∈Z
π(z | x; θ)z
(4)
We can see that, in Equation (4), rather than only considering one best z, it encodes uncertainty in the
latent space by taking a weighted average of all z. The attention mechanism is a common example of this
type of softening. In the hard case, a model aligns to the token with the highest compatibility score. This,
however, is non-differentiable and restricts the focus to only one token. Hence, recent works obtain a
3Note that the intermediate Lstructure is different from the downstream loss function L.
5
Figure 4: The attention distribution as normalized by three different functions. fusedmax and sparsemax produce
sparser patterns than softmax while the attention distribution fusedmax has more contiguous chunks. Figure is
taken from Niculae and Blondel (2017).
distribution among all candidate tokens, a paradigm that has achieved tremendous success (Bahdanau
et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017, inter alia).
There can be many different choices of π(·). A straightforward and widely-used choice uses the softmax
function. Consider ﬁrst some categorical and unstructured latent variable where Z can be seen as the set
of classes represented as one-hot vectors. Then:
π(z | x; θ) = z⊤softmax(s)
(5)
Nevertheless, one downside of softmax is that it is soft. Even when the temperature parameter (Hinton
et al., 2015) is sometimes used to induce sparse probabilities (Jang et al., 2017; Zhou and Neubig, 2017;
Maillard et al., 2019), it never yields completely discrete 0-1 solutions. On the other hand, discreteness is
sometimes desirable for, for example, interpretability, so many works have sought sparser alternatives to
softmax that are still differentiable.
These alternatives are inspired by the equivalence of softmax and arg max coupled with a Shannon
entropy term as penalty:4
softmax(s) = arg max
z∈∆|Z|−1 z⊤s + H(z)
(6)
Substituting the entropy term H(z) with other forms of penalty results in functions including sparsemax (Mar-
tins and Astudillo, 2016), α-entmax (Peters et al., 2019), fusedmax (Niculae and Blondel, 2017), etc.
As derived in Niculae and Blondel (2017):
sparsemax(s) = arg max
z∈∆|Z|−1 z⊤s −1
2 ∥z∥2
2
(7)
α -entmax(s) = arg max
z∈∆|Z|−1 z⊤s −
1
α(α −1) ∥z∥α
α
(8)
fusedmax(s) = arg max
z∈∆|Z|−1 z⊤s −1
2 ∥z∥2
2 −λ
X
i
|zi −zi−1|
(9)
α-entmax, of which sparsemax is a special case, penalizes the norm of the structure, effectively
encouraging sparser structures. fusedmax builds on sparsemax while including an additional penalty
term that discourages changes in value between consecutive parts. See Figure 4 for a visualization.
Figure 5 (left) illustrates the relationship between arg max, softmax, and this family of approaches using
sparsemax as an example.
Of course, these arg max-based formulations cannot be naïvely applied since, again, arg max is not
amenable to gradient-based optimization. Nevertheless, non-zero Jacobians speciﬁc to each of these
functions have been derived. We refer readers to the original papers for details.
4For a proof, see the appendix of Niculae et al. (2018b).
6
Figure 5: Illustration of the relationship between arg max, softmax, and sparsemax in the probability simplex
(left), as well as their structured counterpart in the convex hull of all possible structures (right). Figure is taken
from Niculae et al. (2018a).
When z is a structure, Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[z] can be intractable to obtain, and people have instead considered the
part-marginal Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[zi] by marginalizing over exponentially many z. Speciﬁcally:
π(Zi = zi | x; θ) = Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[zi] =
X
z∈Z
π(z | x; θ)I([z]i = zi)
(10)
where I(·) is the indicator function. Of course, directly calculating the right-hand side of Equation (10)
is still in most cases intractable. Nevertheless, for speciﬁc cases, efﬁcient algorithms exist, typically
variants of the sum-product algorithm, such as the forward-backward algorithm (Rabiner, 1989) and the
inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979).
Analogous to sparsemax and related functions in the unstructured case, sparser alternatives to Equa-
tion (10) have been pursued. While the right-hand side of Equation (10) cannot be directly evaluated,
with a sparse distribution overs structures π(·), we can only enumerate over structures with a nonzero
probability which allows tractable inference. This provides an alternative to using sum-product algorithms
which in some cases are unavailable and, even when available, only provide local features (e.g., the
probability of an arc between a pair of words), incapable of modeling more global structures which can be
beneﬁcial (Corro and Titov, 2019b). Niculae et al. (2018a,b) developed the SparseMAP inference strategy
which produces a combination of only a small number of structures. Figure 5 illustrates its correspondence
with the unstructured setting. In addition to outperforming the softmax baseline on a variety of tasks, this
sparse distribution over structures allows for improved interpretability: they discovered that it represents
legitimate linguistic ambiguity. Niculae and Martins (2020) proposed LP-SparseMAP that builds on
SparseMAP while allowing approximate inference.
6
Marginal Likelihood Maximization via Sampling
We now reconsider our objective probabilistically as a conditional marginal likelihood model. We want to
maximize the likelihood of the label y given the input x, p(y | x). Introducing and marginalizing over the
latent variable z, this can be written as
p(y | x; θ, φ) =
X
z∈Z
p(y | x, z; φ)p(z | x; θ)
= Ez∼p(z|x;θ)[p(y | x, z; φ)]
(11)
This perspective in fact relates to using continuous relaxation where we considered p(y | x, Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[z]; φ).
When the function that models the outer probability distribution is convex, though it often is not as
parameterized by neural networks, by Jensen’s inequality, the continuous relaxation perspective is a lower
bound of this quantity. Hence, optimizing Equation (11) provides an alternative to continuous relaxation.
7
Nevertheless, the challenge of optimizing Equation (11), or back to our formulation, Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z; φ), y)],
with respect to θ lies in the fact that the expectation is taken over a distribution parameterized by θ.
This makes ∇θEz∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z; φ), y)] difﬁcult to calculate. Sometimes this gradient can be directly
evaluated with special structures and algorithms (e.g., Wiseman et al. (2018)). In this survey, we focus on
the more general setting where this might be intractable and review two methods that rewrite this quantity
in forms that allow its approximation via sampling: score function estimator and reparameterization.5
6.1
Score Function Estimator
One class of such methods uses score function estimators, also known as the REINFORCE algorithm (Williams,
1992), to compute this gradient. They are based on the identity
∇θπ(z | x; θ) = π(z | x; θ)∇θ log π(z | x; θ)
(12)
which leads to
∇θEz∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z))] = ∇θ
X
z∈Z
L(g(z))π(z | x; θ)
=
X
z∈Z
L(g(z))∇θπ(z | x; θ)
=
X
z∈Z
L(g(z))π(z | x; θ)∇θ log π(z | x; θ)
= Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z))∇θ log π(z | x; θ)]
(13)
This formulation allows approximating the gradient with Monte-Carlo samples.
The score function estimator can suffer from high variance due to its sampling nature considering the
exponential number of possible trees and the lack of intermediate rewards. For example, Nangia and
Bowman (2018) showed that the trees induced by Yogatama et al. (2017), a method based on score
function estimators, has a self-F1, which is a measure of variance, that is similar to random trees. Hence,
variance reduction techniques are often employed in practice. For example, a control variate b(x) (Paisley
et al., 2012) can be subtracted from L:
∇θEz∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z))] = Ez∼π(z|x;θ)[(L(g(z)) −b(x))∇θπ(z | x; θ)]
(14)
6.2
Reparameterization
An alternative to score function estimators is the reparameterization trick (Kingma and Welling, 2014).
Suppose we can sample from π(· | x; θ) by ﬁrst sampling a noise γ from a simpler base distribution B
independent of θ and then apply a transformation h(γ; θ). Then:
∇θEz∼π(z|x;θ)[L(g(z))] = ∇θ
X
z∈Z
L(g(z))π(z | x; θ)
= ∇θ
X
γ∈supp(B)
L(g(h(γ; θ)))B(γ)
=
X
γ∈supp(B)
B(γ)∇θL(g(h(γ; θ)))
= Eγ∼B[∇θL(g(h(γ; θ)))]
(15)
5Technically, this formulation does not apply directly in an autoencoding setup where y = x, because we cannot use two
separate networks to model p(x | z) and p(z | x). Directly maximizing the probability is often intractable (Ammar et al. (2014)
being a notable exception), and requires optimizing the evidence lower bound, or ELBO. We omit the technical details for
brevity, though most methods below also apply to ELBO optimization. See Rush et al. (2018) for a review.
8
Figure 6: The Kumaraswamy distribution (dashed curve) and the HardKumaraswamy distribution (solid curve).
The HardKumaraswamy distribution “stretches” the Kumaraswamy distribution and collapses mass beyond [0, 1].
Figure is taken from Bastings et al. (2019).
This allows, once again, Monte-Carlo methods to approximate the original gradient.
We can compare the score function estimator and reparameterization-based methods by contrasting the
ﬁnal line in Equations (13) and (15). In reparameterization, we differentiate through the loss function,
whereas in score function estimator, we only consider the gradient of the log probability of the structure
and use the loss, or “reward” in reinforcement learning terminologies, as a black-box to drive the
optimization. The former hence is more informative and empirically yields lower variance (Rush et al.,
2018). Nevertheless, not all probability distributions are reparameterizable.
The reparameterization trick was originally introduced to train variational auto-encoders (Kingma and
Welling, 2014). Thanks to the linearity of the normal distribution, sampling X ∼N(µ, σ2) can be
equivalently reparameterized as X = h(γ; θ) = µ + σγ where γ ∼N(0, 1), allowing gradients to
be taken with respect to µ and σ so that they can be learned. Nevertheless, it can be more difﬁcult to
reparameterize a discrete variable. We review a few methods to do this below.
6.2.1
Rectiﬁed Distributions
Rectifying continuous distributions can ensure a non-trivial probability for discrete solutions. For
example, Bastings et al. (2019) used a stretch-and-rectify procedure, originally proposed in Louizos
et al. (2018), to design the continuous HardKumaraswamy distribution (solid curve in Figure 6) that
is based on the Kumaraswamy distribution (dashed curve in Figure 6; Kumaraswamy, 1980), which is
reparameterizable. Speciﬁcally, after a base noise is drawn γ ∼unif(0, 1), it is fed through the inverse
CDF of the Kumaraswamy distribution k = F −1
K (γ; a, b) ∈(0, 1), stretched t = l + (r −l)k, and
collapsed z = min(1, max(0, t)). Intuitively, while the original Kumaraswamy distribution does not
have 0 and 1 in its support, we can stretch it from its original support (0, 1) to [l, r] and collapse the
probability mass beyond 0 and 1 to the endpoints, allowing a non-trivial probability at these two points.
This stretch-and-rectify procedure is visualized in Figure 6, and we refer readers to Bastings et al. (2019)
for more details.
6.2.2
Gumbel-Max
The Gumbel-Max trick (Gumbel, 1954; Maddison et al., 2014) can also be used to reparameterize
the sampling of discrete variables. To sample from the unnormalized scores s, the Gumbel-Max trick
perturbs the scores with an additive noise γ ∼Gumbel(0, 1), or equivalently, U ∼unif(0, 1), γ =
9
−log(−log(U)). It can be shown that taking
ˆz = h(γ; θ) = arg max
z∈Z
z⊤s + γ = arg max
z∈Z
S(z | x; θ) + γ
(16)
where Z consists of one-hot vectors, is equivalent to sampling from the softmax-normalized s.6
However, even with the Gumbel-Max trick, the non-differentiability still exists in Equation (16). There-
fore, methods introduced in Section 4 or 5 may still be required. With surrogate gradients, it becomes
Gumbel STE, while with continuous relaxation, it yields Gumbel-softmax (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison
et al., 2017). The two can be combined, where the forward pass uses a discrete arg max like in STE,
while the softmax-ed distribution is used in the backward pass (vs. the identity function in identity STE).
This is sometimes called straight-through Gumbel-softmax (Jang et al., 2017).
In the structured case, it is intractable to perturb every possible z ∈Z separately. Corro and Titov
(2019a,b) proposed differentiable Perturb-and-Parse by perturbing scores of each part. Speciﬁcally:
ˆz = arg max
z∈Z
z⊤(s + γ)
(17)
This arg max can be solved with max-product algorithms, though these algorithms usually have arg max
operations within them that break backpropagation (Mensch and Blondel, 2018). Therefore, Corro and
Titov (2019a,b) relaxed these operations with softmax that preserves the gradient ﬂow. Nevertheless,
unlike in the unstructured case, sampling using this method is not exact because it perturbs local parts
rather than the global structure. This is apparent by contrasting Equations (16) and (17).
6.2.3
Direct Loss Minimization
As an alternative to circumventing the non-differentiability introduced by Gumbel-Max using STE
or Gumbel-softmax, Lorberbom et al. (2019) proposed to adopt direct loss minimization, originally
introduced by McAllester et al. (2010). Direct loss minimization was developed to optimize arbitrary,
not necessarily differentiable, loss functions under mild conditions. We state this formally in Theorem 1,
taken from Song et al. (2016), which is a generalization of the original theorem proposed in McAllester
et al. (2010):
Theorem 1. When given a ﬁnite set Y, a scoring function F(x, y, w), a data distribution, as well as a
task-loss L(y, ˆy), then, under some mild regularity conditions (see the supplementary material of Song
et al. (2016) for details), the direct loss gradient has the following form:
∇wE[L(y, yw)] = ± lim
ϵ→0
1
ϵ E[∇wF(x, ydirect, w) −∇wF(x, yw, w)]
(18)
with
yw = arg max
ˆy∈Y
F(x, ˆy, w)
(19)
ydirect = arg max
ˆy∈Y
F(x, ˆy, w) ± ϵL(y, ˆy)
(20)
Proof. We refer readers to the supplementary material of Song et al. (2016).
In Theorem 1, in addition to executing the regular inference procedure to compute yw, one also needs an
additional loss-adjusted inference for ydirect.
Lorberbom et al. (2019) adapted Theorem 1 to work with the Gumbel-Max reparameterization in varia-
tional auto-encoders (VAEs) that allows further expansion of Equation (15) by plugging in Equation (16).
This is formalized in Theorem 2, taken from their work and adapted to our notation:
6See the appendix of Maddison et al. (2014) for a proof.
10
Theorem 2. Assume that S(z | x; θ) is a smooth function of θ. Then7
Eγ∼B[∇θL(g(h(γ; θ)))] = Eγ∼B[∇θL(g(ˆz))]
= ∇θEγ∼B[L(g(ˆz))]
= lim
ϵ→0
1
ϵ Eγ∼B[∇θS(ˆz(ϵ) | x; θ) −∇θS(ˆz | x; θ)]
(21)
with
ˆz = arg max
z∈Z
S(z | x; θ) + γ
(22)
ˆz(ϵ) = arg max
z∈Z
S(z | x; θ) + γ + ϵL(g(z))
(23)
Proof. We refer readers to the supplementary material of Lorberbom et al. (2019).
The expansion in Equation (21) circumvents the need to take the gradient through the arg max that is
introduced by Gumbel-Max in Equation (15). Intuitively, the gradient is estimated by slightly perturbing
ˆz.
While Equation (21) holds theoretically, one cannot implement the limit easily in a machine learning
system. Lorberbom et al. (2019) hence treated ϵ as a ﬁxed hyperparameter that controls the bias-variance
trade-off. Since too small an ϵ could lead to very large gradients, they only considered ϵ ≥0.1. This,
therefore, leads to a biased estimator for the true gradient. Nevertheless, they compared their method
with Gumbel-softmax and showed that ϵ better controls the bias-variance trade-off than the temperature
parameter in Gumbel-softmax.
In the structured case, direct loss minimization suffers from the same intractability as Gumbel-Max.
Lorberbom et al. (2019) therefore only considered pairwise structures. We believe attempting to combine
direct loss minimization and methods such as Perturb-and-Parse would be an interesting future study.
7
Applications
The methods introduced above have been widely adopted for optimizing models with latent discrete
decisions. We review some applications below. We ﬁrst discuss two settings where a downstream task
is used as the training signal for latent structure induction, where the latent z can either be a linguistic
structure or an extractive summary of the input sentence. We also review when the target output is the
same as the input, an auto-encoding setup, that allows unsupervised structure induction.
7.1
Linguistic Structures
As argued in Section 1, latently inducing a linguistically-inspired structure that aids the downstream
prediction can provide a useful inductive bias. Typically, a latent tree is induced from text, and some
structure-encoding model such as TreeLSTM (Tai et al., 2015) or GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2017) is used
on top of this structure to compose the word-level representations into a sentence representation for the
ﬁnal prediction for various end tasks.
We presented graph-based parsing for bilexical dependencies in Section 2. Transition-based parsers, on
the other hand, uses the scoring function S(z | x; θ) = P
{a:yield(a)=z}
Q|a|
i=1 f(ai | x, a<i; θ), where
yield(·) is the mapping from a sequence of actions a = [a1, · · · , am], such as SHIFT and REDUCE, to the
deterministic structure produced by these actions. For constituency parsing, the default choice is the CKY
algorithm (Cocke, 1969; Kasami, 1965; Younger, 1967), a special case of chart parsing, which determines
the optimal parse structure with dynamic programming by ﬁnding the optimal split point for spans.
7Again ignoring the caveat in Footnote 5.
11
Transition-based parsing and the CKY algorithm
are similar in that, in most settings, every decision
sequence yields a valid structure. Therefore, we can simply backpropagate through the sequence of
discrete decisions using the methods presented above. In this manner: Maillard and Clark (2018) trained
a latent shift-reduce parser with STE. Maillard et al. (2019) induced a latent constituency structure with
continuous relaxation using a softmax to normalize over all possible split points. Bogin et al. (2021)
used a similar architecture to improve compositional generalization for grounded question answering.
Yogatama et al. (2017) learned a policy network for a latent dependency parser.
Kim et al. (2019)
trained an unsupervised recurrent neural network grammar (Dyer et al., 2016) that resembles a shift-
reduce parser using reinforcement learning.
Choi et al. (2018) latently induced a constituency tree
by greedily choosing a pair of neighboring text spans to merge at each layer using straight-through
Gumbel-softmax at each layer for sampling. Hu et al. (2021) used this method to design a heuristic
pruning procedure that improves the O(n3) complexity of the CKY algorithm to O(n). This efﬁciency
also allowed them to pretrain this model with a language modeling objective.
Graph-based parsing
usually needs to be mindful of structural constraints. Peng et al. (2018) used
SPIGOT to train latent syntactic and semantics parsers.
Kim et al. (2017) considered the expected
local decisions by marginalizing over all possible structures, latently inducing a projective syntactic
dependency tree structure (and also a linear sequential structure), which they termed “structured at-
tention.” For example, if Zpq represents the existence of a syntactic edge between words p and q
with q being the parent, then one can obtain a context vector of q, cq, by performing attention to the
syntactic parent of q with cq ∝P
p π(Zpq = 1 | x; θ)xp where xp denotes the representation of the
word p. Liu et al. (2018) leveraged structured attention networks to induce latent constituency trees
for richer inter-sentence attention (Parikh et al., 2016). Structured attention networks, however, can be
expensive during the marginalization step. For example, marginalizing over dependency trees using
the inside-outside algorithm can result in a more than 10 times slowdown (Liu and Lapata, 2018) due
to its lack of parallelizability. Additionally, it is inherently unable to consider non-projective depen-
dency trees. To address these two issues, Liu and Lapata (2018) proposed a generalization of structured
attention networks by marginalizing using the Matrix-Tree Theorem (Tutte, 1984) that allows the in-
duction of non-projective dependency trees (Koo et al., 2007; Smith and Smith, 2007; McDonald and
Satta, 2007) and with better parallelizability, achieving similar speed as their simple attention baseline.
Bisk and Tran (2018) extended this method to machine translation and showed that it outperforms using
simple attention as well as STE. Niculae et al. (2018b) used SparseMAP to induce sparse distributions
over latent dependency parses for sentence classiﬁcation, natural language inference, and reverse dic-
tionary lookup. Zhou et al. (2020) used a rectiﬁed distribution to induce latent dependency trees for
syntactic-then-semantic AMR (Banarescu et al., 2013). Corro and Titov (2019b) used Perturb-and-Parse
to obtain a latent dependency parser.
7.2
Rationale Extraction
One line of work concerns the interpretability of neural models and aims to extract the words and phrases
in a span of text that are responsible for some task prediction, usually termed “rationale extraction.” Lei
et al. (2016) ﬁrst introduced this task and considered the intermediate structure as a collection of Bernoulli
variables, each corresponding to a word in the original text, with some independence assumption among
them. A condensed summary is formed by collecting the words corresponding to the activated Bernoulli
variables. Then, a predictor learns a mapping from the summary to the ﬁnal prediction, which is expected
to stay close to the gold label. The summary usually needs to be latently induced due to a lack of summary
annotation.
Lei et al. (2016) proposed to jointly train a rationale extractor and a downstream task predictor using
score function estimators. They experimented with both an unstructured intermediate rationale where
each word is independently selected as a Bernoulli random variable, as well a structured rationale
12
where the selection of each word recurrently depends on previous selections. Their method achieved
similar performance to using the full text while in most cases including only up to 30% of the text.
Bastings et al. (2019) used reparameterization with a rectiﬁed distribution and demonstrated improved
performance.
7.3
Auto-Encoder
Another important body of work uses an autoencoding objective where the target y is the same as the
input x. A reconstruction loss is typically either maximized directly (Ammar et al., 2014) or, when it
is intractable as is common with neural network parameterized models, using variational autoencoders
(VAE; Kingma and Welling, 2014). An encoder, or inference network, f that models p(z | x) and a
reconstruction network g that models p(x | z) are jointly learned, after which we can take only the
inference network to predict a structure from text.
With the output the same as the input, this allows completely unsupervised learning. Sometimes some
amount of intermediate supervision is also added to ensure that the intermediate structure resembles some
target formalism.
Linguistic Structures
When z is a linguistic structure, this method enables unsupervised or semi-
supervised parsing.
Drozdov et al. (2019, 2020) and Xu et al. (2021) used a continuous relaxation
based approach for unsupervised and distantly-supervised parsing. Shen et al. (2018) softly and latently
attends to a word’s syntactic siblings using proximity values induced by a “syntactic distance” for language
modeling and unsupervised constituency parsing. Yin et al. (2018) used reinforcement learning to train
a semi-supervised semantic parser. Corro and Titov (2019a) used Perturb-and-Parse for semi-supervised
parsing.
Others
The methods reviewed in this survey have also been used in VAEs when z is not a linguis-
tic structure. For example, Miao and Blunsom (2016) considered z as a compressed version of the
input sentence and trained a semi-supervised sentence compression model. Using Gumbel-softmax,
Zhou and Neubig (2017) sampled independent morphological label as z for morphological re-inﬂection,
and Rezaee and Ferraro (2021) treated semantic frames as z and trained a model for semi-supervised
event modeling.
8
What is Latently Learned?
We now inspect the structure that is latently learned. We focus on latent syntax-inspired trees as they are
easy to compare to human’s syntactic judgment and there are treebanks, or silver parser-generated trees,
for reference.
Perhaps surprisingly, despite the strong downstream performance of these latent structure models, the
trees that many such models learn for the most part do not correspond to traditional linguistic formalisms
and at best capture only shallow syntactic units. Williams et al. (2018) examined the reinforcement
learning based model of Yogatama et al. (2017) (RL-SPINN) and the straight-through Gumbel based
model of Choi et al. (2018) (ST-Gumbel). They took these models that are trained on NLI datasets and
evaluated them on the Penn Treebank (PTB; Marcus et al., 1993). RL-SPINN achieved similar parsing
performance as random trees, while ST-Gumbel was even worse. In particular, RL-SPINN’s induced trees
are highly similar to a purely left-branching structure with an F1of > 99%. In contrast to this deepest
possible strategy, the trees of ST-Gumbel are very shallow with an average depth of 4.2, close to 3.9
for balanced trees, and much shallower than silver parses with a 5.7 average depth. Maillard and Clark
(2018) conﬁrmed that the models of themselves and of Maillard et al. (2019) do not induce trees that
resemble those produced by the Stanford Parser. Bisk and Tran (2018) similarly showed that their method
achieved an attachment score similar to or even worse than ﬂat baselines.
13
Nangia and Bowman (2018) introduced the ListOps dataset for synthetic math expression evaluation
which is easy to solve with a parse structure but difﬁcult otherwise. Both RL-SPINN and ST-Gumbel
even underperform a simple LSTM model that has no structured modeling, suggesting that these models,
with the datasets and training algorithms they used, cannot learn the structure required for this task.
Nevertheless, Havrylov et al. (2019), which improved over RL-SPINN as introduced in §6.1, achieved
near-perfect performance on this dataset by reducing the gradient estimation variance and reducing the
coadaptation issue of the parser and the downstream predictor.
Overall, it seems that for the latently induced structure to bear a close resemblance to existing syntactic
formalisms is not a necessary condition for strong downstream task performance. In fact, many studies
showed that, in latent structure learning, using parses from a pretrained parser deteriorates the perfor-
mance (Choi et al., 2018; Maillard et al., 2019), pretraining on these parses does not help (Kim et al.,
2017), and neither does including an auxiliary parsing loss (Yogatama et al., 2017). Some studies qualita-
tively inspected the latent structure and discovered deviation from existing formalisms that may beneﬁt
composition (Bisk and Tran, 2018; Niculae et al., 2018b). For example, in coordination constructions,
Universal Dependencies dictate the leftmost conjunct as the head (Zeman et al., 2021), while Niculae
et al. (2018b) argued that a symmetric treatment may provide a better composition order. On the other
hand, Shi et al. (2018) noted that trivial trees (i.e., balanced or linear trees) achieve performance similar
to or better than latently induced trees or external parse trees on a variety of classiﬁcation and generation
tasks, casting doubt on the real source of performance improvement. More future work is needed to
understand the role syntax plays in this picture and how it might vary across different tasks.
The story is different for methods for unsupervised parsing which can induce familiar linguistic for-
malisms with decent accuracy (though see Li and Risteski (2021) for a theoretical analysis of their
limitations). These methods usually use a language modeling or autoencoding objective rather than
receiving supervision from a natural language understanding task (Shen et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2019; Hu
et al., 2021, inter alia). Why these objectives are more conducive to the induction of a latent structure
that better resembles existing linguistic formalisms would be an interesting future research question.
9
Conclusion
In this work, we surveyed three families of methods that tackle the non-differentiability of discrete
decisions caused by the arg max function and introduced how they respectively handle the unique
challenges of structure prediction. These methods and some of their key properties are summarized in
Table 1. We also reviewed past work that studied the induced latent structures and highlighted that they
mostly do not closely resemble existing linguistic formalisms. We hope this survey can serve to catalyze
future research in this area.
Acknowledgment
We thank Greg Durrett, André Martins, Vlad Niculae, Hao Peng, Noah Smith, Nishant Subramani,
ordered alphabetically by last name, for helpful discussions and feedback on various versions of this
work.
References
Waleed Ammar, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith. 2014. Conditional random ﬁeld autoencoders for
unsupervised structured prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27.
Curran Associates, Inc.
14
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Learning
Representations.
J. K. Baker. 1979. Trainable grammars for speech recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 65(S1):S132–S132.
Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina Georgescu, Kira Grifﬁtt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse, pages 178–186, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jasmijn Bastings, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. 2019. Interpretable neural predictions with differentiable
binary variables. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 2963–2977, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. 2013. Estimating or propagating gradients
through stochastic neurons for conditional computation.
Yonatan Bisk and Ke Tran. 2018. Inducing grammars with and for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Neural Machine Translation and Generation, pages 25–35,
Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ben Bogin, Sanjay Subramanian, Matt Gardner, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Latent Compositional
Representations Improve Systematic Generalization in Grounded Question Answering. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:195–210.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jon Gauthier, Abhinav Rastogi, Raghav Gupta, Christopher D. Manning, and
Christopher Potts. 2016. A fast uniﬁed model for parsing and sentence understanding. In Proceedings
of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1466–1477, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhaowei Cai, Xiaodong He, Jian Sun, and Nuno Vasconcelos. 2017. Deep learning with low precision by
half-wave gaussian quantization. In CVPR.
Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhen-Hua Ling, Si Wei, Hui Jiang, and Diana Inkpen. 2017. Enhanced
LSTM for natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1657–1668, Vancouver, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jihun Choi, Kang Min Yoo, and Sang goo Lee. 2018. Learning to compose task-speciﬁc tree structures.
In Proceddings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Noam Chomsky. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, 50 edition. The MIT Press.
Junyoung Chung, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Hierarchical multiscale recurrent neural
networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
John Cocke. 1969. Programming Languages and Their Compilers: Preliminary Notes. New York
University, USA.
Caio Corro and Ivan Titov. 2019a. Differentiable perturb-and-parse: Semi-supervised parsing with a
structured variational autoencoder. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Caio Corro and Ivan Titov. 2019b. Learning latent trees with stochastic perturbations and differentiable dy-
namic programming. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 5508–5521, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
15
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Drozdov, Subendhu Rongali, Yi-Pei Chen, Tim O’Gorman, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum.
2020. Unsupervised parsing with S-DIORA: Single tree encoding for deep inside-outside recursive
autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 4832–4845, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Drozdov, Patrick Verga, Mohit Yadav, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum. 2019. Unsupervised
latent tree induction with deep inside-outside recursive auto-encoders. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1129–1141, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Recurrent neural network
grammars. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 199–209, San Diego, California.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Akiko Eriguchi, Kazuma Hashimoto, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. 2016. Tree-to-sequence attentional neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 823–833, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Emil Julius Gumbel. 1954. Statistical theory of extreme values and some practical applications; a series
of lectures. Applied mathematics series ; 33. U.S. Govt. Print. Ofﬁce, Washington.
Kazuma Hashimoto, Caiming Xiong, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, and Richard Socher. 2017. A joint many-task
model: Growing a neural network for multiple NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1923–1933, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Serhii Havrylov, Germán Kruszewski, and Armand Joulin. 2019. Cooperative learning of disjoint
syntax and semantics. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers), pages 1118–1128, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Irene Heim and Angelika Kratzer. 1998. Semantics in Generative Grammar. Blackwell Textbooks in
Linguistics. Wiley.
Geoffrey Hinton. 2012. Neural networks for machine learning, coursera.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. 2015. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
NIPS Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation,
9(8):1735–1780.
Xiang Hu, Haitao Mi, Zujie Wen, Yafang Wang, Yi Su, Jing Zheng, and Gerard de Melo. 2021. R2D2:
Recursive transformer based on differentiable tree for interpretable hierarchical language modeling.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
4897–4908, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
16
Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Binarized
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Quantized
neural networks: Training neural networks with low precision weights and activations. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 18(1):6869–6898.
Angelina Ivanova, Stephan Oepen, Lilja Øvrelid, and Dan Flickinger. 2012. Who did what to whom? a
contrastive study of syntacto-semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of the Sixth Linguistic Annotation
Workshop, pages 2–11, Jeju, Republic of Korea. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2017. Categorical reparametrization with gumbel-softmax. In
Proceedings International Conference on Learning Representations 2017. OpenReviews.net.
T. Kasami. 1965. An efﬁcient recognition and syntax analysis algorithm for context-free languages.
Technical Report AFCRL-65-758, Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory, Bedford, MA.
Yoon Kim, Carl Denton, Luong Hoang, and Alexander M. Rush. 2017. Structured attention networks.
Yoon Kim, Alexander Rush, Lei Yu, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Chris Dyer, and Gábor Melis. 2019. Unsu-
pervised recurrent neural network grammars. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1105–1117, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. 2014. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference
Track Proceedings.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Jyrki Kivinen and Manfred K. Warmuth. 1997. Exponentiated gradient versus gradient descent for linear
predictors. Information and Computation, 132(1):1 – 63.
Terry Koo, Amir Globerson, Xavier Carreras, and Michael Collins. 2007. Structured prediction models
via the matrix-tree theorem. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 141–150, Prague, Czech Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
P. Kumaraswamy. 1980. A generalized probability density function for double-bounded random processes.
Journal of Hydrology, 46(1):79–88.
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’01, page 282–289, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. 2016. Rationalizing neural predictions. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 107–117, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuchen Li and Andrej Risteski. 2021. The limitations of limited context for constituency parsing. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
2675–2687, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
17
Yang Liu, Matt Gardner, and Mirella Lapata. 2018. Structured alignment networks for matching sentences.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1554–1564, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yang Liu and Mirella Lapata. 2018. Learning structured text representations. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:63–75.
Guy Lorberbom, Andreea Gane, Tommi Jaakkola, and Tamir Hazan. 2019. Direct optimization through
arg max for discrete variational auto-encoder. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Christos Louizos, Max Welling, and Diederik P. Kingma. 2018. Learning sparse neural networks through
L0 regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. 2017. The Concrete Distribution: A Continuous
Relaxation of Discrete Random Variables. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Chris J Maddison, Daniel Tarlow, and Tom Minka. 2014. A∗sampling. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc.
Jean Maillard and Stephen Clark. 2018. Latent tree learning with differentiable parsers: Shift-reduce
parsing and chart parsing. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Relevance of Linguistic Structure
in Neural Architectures for NLP, pages 13–18, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jean Maillard, Stephen Clark, and Dani Yogatama. 2019. Jointly learning sentence embeddings and
syntax with unsupervised Tree-LSTMs. Natural Language Engineering, 25(4):433–449.
Diego Marcheggiani and Ivan Titov. 2017. Encoding sentences with graph convolutional networks for
semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1506–1515, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.
André F. T. Martins and Ramón F. Astudillo. 2016. From softmax to sparsemax: A sparse model
of attention and multi-label classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICML’16, page 1614–1623. JMLR.org.
André F. T. Martins, Tsvetomila Mihaylova, Nikita Nangia, and Vlad Niculae. 2019. Latent structure
models for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts, pages 1–5, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
David McAllester, Tamir Hazan, and Joseph Keshet. 2010. Direct loss minimization for structured
prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 23. Curran Associates, Inc.
Ryan McDonald and Giorgio Satta. 2007. On the complexity of non-projective data-driven dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Parsing Technologies, pages 121–132,
Prague, Czech Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Arthur Mensch and Mathieu Blondel. 2018. Differentiable dynamic programming for structured prediction
and attention. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3462–3471. PMLR.
18
Yishu Miao and Phil Blunsom. 2016. Language as a latent variable: Discrete generative models for
sentence compression. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 319–328, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tsvetomila Mihaylova, Vlad Niculae, and André F. T. Martins. 2020. Understanding the mechanics of
SPIGOT: Surrogate gradients for latent structure learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 2186–2202, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Nikita Nangia and Samuel Bowman. 2018. ListOps: A diagnostic dataset for latent tree learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, pages 92–99, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Vlad Niculae and Mathieu Blondel. 2017. A regularized framework for sparse and structured neural
attention. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS’17, page 3340–3350, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc.
Vlad Niculae and Andre Martins. 2020. LP-SparseMAP: Differentiable relaxed optimization for sparse
structured prediction. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 7348–7359. PMLR.
Vlad Niculae, Andre Martins, Mathieu Blondel, and Claire Cardie. 2018a. SparseMAP: Differentiable
sparse structured inference. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3799–3808. PMLR.
Vlad Niculae, André F. T. Martins, and Claire Cardie. 2018b. Towards dynamic computation graphs
via sparse latent structure. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 905–911, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
John Paisley, David M. Blei, and Michael I. Jordan. 2012. Variational bayesian inference with stochastic
search. In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML’12, page 1363–1370, Madison, WI, USA. Omnipress.
Ankur Parikh, Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, and Jakob Uszkoreit. 2016. A decomposable attention
model for natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2249–2255, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hao Peng, Sam Thomson, and Noah A. Smith. 2018. Backpropagating through structured argmax using a
SPIGOT. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1863–1873, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ben Peters, Vlad Niculae, and André F. T. Martins. 2019. Sparse sequence-to-sequence models. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1504–1519, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
L.R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected applications in speech recognition.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 77(2):257–286.
19
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67.
Mehdi Rezaee and Francis Ferraro. 2021. Event representation with sequential, semi-supervised discrete
variables. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 4701–4716, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Alexander Rush, Yoon Kim, and Sam Wiseman. 2018. Deep latent variable models of natural language. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Tutorial
Abstracts, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow. 2016. Linguistic input features improve neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 1, Research Papers, pages
83–91, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yikang Shen, Zhouhan Lin, Chin wei Huang, and Aaron Courville. 2018. Neural language modeling by
jointly learning syntax and lexicon. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Haoyue Shi, Hao Zhou, Jiaze Chen, and Lei Li. 2018. On tree-based neural sentence modeling. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
4631–4641, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
David A. Smith and Noah A. Smith. 2007. Probabilistic models of nonprojective dependency trees. In
Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 132–140, Prague, Czech
Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Noah A. Smith. 2011. Linguistic Structure Prediction. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies. Morgan and Claypool.
Yang Song, Alexander Schwing, Zemel Richard, and Raquel Urtasun. 2016. Training deep neural
networks via direct loss minimization. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2169–2177, New
York, New York, USA. PMLR.
Kai Sheng Tai, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Improved semantic representations
from tree-structured long short-term memory networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1556–1566, Beijing, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
W.T. Tutte. 1984. Graph Theory. Encyclopedia of mathematics and its applications. Cambridge University
Press.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
Adina Williams, Andrew Drozdov, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2018. Do latent tree learning models identify
meaningful structure in sentences? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
6:253–267.
Ronald J. Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Mach. Learn., 8(3–4):229–256.
20
Sam Wiseman, Stuart Shieber, and Alexander Rush. 2018. Learning neural templates for text generation.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
3174–3187, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhaofeng Wu, Hao Peng, and Noah A. Smith. 2021. Infusing Finetuning with Semantic Dependencies.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:226–242.
Zhaofeng Wu, Yan Song, Sicong Huang, Yuanhe Tian, and Fei Xia. 2019. WTMED at MEDIQA 2019:
A hybrid approach to biomedical natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP
Workshop and Shared Task, pages 415–426, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhiyang Xu, Andrew Drozdov, Jay Yoon Lee, Tim O’Gorman, Subendhu Rongali, Dylan Finkbeiner,
Shilpa Suresh, Mohit Iyyer, and Andrew McCallum. 2021. Improved latent tree induction with distant
supervision via span constraints. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 4818–4831, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pengcheng Yin, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, and Graham Neubig. 2018. StructVAE: Tree-structured
latent variable models for semi-supervised semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 754–765,
Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Penghang Yin, Jiancheng Lyu, Shuai Zhang, Stanley J. Osher, Yingyong Qi, and Jack Xin. 2019.
Understanding straight-through estimator in training activation quantized neural nets. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Dani Yogatama, Phil Blunsom, Chris Dyer, Edward Grefenstette, and Wang Ling. 2017. Learning
to compose words into sentences with reinforcement learning. In 5th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track
Proceedings. OpenReview.net.
Daniel H. Younger. 1967. Recognition and parsing of context-free languages in time n3. Information and
Control, 10(2):189–208.
Daniel Zeman, Joakim Nivre, Mitchell Abrams, Elia Ackermann, Noëmi Aepli, Hamid Aghaei, Željko
Agi´c, Amir Ahmadi, Lars Ahrenberg, Chika Kennedy Ajede, Gabriel˙e Aleksandraviˇci¯ut˙e, Ika Al-
ﬁna, Lene Antonsen, Katya Aplonova, Angelina Aquino, Carolina Aragon, Maria Jesus Aranzabe,
Bilge Nas Arıcan, Hórunn Arnardóttir, Gashaw Arutie, Jessica Naraiswari Arwidarasti, Masayuki
Asahara, Deniz Baran Aslan, Luma Ateyah, Furkan Atmaca, Mohammed Attia, Aitziber Atutxa,
Liesbeth Augustinus, Elena Badmaeva, Keerthana Balasubramani, Miguel Ballesteros, Esha Banerjee,
Sebastian Bank, Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Starkaður Barkarson, Victoria Basmov, Colin Batchelor,
John Bauer, Seyyit Talha Bedir, Kepa Bengoetxea, Gözde Berk, Yevgeni Berzak, Irshad Ahmad Bhat,
Riyaz Ahmad Bhat, Erica Biagetti, Eckhard Bick, Agn˙e Bielinskien˙e, Kristín Bjarnadóttir, Rogier
Blokland, Victoria Bobicev, Loïc Boizou, Emanuel Borges Völker, Carl Börstell, Cristina Bosco,
Gosse Bouma, Sam Bowman, Adriane Boyd, Anouck Braggaar, Kristina Brokait˙e, Aljoscha Bur-
chardt, Marie Candito, Bernard Caron, Gauthier Caron, Lauren Cassidy, Tatiana Cavalcanti, Gül¸sen
Cebiro˘glu Eryi˘git, Flavio Massimiliano Cecchini, Giuseppe G. A. Celano, Slavomír ˇCéplö, Neslihan
Cesur, Savas Cetin, Özlem Çetino˘glu, Fabricio Chalub, Shweta Chauhan, Ethan Chi, Taishi Chika,
Yongseok Cho, Jinho Choi, Jayeol Chun, Alessandra T. Cignarella, Silvie Cinková, Aurélie Collomb,
Ça˘grı Çöltekin, Miriam Connor, Marine Courtin, Mihaela Cristescu, Philemon. Daniel, Elizabeth
Davidson, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Valeria de Paiva, Mehmet Oguz Derin, Elvis de Souza,
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Carly Dickerson, Arawinda Dinakaramani, Elisa Di Nuovo, Bamba Dione,
Peter Dirix, Kaja Dobrovoljc, Timothy Dozat, Kira Droganova, Puneet Dwivedi, Hanne Eckhoff,
Sandra Eiche, Marhaba Eli, Ali Elkahky, Binyam Ephrem, Olga Erina, Tomaž Erjavec, Aline Etienne,
21
Wograine Evelyn, Sidney Facundes, Richárd Farkas, Marília Fernanda, Hector Fernandez Alcalde,
Jennifer Foster, Cláudia Freitas, Kazunori Fujita, Katarína Gajdošová, Daniel Galbraith, Marcos
Garcia, Moa Gärdenfors, Sebastian Garza, Fabrício Ferraz Gerardi, Kim Gerdes, Filip Ginter, Gustavo
Godoy, Iakes Goenaga, Koldo Gojenola, Memduh Gökırmak, Yoav Goldberg, Xavier Gómez Guino-
vart, Berta González Saavedra, Bernadeta Grici¯ut˙e, Matias Grioni, Loïc Grobol, Normunds Gr¯uz¯ıtis,
Bruno Guillaume, Céline Guillot-Barbance, Tunga Güngör, Nizar Habash, Hinrik Hafsteinsson, Jan
Hajiˇc, Jan Hajiˇc jr., Mika Hämäläinen, Linh Hà M˜y, Na-Rae Han, Muhammad Yudistira Hanifmuti,
Sam Hardwick, Kim Harris, Dag Haug, Johannes Heinecke, Oliver Hellwig, Felix Hennig, Barbora
Hladká, Jaroslava Hlaváˇcová, Florinel Hociung, Petter Hohle, Eva Huber, Jena Hwang, Takumi Ikeda,
Anton Karl Ingason, Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, O. lájídé Ishola, Kaoru Ito, Tomáš Jelínek, Apoorva Jha,
Anders Johannsen, Hildur Jónsdóttir, Fredrik Jørgensen, Markus Juutinen, Sarveswaran K, Hüner
Ka¸sıkara, Andre Kaasen, Nadezhda Kabaeva, Sylvain Kahane, Hiroshi Kanayama, Jenna Kanerva,
Neslihan Kara, Boris Katz, Tolga Kayadelen, Jessica Kenney, Václava Kettnerová, Jesse Kirchner,
Elena Klementieva, Arne Köhn, Abdullatif Köksal, Kamil Kopacewicz, Timo Korkiakangas, Natalia
Kotsyba, Jolanta Kovalevskait˙e, Simon Krek, Parameswari Krishnamurthy, O˘guzhan Kuyrukçu, Aslı
Kuzgun, Sookyoung Kwak, Veronika Laippala, Lucia Lam, Lorenzo Lambertino, Tatiana Lando,
Septina Dian Larasati, Alexei Lavrentiev, John Lee, Phuong Lê H`ông, Alessandro Lenci, Saran
Lertpradit, Herman Leung, Maria Levina, Cheuk Ying Li, Josie Li, Keying Li, Yuan Li, KyungTae
Lim, Bruna Lima Padovani, Krister Lindén, Nikola Ljubeši´c, Olga Loginova, Andry Luthﬁ, Mikko
Luukko, Olga Lyashevskaya, Teresa Lynn, Vivien Macketanz, Aibek Makazhanov, Michael Mandl,
Christopher Manning, Ruli Manurung, Bü¸sra Mar¸san, C˘at˘alina M˘ar˘anduc, David Mareˇcek, Katrin
Marheinecke, Héctor Martínez Alonso, André Martins, Jan Mašek, Hiroshi Matsuda, Yuji Matsumoto,
Alessandro Mazzei, Ryan McDonald, Sarah McGuinness, Gustavo Mendonça, Niko Miekka, Karina
Mischenkova, Margarita Misirpashayeva, Anna Missilä, C˘at˘alin Mititelu, Maria Mitrofan, Yusuke
Miyao, AmirHossein Mojiri Foroushani, Judit Molnár, Amirsaeid Moloodi, Simonetta Montemagni,
Amir More, Laura Moreno Romero, Giovanni Moretti, Keiko Sophie Mori, Shinsuke Mori, Tomohiko
Morioka, Shigeki Moro, Bjartur Mortensen, Bohdan Moskalevskyi, Kadri Muischnek, Robert Munro,
Yugo Murawaki, Kaili Müürisep, Pinkey Nainwani, Mariam Nakhlé, Juan Ignacio Navarro Horñiacek,
Anna Nedoluzhko, Gunta Nešpore-B¯erzkalne, Manuela Nevaci, Luong Nguy˜ên Thi., Huy`ên Nguy˜ên
Thi. Minh, Yoshihiro Nikaido, Vitaly Nikolaev, Rattima Nitisaroj, Alireza Nourian, Hanna Nurmi, Stina
Ojala, Atul Kr. Ojha, Adédayo. Olúòkun, Mai Omura, Emeka Onwuegbuzia, Petya Osenova, Robert
Östling, Lilja Øvrelid, ¸Saziye Betül Özate¸s, Merve Özçelik, Arzucan Özgür, Balkız Öztürk Ba¸saran,
Hyunji Hayley Park, Niko Partanen, Elena Pascual, Marco Passarotti, Agnieszka Patejuk, Guilherme
Paulino-Passos, Angelika Peljak-Łapi´nska, Siyao Peng, Cenel-Augusto Perez, Natalia Perkova, Guy
Perrier, Slav Petrov, Daria Petrova, Jason Phelan, Jussi Piitulainen, Tommi A Pirinen, Emily Pitler,
Barbara Plank, Thierry Poibeau, Larisa Ponomareva, Martin Popel, Lauma Pretkalnin, a, Sophie Prévost,
Prokopis Prokopidis, Adam Przepiórkowski, Tiina Puolakainen, Sampo Pyysalo, Peng Qi, Andriela
Rääbis, Alexandre Rademaker, Taraka Rama, Loganathan Ramasamy, Carlos Ramisch, Fam Rashel,
Mohammad Sadegh Rasooli, Vinit Ravishankar, Livy Real, Petru Rebeja, Siva Reddy, Georg Rehm,
Ivan Riabov, Michael Rießler, Erika Rimkut˙e, Larissa Rinaldi, Laura Rituma, Luisa Rocha, Eiríkur
Rögnvaldsson, Mykhailo Romanenko, Rudolf Rosa, Valentin Ros,ca, Davide Rovati, Olga Rudina,
Jack Rueter, Kristján Rúnarsson, Shoval Sadde, Pegah Safari, Benoît Sagot, Aleksi Sahala, Shadi
Saleh, Alessio Salomoni, Tanja Samardži´c, Stephanie Samson, Manuela Sanguinetti, Ezgi Sanıyar,
Dage Särg, Baiba Saul¯ıte, Yanin Sawanakunanon, Shefali Saxena, Kevin Scannell, Salvatore Scarlata,
Nathan Schneider, Sebastian Schuster, Lane Schwartz, Djamé Seddah, Wolfgang Seeker, Mojgan
Seraji, Mo Shen, Atsuko Shimada, Hiroyuki Shirasu, Yana Shishkina, Muh Shohibussirri, Dmitry
Sichinava, Janine Siewert, Einar Freyr Sigurðsson, Aline Silveira, Natalia Silveira, Maria Simi, Radu
Simionescu, Katalin Simkó, Mária Šimková, Kiril Simov, Maria Skachedubova, Aaron Smith, Isabela
Soares-Bastos, Carolyn Spadine, Rachele Sprugnoli, Steinhór Steingrímsson, Antonio Stella, Milan
Straka, Emmett Strickland, Jana Strnadová, Alane Suhr, Yogi Lesmana Sulestio, Umut Sulubacak,
Shingo Suzuki, Zsolt Szántó, Dima Taji, Yuta Takahashi, Fabio Tamburini, Mary Ann C. Tan, Takaaki
22
Tanaka, Samson Tella, Isabelle Tellier, Marinella Testori, Guillaume Thomas, Liisi Torga, Marsida
Toska, Trond Trosterud, Anna Trukhina, Reut Tsarfaty, Utku Türk, Francis Tyers, Sumire Uematsu,
Roman Untilov, Zdeˇnka Urešová, Larraitz Uria, Hans Uszkoreit, Andrius Utka, Sowmya Vajjala,
Rob van der Goot, Martine Vanhove, Daniel van Niekerk, Gertjan van Noord, Viktor Varga, Eric
Villemonte de la Clergerie, Veronika Vincze, Natalia Vlasova, Aya Wakasa, Joel C. Wallenberg, Lars
Wallin, Abigail Walsh, Jing Xian Wang, Jonathan North Washington, Maximilan Wendt, Paul Wid-
mer, Seyi Williams, Mats Wirén, Christian Wittern, Tsegay Woldemariam, Tak-sum Wong, Alina
Wróblewska, Mary Yako, Kayo Yamashita, Naoki Yamazaki, Chunxiao Yan, Koichi Yasuoka, Marat M.
Yavrumyan, Arife Betül Yenice, Olcay Taner Yıldız, Zhuoran Yu, Zdenˇek Žabokrtský, Shorouq Zahra,
Amir Zeldes, Hanzhi Zhu, Anna Zhuravleva, and Rayan Ziane. 2021. Universal dependencies 2.8.1.
LINDAT/CLARIAH-CZ digital library at the Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics (ÚFAL),
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University.
Chunting Zhou and Graham Neubig. 2017. Multi-space variational encoder-decoders for semi-supervised
labeled sequence transduction. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 310–320, Vancouver, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Qiji Zhou, Yue Zhang, Donghong Ji, and Hao Tang. 2020. AMR parsing with latent structural information.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
4306–4319, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
23
