Title: Open System Categorical Quantum Semantics in Natural Language Processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.00831v2
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:1502.00831v2  [cs.CL]  4 Feb 2015
Open System Categorical Quantum Semantics
in Natural Language Processing
Robin Piedeleu∗, Dimitri Kartsaklis†, Bob Coecke∗and Mehrnoosh Sadrzadeh†
∗University of Oxford, Department of Computer Science
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QD, UK
Email: {robin.piedeleu;bob.coecke}@cs.ox.ac.uk
†Queen Mary University of London, School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK
Email: {d.kartsaklis;m.sadrzadeh}@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract—Originally inspired by categorical quantum mechan-
ics (Abramsky and Coecke, LiCS’04), the categorical compo-
sitional distributional model of natural language meaning of
Coecke, Sadrzadeh and Clark provides a conceptually motivated
procedure to compute the meaning of a sentence, given its
grammatical structure within a Lambek pregroup and a vectorial
representation of the meaning of its parts. The predictions of
this ﬁrst model have outperformed that of other models in
mainstream empirical language processing tasks on large scale
data. Moreover, just like CQM allows for varying the model in
which we interpret quantum axioms, one can also vary the model
in which we interpret word meaning.
In this paper we show that further developments in categorical
quantum mechanics are relevant to natural language processing
too. Firstly, Selinger’s CPM-construction allows for explicitly
taking into account lexical ambiguity and distinguishing between
the two inherently different notions of homonymy and polysemy.
In terms of the model in which we interpret word meaning,
this means a passage from the vector space model to density
matrices. Despite this change of model, standard empirical
methods for comparing meanings can be easily adopted, which
we demonstrate by a small-scale experiment on real-world data.
This experiment moreover provides preliminary evidence of the
validity of our proposed new model for word meaning.
Secondly, commutative classical structures as well as their
non-commutative counterparts that arise in the image of the
CPM-construction allow for encoding relative pronouns, verbs
and adjectives, and ﬁnally, iteration of the CPM-construction,
something that has no counterpart in the quantum realm, enables
one to accommodate both entailment and ambiguity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Language serves to convey meaning. From this perspective,
the ultimate and long-standing goal of any computational
linguist is to capture and adequately represent the meaning
of an utterance in a computer’s memory. At word level,
distributional semantics offers an effective way to achieve
that goal; following the distributional hypothesis [1] which
states that the meaning of a word is determined by its context,
words are represented as vectors of co-occurrence statistics
with all other words in the vocabulary. While models following
this paradigm have been found very useful in a number of
natural language processing tasks [2]–[4], they do not scale
up to the level of phrases or sentences. This is due to the
capacity of natural language to generate inﬁnite structures
(phases and sentences) from ﬁnite means (words); no text
corpus, regardless of its size, can provide reliable distributional
statistics for a multi-word sentence. On the other hand, type-
logical approaches conforming to the tradition of Lambek [5],
Montague [6] and other pioneers of language, are composi-
tional and deal with the sentence in a more abstract level based
on the syntactical rules that hold between the different text
constituents, but in principle they do not provide a convincing
model for word meaning.
The categorical compositional distributional model of Co-
ecke, Sadrzadeh and Clark [7] addresses the challenge of
combining these two orthogonal models of meaning in a
uniﬁed setting. The model is based on the observation that a
grammar expressed as a pregroup [8] shares the same structure
with the category of ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces and linear
maps, that of a compact closed category [9]. In principle, this
offers a canonical way to express a grammatical derivation
as a morphism that deﬁnes linear-algebraic manipulations
between vector spaces, resulting in a sentence vector. The main
characteristic of the model is that the grammatical type of a
word determines the vector space in which it lives. Words with
atomic types, such as nouns, are represented by vectors living
in some basic vector space N; on the contrary, relational words
such as verbs and adjectives live in tensor product spaces
of higher order. An adjective, for example, is an element of
N ⊗N, while a transitive verb lives in N ⊗S ⊗N. The
relational tensors act on their argument by tensor contraction,
a generalization of the familiar notion of matrix multiplication
to higher order tensors.
Ambiguity is a dominant feature of language. At the lex-
ical level, one can distinguish between two broad types of
ambiguity: homonymy refers to cases in which, due to some
historical accident, words that share exactly the same spelling
and pronunciation are used to describe completely distinct
concepts; such an example is ‘bank’, meaning a ﬁnancial
institution and a land alongside a river. On the other hand, the
senses of a polysemous word are usually closely related with
only small deviations between them; as an example, think of
‘bank’ again as a ﬁnancial institution and the concrete building
where that institution is accommodated. These two notions
of ambiguity are inherently different; while a polysemous
word still retains a certain level of semantic coherence, a
homonymous word can be seen as an incoherent mixing
due to coincidence. The issue of lexical ambiguity and the
different levels of it is currently ignored from almost all
attempts that aim to equip distributional models of meaning
with compositionality.
The purpose of this paper is to provide the theoretical
foundations for a compositional distributional model of mean-
ing capable of explicitly dealing with lexical ambiguity. At
a philosophical level, we deﬁne an ambiguous word as a
probabilistic mixing of idealistically pure (in the sense of
completely unambiguous) concepts. In practice, though, these
pure concepts cannot be precisely deﬁned or even expressed
by words; no word is completely unambiguous, and its precise
meaning can only be deﬁned in relation to a relevant context
[10]. Empirically, then, we can approximate these pure con-
cepts by meaning vectors provided by a word sense induction
method based on clustering the contexts in which a word
occurs. We take the set of meaning vectors assigned to a
speciﬁc word as representing distinct polysemous uses of the
word, i.e. relatively self-contained concepts with a certain level
of semantic coherence. An ambiguous word then corresponds
to a homonymous case, where the same name is used for more
than one semantically coherent concepts.
In the proposed model we exploit the observation that the
compact closed structure on which the original model of
Coecke et al. [7] was based provides an abstraction of the
Hilbert space formulation used in the quantum theory, in terms
of pure quantum states as vectors, which is known under the
umbrella of categorical quantum mechanics [11]. In fact, the
original model of Coecke et al. was itself greatly inspired by
quantum theory, and in particular, by quantum protocols such
as quantum teleportation, as explained in [12]. Importantly,
vectors in a Hilbert space represent the states of a closed
quantum system, also called pure states. Selinger’s CPM-
construction [13], which maps any dagger compact closed
category on another one, then adjoins open system states,
also called mixed states. In the new model, these allow for a
lack of knowledge on part of the system under consideration,
which may be about an extended part of the quantum system,
or uncertainty (read: ambiguity) regarding the preparation
procedure.
The crucial distinction between homonymous and polyse-
mous words is achieved as follows: while a polysemous word
corresponds to a pure quantum state, a homonymous word is
given by a mixed state that essentially embodies a probability
distribution over all potential meanings of that word. Mathe-
matically, a mixed states is expressed as a density matrix: a
self-adjoint, positive semi-deﬁnite operator with trace one. The
new formulation offers many opportunities for interesting and
novel research. For instance, by exploiting the notion of Von
Neumann entropy one can measure how ambiguity evolves
from individual words to larger text constituents; we would
expect that the level of ambiguity in word ‘bank’ is higher
than that of the compound ‘river bank’.
Furthermore, the richness of the new category in which
the meanings of words now live offers interesting alternative
design options. In the past, for example, Sadrzadeh, Kartsaklis
and colleagues [14], [15] enriched the categorical composi-
tional model with elements of classical processing, exploiting
the fact that any basis of a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space
induces a commutative Frobenius algebra over this space,
which allows the uniform copying or deleting of the infor-
mation relative to this basis [16]. As we will see in Sect. V,
the dagger compact closed categories arising from the CPM-
construction also accommodate canonical non-commutative
Frobenius algebras which have the potential to account for
the non-commutativity of language.
Finally, we discuss how iterated application of the CPM-
construction, which gives rise to states that have no inter-
pretation in quantum theory, does have a natural application
in natural language processing. It allows for simultaneous
semantic representation of more than one language feature that
can be represented by density matrices, for example, lexical
entailment in conjunction with ambiguity.
Outline
Sect. II provides an introduction to categorical
compositional distributional semantics; Sect. III explains the
linguistic intuition behind the core ideas of this paper; Sect. IV
gives the mathematical details for the extension of the original
model to the quantum formulation; Sect. V discusses non-
commutativity in this new context; ﬁnally, Sect. VI provides
the basic intuition for yet another extension of the model that
adds the notion of entailment to that of ambiguity.
Related work The issue of lexical ambiguity in categor-
ical compositional models of meaning has been previously
experimentally investigated by Kartsaklis and Sadrzadeh [17],
who present evidence that the introduction of an explicit
disambiguation step on the word vectors prior to composition
improves the performance of the model in various sentence
and phrase similarity tasks.
Furthermore, the research presented here is not the only one
that uses density matrices for linguistic purposes. Balkır [18]
uses a form of density matrices in order to provide a similarity
measure that can be used for evaluating hyponymy-hypernymy
relations. In Sect. VI we indicate how these two uses of density
matrices can be merged into one. Blacoe et al. [19] describe a
distributional (but not compositional) model of meaning based
on density matrices created by grammatical dependencies. At a
more generic level not directly associated to density matrices,
the application of ideas from quantum theory to language
proved to be a very popular ﬁeld of research—see for example
the work of Bruza et al. [20] and Widdows [21].
Finally, the core idea of this paper to represent ambiguous
words as mixed states is based on material presented in the
MSc thesis of the ﬁrst author [22] and the PhD thesis of the
second author [23].
II. BACKGROUND
The ﬁeld of category theory aims at identifying and studying
connections between seemingly different forms of mathemat-
ical structures. A very representative example of its potency
is the compositional categorical framework of Coecke et al.
[7], which shows that a grammatical derivation deﬁning the
structure of a sentence is homomorphic to a linear-algebraic
formula acting on a semantic space deﬁned by a distributional
model. The framework offers a concrete manifestation of the
rule-to-rule hypothesis [24], and a mathematical counterpart
to the formal semantics perspective on language. As noted
above, the main idea is based on the fact that both the type-
logic of the model, a pregroup grammar, and the semantic
category, namely FHilb, possess a compact-closed structure.
Recall that a compact closed category is a monoidal category
in which every object A has a left and right adjoint, denoted as
Al, Ar respectively, for which the following special morphisms
exist:
ηl : I →A ⊗Al
ηr : I →Ar ⊗A
(1)
ǫl : Al ⊗A →I
ǫr : A ⊗Ar →I
(2)
These maps need to satisfy certain conditions (known as
yanking equations) which ensure that all relevant diagrams
commute:
(1A ⊗ǫl
A) ◦(ηl
A ⊗1A) = 1A
(ǫr
A ⊗1A) ◦(1A ⊗ηr
A) = 1A (3)
(ǫl
A ⊗1Al) ◦(1Al ⊗ηl
A) = 1Al
(1Ar ⊗ǫr
A) ◦(ηr
A ⊗1Ar) = 1Ar
Finally, the passage from syntax to semantics is carried out
by a strong monoidal functor and, as a result, preserves the
compact closed structure. Before we proceed to expand on
the above constructions, we brieﬂy introduce the graphical
calculus of monoidal categories which will be used throughout
our exposition.
A. Graphical calculus
Monoidal categories are complete with regard to a graph-
ical calculus [25] which depicts derivations in their internal
language very intuitively, thus simplifying the reading and
the analysis. Objects are represented as labelled wires, and
morphisms as boxes with input and output wires. The η- and
ǫ-maps are given as half-turns.
B
ηl:
ηr:
f
A
ǫl:
ǫr:
A
Composing morphisms amounts to connecting outputs to
inputs, while the tensor product is simply juxtaposition:
C
C
B
g
B
D
B
D
g
◦
f
=
B
f
⊗g
=
f
g
B
A
f
A
C
A
C
A
In this language, the yanking equations (3) get an intuitive
visual justiﬁcation (here for the ﬁrst two identities):
A
Al
A
=
A
A
Ar
A
=
A
For a given object A, we deﬁne a state of A to be a
morphism I →A. If A denotes a vector space, we can think
of a state as a speciﬁc vector living in that space. In our
graphical language the unit object I can be omitted, leading
to the following representation of states:
A
A
B
A
B
A
B
⊗
=
Note that the second diagram from the left depicts an
entangled state of A⊗B; product states (such as the rightmost
one) are simple juxtapositions of two states.
B. Pregroup grammars
A pregroup algebra [8] is a partially ordered monoid with
unit 1, whose each element p has a left adjoint pl and a right
adjoint pr, conforming to the following inequalities:
pl · p ≤1 ≤p · pl
and
p · pr ≤1 ≤pr · p
(4)
A pregroup grammar is a pregroup algebra freely generated
over a set of basic types B including a designated end type and
a type dictionary that assigns elements of the pregroup to the
vocabulary of a language. For example, it is usually assumed
that B = {n, s}, where n is the type assigned to a noun or
a well-formed noun phrase, while s is a designated type kept
for a well-formed sentence. Atomic types can be combined in
order to provide types for relational words; for example, an
adjective has type n·nl, reﬂecting the fact that it is something
that expects for a noun at its right-hand side in order to return
another noun. Similarly, a transitive verb has type nr · s · nl,
denoting something that expects two nouns (one at each side)
in order to return a sentence. Based on (4), for this latter case
the pregroup derivation gets the following form:
n · (nr · s · nl) · n = (n · nr) · s · (nl · n) ≤1 · s · 1 ≤s
(5)
Let CF denote the free compact closed category derived
from the pregroup algebra of a pregroup grammar [26]; then,
according to (1) and (2), the above type reduction corresponds
to the following morphism in CF:
ǫr
n · 1s · ǫl
n : n · nr · s · nl · n →s
(6)
C. From syntax to semantics
The type-logical approach presented in Sect. II-B is com-
positional, but unable to distinguish between words of the
same type; even more importantly, the only information that a
derivation such as the one in (5) can provide to us is whether
the sentence is well-formed or not. Distributional models of
meaning offer a solution to the ﬁrst of these problems, by
representing a word in terms of its distributional behaviour in
a large corpus of text. While the actual methods for achieving
this can vary,1 the goal is always the same: to represent words
as points of some metric space, where differences in semantic
similarity can be detected and precisely quantiﬁed. The prime
intuition is that words appearing in similar contexts must have
a similar meaning [1]. The word vectors typically live in a
1See Appendix A for a concrete implementation.
highly dimensional semantic space with a ﬁxed orthonormal
basis, the elements of which correspond to content-bearing
words. The values in the vector of a target word wt express
co-occurrence statistics extracted from some large corpus of
text, showing how strongly wt is associated with each one of
the basis words. For a concise introduction to distributional
models of meaning see [27].
We take (FHilb, ⊗), the category of ﬁnite dimensional
Hilbert spaces and linear maps over the scalar ﬁeld I, to be
the semantic counterpart of CF which, as we saw before, ac-
commodates the grammar. FHilb is a dagger compact closed
category (or, †-compact closed); that is, a symmetric compact
closed category (so that Ar ∼= Al = A∗for all A) equipped
with an involutive contravariant functor † : FHilb →FHilb
that is the identity on objects. Concretely, in FHilb, for a
morphism f : A →B, its dagger f † : B →A is simply its
adjoint. Furthermore, ǫA = η†
A ◦σA∗,A for all A.
Taking |ψ⟩and |φ⟩to be two vectors in a Hilbert space H,
ǫA : A∗⊗A →I is the pairing ǫA(⟨ψ|, |φ⟩) = ⟨ψ|(|φ⟩) =
⟨ψ|φ⟩and ηA = ǫ†
A. This yields a categorical deﬁnition of the
inner product:
⟨ψ|φ⟩: I
ψ
−−→H
φ†
−−−→I
(7)
In practice it is often necessary to normalise in order to
obtain the cosine of the angle between vectors as a measure
of semantic similarity. This measure has been widely (and
successfully, see [3]) used in distributional models.
D. Quantizing the grammar
We now proceed to present a solution to the second problem
posed above, that of providing a quantiﬁed semantic represen-
tation for a sentence by composing the representations of the
words therein: in this paper we follow [28] and [15] and we
achieve the transition from syntax to semantics via a strong
monoidal functor Q:
Q : CF →FHilb
(8)
which can be shown to also preserve the compact structure so
that Q(pl) = Q(p)l and Q(pr) = Q(p)r for p an object of
CF. Since each object in FHilb is its own dual we also have
Q(pl) ∼= Q(p) ∼= Q(pr). Moreover, for basic types, we let:
Q(n) = N
Q(s) = S
(9)
Furthermore, since Q is strongly monoidal, complex types
are mapped to tensor product of vector spaces:
Q(n · nr) = Q(n) ⊗Q(nr) = N ⊗N
(10)
Q(nr · s · nl) = Q(nr) ⊗Q(s) ⊗Q(nl) = N ⊗S ⊗N
Finally, each morphism in CF is mapped to a linear map
in FHilb. Equipped with such a functor, we can now deﬁne
the meaning of a sentence as follows:
Deﬁnition II.1. Let |wi⟩be a vector I →Q(pi) correspond-
ing to word wi with type pi in a sentence w1w2 . . . wn. Given
a type-reduction α : p1 · p2 · . . . · pn →s, the meaning of the
sentence is deﬁned as:
|w1w2 . . . wn⟩:= Q(α)(|w1⟩⊗. . . ⊗|wn⟩)
(11)
Take as an example the sentence “Trembling shadows play
hide-and-seek”, with the standard types n·nl and nr ·s·nl as-
signed to adjectives and verbs, respectively. Then the adjective
‘trembling’ will be a morphism I →Q(n·nl) = I →N ⊗N,
that is, a state in the tensor product space N ⊗N. Note that
this matrix deﬁnes a linear map N →N, an interpretation
that is fully aligned with the formal semantics perspective: an
adjective is a function that takes a noun as input and returns
a modiﬁed version of it. Similarly, the verb ‘play’ lives in
N⊗S⊗N or, equivalently, is a bi-linear map N⊗N →S (with
a subject and an object as arguments) which returns a sentence.
In contrast to those two relational words, the nouns ‘shadows’
and ‘hide-and-seek’ are plain vectors in N. The syntax of the
sentence conforms to the following type reduction:
(ǫr
n·1s)◦(1n·ǫl
n·1nr ·1s·ǫl
n) : n·nl·n·nr ·s·nl·n →s (12)
which, when transferred to FHilb via Q, yields the following
diagrammatic derivation:
S
N N l
N
N r
N l
N
Trembling
shadows
play
hide-and-seek
(13)
Recall that ǫ-morphisms (depicted as caps) in FHilb denote
inner product, so when a relational word of order m is applied
on an argument of order n, the result is always a tensor of order
n + m −2; this simply means that the computation in (13)
will be a tensor in S, serving as the semantic representation
for the sentence.
E. Using Frobenius Algebras in Language
If distributional models provide a way to build meaning
vectors for words with atomic types, the question of how to
create a tensor representing a relational or a functional word
is much more challenging. Following an approach that resem-
bles an extensional perspective of semantics, Grefenstette and
Sadrzadeh [29] propose the representation of a relational word
as the sum of its argument vectors. In other words, an adjective
is given as P
i |nouni⟩, where i iterates through all nouns that
the speciﬁc adjective modiﬁes in a large corpus and |nouni⟩
is the meaning vector of the ith noun; similarly, an intransitive
verb is the sum of all its subject nouns, while a transitive verb
(a function of two arguments) is deﬁned as follows:
|verbT ⟩=
X
i
|subji⟩⊗|obji⟩
(14)
While this idea is intuitive and fairly easy to implement, it
immediately results in a mismatch between the grammatical
types of the words and their concrete representations. The type
of a transitive verb, for example, is nr · s · nl, but the method
needs a concrete representation which lives in N ⊗N. In order
to provide a solution to this problem, Kartsaklis, Sadrzadeh,
Pulman and Coecke [15] propose to expand this tensor to N ⊗
N ⊗N using the co-monoid part of a Frobenius algebra. Later,
Sadrzadeh et al. [14], [30] show how both the monoid and the
co-monoid maps of a Frobenius algebra can be used to model
meanings of functional words such as subjective, objective,
and possessive relative pronouns.
Recall from [31] that a Frobenius algebra in a monoidal
category is a quintuple (A, ∆, ι, µ, ζ) such that:
• (A, µ, ζ) is a monoid, that is we have:
µ = A ⊗A →A
ζ : I →A
(15)
satisfying associativity and unit conditions,
• (A, ∆, ι) is a co-monoid, so that:
∆= A →A ⊗A
ι : A →I
(16)
satisfy co-associativity and co-unit conditions;
• furthermore, ∆and µ adhere to the following Frobenius
condition:
=
=
(17)
In a monoidal †-category, a †-Frobenius algebra is a Frobe-
nius algebra whose co-monoid is adjoint to the monoid.
As shown in [16], every ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert space
H with orthonormal basis {|i⟩} has a †-Frobenius algebra
associated to it, the co-multiplication and multiplication of
which corresponds to uniformly copying and uncopying the
basis as follows:
∆:: |i⟩7→|i⟩⊗|i⟩
ι :: |i⟩7→1
(18)
µ :: |i⟩⊗|j⟩7→δij|i⟩:=

|i⟩
i = j
|0⟩
i ̸= j
ζ :: 1 7→
X
i
|i⟩
Abstractly, this enables us to copy and delete the (classical)
information relative to the given basis. Concretely, the copying
∆-map amounts to encoding faithfully the components of a
vector in H as the diagonal elements of a matrix in H ⊗H,
while the “uncopying” operation µ picks out the diagonal
elements of a matrix and returns them as a vector in H.
Kartsaklis et al. [15] use the Frobenius co-multiplication in
order to faithfully encode tensors of lower order constructed by
the argument summing procedure of [29] to higher order ones,
thus restoring the proper functorial relation. The concrete rep-
resentation of an adjective is given as ∆(P
i |nouni⟩) which,
when substituted to Deﬁnition II.1, gives the composition on
the right:2
2Notice that the resulting normal form is just a direct application of the
Frobenius condition (17).
=
adj:
(19)
In order to apply this method to verbs, we ﬁrst need to
notice that since now our sentence space will be essentially
produced by copying basis elements of the noun space, our
functor Q cannot any more apply different mappings on the
two atomic pregroup types {s, n}; both of these should be
mapped onto the same basic vector space, so we get:
Q(n) = W
Q(s) = W
(20)
Given the above limitation, the case of an intransitive verb
is quite similar to that of an adjective: we construct a concrete
tensor as ∆(P
i |subji⟩), the composition of which with a
subject noun on its right-hand side proceeds as in (19) due
to the commutativity of the algebra. The case of a transitive
verb is more interesting, since now the Frobenius structure
offers two options: starting from a verb matrix in W ⊗W
created as in (14), we can encode it to a tensor in W ⊗W ⊗
W by either copying the row dimension (responsible for the
interaction of the verb with the subject noun) or the column
dimension (responsible for the interaction with the object). For
the latter case, referred to by Copy-Object, the composition
becomes as follows:
=
verb:
(21)
The composition for the case of copying the subject dimension
proceeds similarly on the left-hand side. In practice, empirical
work has shown that objects have stronger inﬂuence on the
meaning of a transitive sentence than subjects [15], especially
when the head verb is ambiguous. This in principle means
that the Frobenius structure of the Copy-Object approach is a
more effective model of sentential compositionality.
Furthermore, Sadrzadeh et al. [14] exploit the abilities
of Frobenius algebras in order to model relative pronouns.
Speciﬁcally, copying is used in conjunction with deleting in
order to allow the head noun of a relative clause to interact
with its modiﬁer verb phrase from the far left-hand side of the
clause to its right-hand side. For the case of a relative clause
modifying a subject this is achieved as follows:
N
N N S N
N S N
N
N
N
N
N
=
the man
who
likes
Mary
the man
likes
Mary
(22)
This concludes the presentation of the categorical compo-
sitional model of Coecke et al. [7] and the related research
up to today. From the next section we start working towards
an extension of this model capable of handling the notions of
homonymy and polysemy in a uniﬁed manner.
III. UNDERSTANDING AMBIGUITY
In order to deal with lexical ambiguity we ﬁrstly need to
understand its nature. In other words, we are interested to study
in what way an ambiguous word differs from an unambiguous
one, and what is the deﬁning quality that makes this distinction
clear. On the surface, the answer to these questions seems
straightforward: an ambiguous word is one with more than one
lexicographic entries in the dictionary. However, this deﬁnition
ﬁts well only to homonymous cases, in which due to some
historical accident words that share the same spelling and
pronunciation refer to completely unrelated concepts. Indeed,
while the number of meanings of a homonymous word such as
‘bank’ is almost ﬁxed across different dictionaries, the same
is not true for the small (and overlapping) variations of senses
that might be listed under a word expressing a polysemous
case.
The crucial distinction between homonymy and polysemy
is that in the latter case a word still expresses a coherent and
self-contained concept. Recall the example of the polysemous
use of ‘bank’ as a ﬁnancial institution and the building where
the services of the institution are offered; when we use the
sentence ‘I went to the bank’ (with the ﬁnancial meaning of the
word in mind) we essentially refer to both of the polysemous
meanings of ‘bank’ at the same time—at a higher level, the
word ‘bank’ expresses an abstract but concise concept that
encompasses all of the available polysemous meanings. On
the other hand, the fact that the same name can be used
to describe a completely different concept (such as a river
bank or a number of objects in a row) is nothing more than
an unfortunate coincidence expressing lack of speciﬁcation.
Indeed, a listener of the above sentence can retain a small
amount of uncertainty regarding the true intentions of the
sayer; although her ﬁrst guess would be that ‘bank’ refers to
the dominant meaning of ﬁnancial institution (including all re-
lated polysemous meanings), a small possibility that the sayer
has actually visited a river bank still remains. Therefore, in the
absence of sufﬁcient context, the meaning of a homonymous
word is more reliably expressed as a probabilistic mixing of
the unrelated individual meanings.
In a distributional model of meaning where a homonymous
word is represented by a single vector, the ambiguity in
meaning has been collapsed into a convex combination of
the relevant sense vectors; the result is a vector that can be
seen as the average of all senses, inadequate to reﬂect the
meaning of any of them in a reliable way. We need a way
to avoid that. In natural language, ambiguities are resolved
with the introduction of context (recall that meaning is use),
which means that for a compositional model of meaning the
resolving mechanism is the compositional process itself. We
would like to retain the ambiguity of a homonymous word
when needed (i.e. in the absence of appropriate context) and
allow it to collapse only when the context deﬁnes the intended
sense, during the compositional process.
In summary, we seek an appropriate model that will allows
us: (a) to express homonymous words as probabilistic mixings
of their individual meanings; (b) to retain the ambiguity until
the presence of sufﬁcient context that will eventually resolve
it during composition time; (c) to achieve all the above in the
multi-linear setting imposed by the vector space semantics of
our original model.
IV. ENCODING AMBIGUITY
The previous compositional model relies on a strong
monoidal functor from a compact closed category, representing
syntax, to FHilb, modelling a form of distributional seman-
tics. In this section, we will modify the functor to a new
codomain category. However, before we start, we establish a
few guidelines:
• our construction needs to retain a compact closed struc-
ture in order to carry the grammatical reduction maps to
the new category;
• we wish to be able to compare the meaning of words
as in the previous model, i.e., the new category needs to
come equipped with a dagger structure that implements
this comparison;
• ﬁnally, we need a Frobenius algebra to merge and dupli-
cate information in concrete models.
To achieve our goal, we will explore a categorical con-
struction, inspired from quantum physics and originally due
to Selinger [13], in the context of the categorical model of
meaning developed in the previous sections.
A. Mixing in FHilb
Although seemingly unrelated, quantum mechanics and
linguistics share a common link through the framework of
†-compact closed categories, an abstraction of the Hilbert
space formulation, and have been used in the past [11] to
provide structural proofs for a class of quantum protocols,
essentially recasting the vector space semantics of quantum
mechanics in a more abstract way. Shifting the perspective
to the ﬁeld of linguistics, we saw how the same formalism
proposes a description of the semantic interactions of words
at the sentence level. Here we make the connection between
the two ﬁelds even more explicit, taking advantage of the fact
that the ultimate purpose of quantum mechanics is to deal with
ambiguity—and this is exactly what we need to achieve here
in the context of language.
We start by observing that, in quantum physics, the Hilbert
space model is insufﬁcient to incorporate the epistemic state
of the observer in its formalism: what if one does not have
knowledge of a quantum system’s initial state and can only
attribute a probability distribution to a set of possible states?
The answer is by considering a statistical ensemble of pure
states: for example, one may assign a 1
2 probability that the
state vector of a system is |ψ1⟩and a 1
2 probability that it is in
state |ψ2⟩. We say that this system is in a mixed state. In the
Hilbert space setting, such a state cannot be represented as a
vector. In fact, any normalised sum of pure states is again
a pure state (by the vector space structure). Note that the
state (ψ1 + ψ2)/
√
2 is a quantum superposition and not the
mathematical representation of the mixed state above.
This situation is similar to the issue we face when trying
to model ambiguity in distributional semantics: given two
different meanings of a homonymous word and their relative
weights (given as probabilities), simply looking at the convex
composition of the associated vectors collapses the ambiguous
meaning to a single vector, thereby fusing together the two
senses of the word. This is precisely what was discussed in
Sect. III. The mathematical response to this problem is to move
the focus away from states in a Hilbert space to a speciﬁc kind
of operators on the same space: more speciﬁcally, to density
operators, i.e., positive semi-deﬁnite, self-adjoint operators of
trace one. The density operator formalism is our means to
express a probability distribution over the potential meanings
of a homonymous word in a distributional model. We formally
deﬁne this as follows:
Deﬁnition IV.1. Let a distributional model be given in the
form of a Hilbert space M, in which every word wt is
represented by a statistical ensemble {(pi, |wi
t⟩)}i—where
|wi
t⟩is a vector corresponding to a speciﬁc unambiguous
meaning of the word that can occur with probability pi. The
distributional meaning of the word is deﬁned as:
ρ(wt) =
X
i
pi|wi
t⟩⟨wi
t|
(23)
In conceptual terms, mixing is interpreted as ambiguity
of meaning: a word wt with meaning given by ρ(wt) can
have pure meaning wi
t with probability pi. Note that for
the case of a non-homonymous word, the above formula
reduces to |wt⟩⟨wt|, with |wt⟩corresponding to the state vector
assigned to wt. Now, if mixed states are density operators,
we need a notion of morphism that preserves this structure,
i.e., that maps states to states. In the Hilbert space model,
the morphisms were simply linear maps. The corresponding
notion in the mixed setting is that of completely positive map,
that is, positive maps that respect the monoidal structure of
the underlying category.
To constitute a compositional model of meaning, our con-
struction also needs to respect our stated goals: speciﬁcally,
the category of operator spaces and completely positive maps
must be a †-compact closed category; furthermore, we need
to identify the morphism that plays the part of the Frobenius
algebra of the previous model. We start working towards
these goals by describing a construction that builds a similar
category, not only from FHilb, but, more abstractly, from any
†-compact closed category.
B. Doubling and complete positivity
The category that we are going to build was originally intro-
duced by Selinger [13] as a generalisation of the corresponding
construction on Hilbert spaces. Conceptually, it corresponds
to shifting the focus away from vectors or morphisms of the
form I →A to operators on the same space or morphisms of
type A →A. We will formalise this idea by ﬁrst introducing
the category D(C) on a compact closed category C, which
can be perhaps better understood in its diagrammatic form as
a doubling of the wires. In this context, we obtain a duality
between states of D(C) and operators of C, pictured by simple
wire manipulations. As we will see, D(C) retains the compact
closedness of C and is therefore a viable candidate for a
semantic category in our compositional model of meaning.
However, at this stage, states of D(C) do not yet admit a
clear interpretation in terms of mixing. This is why we need
to introduce the notion of completely positive morphisms, of
which positive operators on a Hilbert space (mixed states in
quantum mechanics) are a special case. This will allow us later
to deﬁne the subcategory CPM(C) of D(C).
1) The D construction—doubling: First, given a †-compact
closed category3 C we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition IV.2. The category D(C) with
• the same objects as C;
• morphisms between objects A and B of D(C) are mor-
phisms A ⊗A∗→B ⊗B∗of C.
• composition and dagger are inherited from C via the
embedding E : D(C) ֒→C deﬁned by
 A
7→A ⊗A∗
on objects;
f
7→f
on morphisms.
In addition, we can endow the category D(C) of a monoidal
structure by deﬁning the tensor ⊗D by
A ⊗D B = A ⊗B
on objects A and B, and for morphisms f1 : A⊗A∗→B⊗B∗
and f2 : C ⊗C∗→D ⊗D∗, by:
f1 ⊗D f2 : A ⊗C ⊗C∗⊗A∗
∼
=
−→A ⊗A∗⊗C ⊗C∗
f1⊗f2
−−−−→B ⊗B∗⊗D ⊗D∗
∼
=
−→B ⊗D ⊗D∗⊗B∗
(24)
Or graphically by,
f2
f1
f2
7→
f1
f2
=
f1
(25)
where the arrow 7→represents the functor E and we use the
convention of depicting morphisms in D(C) with thick wires
and boxes to avoid confusion. Note that the intuitive alternative
of simply juxtaposing the two morphisms as we would in C
fails to produce a completely positive morphism in general, as
will become clearer when we deﬁne completely positivity in
this context.
This category carries all the required structure. We refer the
reader to [13] for a proof of the following:
Proposition IV.1. The category D(C) inherits a †-compact
closed structure from C via the strict monoidal functor M :
3The construction works on any monoidal category with a dagger, i.e., an
involution, but we will not need the additional generality.
C →D(C) deﬁned inductively by



f1 ⊗f2
7→M(f1) ⊗D M(f2)
;
A
7→A
on objects;
f
7→f ⊗f∗
on morphisms.
where f∗= (f †)∗by deﬁnition.
The functor M shows that we are not losing any expressive
power since unambiguous words (represented as maps of
C) still admit a faithful representation in doubled form. For
reference, the reader can ﬁnd in Fig. 1 a dictionary that
translates useful diagrams from one category to the other.
Now, notice that we have a bijective correspondence be-
tween states of D(C), i.e., morphisms I →A and operators
on A in C. Explicitly, the map C(A, A) →C(I, A ⊗A∗) is,
for an operator ρ : A →A,
ρ 7→⌜ρ⌝= (ρ ⊗1A∗) ◦ηA∗=
ρ
(26)
that is easily seen to be an isomorphism by bending back the
rightmost wire.4 In the special case of states, the generalised
inner product generated by the dagger functor can be computed
in terms of the canonical trace induced by the compact closed
structure (and reduces to the usual inner product on a space
4An application of the yanking equations (3).
D(C)
C
D(C)
C
B
B B∗
1A
A
A
A∗
f
f
f
A
A A∗
C
C C∗
A
A A∗
g
g
B
f†
f†
f
B
B∗
g ◦f
f
f
B
B B∗
A
A A∗
ǫ
η
Frob. µ
Frob. ∆
Frob. ι
Frob. ζ
Fig. 1.
Translation from C to D(C).
of operators in FHilb):
ρ†
2
7→
ρ1
ρ2∗
=
= Tr(ρ†
2ρ1)
ρ1
(27)
We now proceed to introduce complete positivity.
2) The CPM construction—complete positivity [13]:
Deﬁnition IV.3. A morphism f
: A →B of D(C) is
completely positive if there exists an object C and a morphism
k : C ⊗A →B, in C, such that f embeds in C as
(k ⊗k∗) ◦(1A ⊗ηC∗⊗1A∗) or, pictorially,
B
B
f
7→
k
k∗
A
A
C
A∗
B∗
(28)
From this last representation, we easily see that the compo-
sition of two completely positive maps is completely positive.
Similarly, the tensor product of two completely positive maps
is completely positive. Therefore, we can deﬁne:
Deﬁnition IV.4. The category CPM(C) is the subcategory
of D(C) whose objects are the same and morphisms are
completely positive maps.
CPM(C) is monoidal and ⊗CPM = ⊗D. We easily re-
cover the usual notion of positive operator from this deﬁnition:
k
7→
k
k∗
=
= ⌜k ◦k†⌝
k†
(29)
with pure states corresponding to the disconnected case.
Finally, from deﬁnition IV.3 it is clear that, for a morphism
f of C, M(f) = f ⊗f∗is completely positive. Thus,
Proposition IV.2. M factors through the embedding I :
CPM(C) ֒→D(C), i.e., there exists a strictly monoidal
functor ˜
M : C →CPM(C) such that M = I ˜
M.
3) Frobenius algebras: We are only missing a Frobenius
algebra to duplicate and delete information as necessary (Sect.
II-E). It is natural to ﬁrst consider the doubled version of
Frobenius algebras in C, i.e. the †-Frobenius algebra whose
copying map is M(∆) and whose deleting map is M(ι), as
doubling preserves both operations. In addition, the monoid
operation is clearly completely positive. In more concrete
terms, the monoid operation is precisely the point-wise (some-
times called Hadamard) product of matrices. The morphisms
of this Frobenius algebra are shown in Fig. 1.
C. Categorical Model of Meaning: Reprise
We are now ready to put together all the concepts introduced
above in the context of a compositional model of meaning.
Our aim in this section is to reinterpret the previous model
of [7] as a functor from a compact closed grammar to the
category CPM(C), for any compact closed category C. Given
semantics in the form of a strong monoidal functor Q : CF →
C, our model of meaning is deﬁned by the composition:
˜
MQ : CF →C →CPM(C)
(30)
Since ˜
M sends an object A to the same A in CPM(C),
the mapping of atomic types, their duals and relational types
of the grammar occur in exactly the same fashion as in the
previous model. Furthermore, note that Q is strongly monoidal
and ˜
M is strictly monoidal, so the resulting functor is strongly
monoidal and, in particular, preserves the compact structure.
Thus, we can perform type reductions in CPM(C) according
to the grammatical structure dictated by the category CF.
Note that we have deliberately abstracted the model to
highlight its richness—the category C could be any compact
closed category: FHilb, the category Rel of sets and relations
(in which case we recover a form of Montague semantics [6])
or, as we will see in Sect. VI, even another iteration of the
CPM construction.
Deﬁnition IV.5. Let ρ(wi) be a meaning state I →˜
MQ(pi)
corresponding to word wi with type pi in a sentence w1 . . . wn.
Given a type-reduction α : p1 · . . . · pn →s, the meaning of
the sentence is deﬁned as:
ρ(w1 . . . wn) := ˜
MQ(α)
 ρ(w1) ⊗CPM . . . ⊗CPM ρ(wn)

For example, assigning density matrix representations to the
words in the previous example sentence “trembling shadows
play hide and seek”, we obtain the following meaning repre-
sentation:
N
N
N
N
N
N S
N
N
S
shadows
Trembling
N
N
N
hide-and-seek
play
N
7→
Diagrammatically, it is clear that in the new setting the
partial trace implements meaning composition. Note that
diagrams as the above illustrate the ﬂow of ambiguity or
information between words. How does ambiguity evolve when
composing words to form sentences? This question is very
hard to answer precisely in full generality. The key message
is that (unambiguous) meaning emerges in the interaction of
a word with its context, through the wires. This process of
disambiguation is perhaps better understood by studying very
simple examples. For instance, it is interesting to examine
the interaction of an ambiguous word with a pure meaning
word to build intuition—for example the particular interaction
of an ambiguous noun with an unambiguous verb. In fact,
since density operators are convex sums of pure operators, all
interactions are convex combinations of this simple form of
word composition. In addition, disambiguation is one of the
key NLP tasks on which the previous compositional models
were tested and thus constitutes an interesting case study.
D. Introducing ambiguity in formal semantics
Here, we will work in the category CPM(Rel). We recall
that Rel is the †-compact category of sets and relations.
The tensor product is the Cartesian product and the dagger
associates to a relation its opposite. Let our sentence set
be S = {true, false}. In Rel, this means that we are
only interested in the truth of a sentence, as in Montague
semantics. In this context, nouns are subsets of attributes.
Given a context to which we pass the meaning of a word, the
meaning of the resulting sentence can be either |false⟩, |true⟩
or |false⟩+ |true⟩, the latter representing superposition, i.e.,
the case for which the context is insufﬁcient to determine the
truth of all the attributes of the word (classically, this can be
identiﬁed with false).
On the other hand, in the internal logic of CPM(Rel),
mixing will add a second dimension that can be interpreted as
ambiguous meaning, regardless of truth. The possible values
are now:
N
N S
ambiguous context
word
=





|true⟩⟨true|,
|false⟩⟨false|,
(|true⟩+ |false⟩)(⟨true| + ⟨false|),
1S
where the identity on S represents ambiguity.
Note that we use Dirac notation in Rel rather than set
theoretic union and cartesian product, since elements in ﬁnite
sets can be seen as basis vectors of free modules over the
semi-ring of Booleans; a binary relation can be expressed as
an adjacency matrix. The trace of a square matrix picks out
the elements for which the corresponding relation is reﬂexive.
Consider the phrase ‘queen rules’. We allow a few highly
simplifying assumptions: ﬁrst, we restrict our set of nouns to
the rather peculiar ‘Freddy Mercury’, ‘Brian May’, ‘Elisabeth
II’, ‘chess’, ‘England’ and the empty word ǫ. Moreover,
we consider the verb ‘rule’, supposed to have the following
unambiguous meaning:
|rule⟩
=
|band⟩⊗|true⟩⊗|ǫ⟩+ |chess⟩⊗|false⟩⊗|ǫ⟩
+|elisabeth⟩⊗|true⟩⊗|england⟩
with the obvious |band⟩= |freddy⟩+|brian⟩. This deﬁnition
reﬂects the fact that a band can rule (understand “be the best”)
as well as a monarch. Finally, the ambiguous meaning of
‘queen’ is represented by the following operator:
ρ(queen)
=
|elisabeth⟩⟨elisabeth|
+|band⟩⟨band| + |chess⟩⟨chess|
With the self-evident grammatical structure we can compute
the meaning of the sentence diagrammatically:
N
N SN ′
N ′
N
N SN ′
N ′
7→
queen
rule
which,
in
algebraic
form,
yields,
TrN(|rule⟩⟨rule| ◦
(TrN ′(ρ(queen))⊗1′
N)) = 1S 5. In other words, the meaning
of the sentence is neither true nor false but still ambigu-
ous. This is because the context that we pass to ‘queen’ is
insufﬁcient to disambiguate it (the band or the monarch can
rule).
Now, if we consider ‘queen rules England’, the only
matching pattern in the deﬁnition of |rule⟩is |elisabeth⟩
which
corresponds
to
a
unique
and
therefore
unam-
biguous
meaning
of
ρ(queen).
Hence,
a
similar
cal-
culation
yields
TrN(|rule⟩⟨rule| ◦(TrN ′(ρ(queen)) ⊗
|england⟩⟨england|)) = |true⟩⟨true| and the sentence is
not only true but unambiguous. In this case, the context was
sufﬁcient to disambiguate the meaning of the word ‘queen’.
E. Flow of information with †-Frobenius algebras
In the above examples we used the assumption that a verb
tensor had been faithfully constructed according to its gram-
matical type. However, as we saw in section II-E, concrete
constructions might yield operators on a space of tensor order
lower than the space to which the functor
˜
MQ maps their
grammatical type. As before, †-Frobenius algebras can be used
to solve this type mismatch and encode the information carried
by an operator into tensors of higher order.
Assume that we have a distributional model in the form
of a vector space W with a distinguished basis and density
matrices on W and W ⊗W to represent the meaning of our
nouns and verbs, respectively. Using the doubled version of
the †-Frobenius algebra induced by the basis (as well as the
proven empirical method of copying the object) our example
sentence is given by:
W
W
W W
W
W
W
W W
W
7→
Trembling shadows play hide-and-seek
In addition to being a convenient way for creating verb
tensors, the application of Frobenius algebras in the new model
has another very important practical advantage: it results a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in the dimensionality of the density matrices,
mitigating space complexity problems that might be created
from the imposed doubling in a practical implementation.
5Note that we delete the subject dimension of the verb in order to reﬂect
the fact that it is used intransitively.
Relative Clauses
noun: verb1/verb2
noun
noun that verb1
noun that verb2
organ: enchant/ache
0.18
0.11
0.08
vessel: swell/sail
0.25
0.16
0.01
queen: ﬂy/rule
0.28
0.14
0.16
nail: gleam/grow
0.19
0.06
0.14
bank: overﬂow/loan
0.21
0.19
0.18
Adjectives
noun: adj1/adj2
noun
adj1 noun
adj2 noun
organ: music/body
0.18
0.10
0.13
vessel: blood/naval
0.25
0.05
0.07
queen: fair/chess
0.28
0.05
0.16
nail: rusty/ﬁnger
0.19
0.04
0.11
bank: water/ﬁnancial
0.21
0.20
0.16
TABLE I
COMPUTING ENTROPY FOR NOUNS MODIFIED BY RELATIVE CLAUSES
AND ADJECTIVES.
F. Measuring ambiguity with real data
While a large-scale experiment is out of the scope of this
paper, in this section we present some preliminary witness-
ing results that showcase the potential of the model. Using
2000-dimensional meaning vectors created by the procedure
described in Appendix A, we show how ambiguity evolves for
ﬁve ambiguous nouns when they are modiﬁed by an adjective
or a relative clause. For example, ‘nail’ can appear as ‘rusty
nail’ or ‘nail that grows’; in both cases the modiﬁer resolves
part of the ambiguity, so we expect that the entropy of the
larger compound would be lower than that of the original
ambiguous noun. Both types of composition use the Frobenius
framework described in Sect. II-E; speciﬁcally, composing
an adjective with a noun follows (19), while for the relative
pronoun case we use (22). We further remind that for a density
matrix ρ with eigen-decomposition ρ = P ei|ei⟩⟨ei|, Von
Neumann entropy is given as:
S(ρ) = −Tr(ρ ln ρ) = −
X
i
ei ln ei
(31)
The results are presented in Table I. Note that the entropy
of the compounds are always lower than that of the ambiguous
noun. Even more interestingly, for some cases (e.g ‘vessel that
sails’) the context is so strong that is capable to almost purify
the meaning of the noun. This demonstrates an important
aspect of the proposed model: disambiguation = puriﬁcation.
Finally, the fact that the composite semantic representations
reﬂect indeed their intended meaning has been veriﬁed by
performing a number of informal comparisons; for example,
‘queen that ﬂies’ was close to ‘bee’, but ‘queen that rules’
was closer to ‘palace’; ‘water bank’ was closer to ‘ﬁsh’, but
‘ﬁnancial bank’ was closer to ‘money’, and so on.
V. NON-COMMUTATIVITY
If the last section was concerned with applications of the
CPM-construction to model ambiguity, here we discuss the
role of the D-construction for the same purpose. Frobenius
algebras on objects of D(C) are not necessarily commutative
and thus their associated monoid is not a completely positive
morphism. In the quantum physical literature, non-completely
positive maps are not usually considered since they are not
physically realisable. However, in linguistics, free from these
constraints, we could theoretically venture outside of the
subcategory CPM(C), deep into D(C). More general states
could appear as a result of combining mixed states according
to the reduction rules of our compositional model. There is
no reason for such an operator to be a mixed state itself since
there is no constraint in our model that requires sentences to
decompose into a mixture of atomic concepts.
A. Non-commutativity and complete positivity
Coecke, Heunen and Kissinger [32] introduced the category
CP∗(C) of †-Frobenius algebras (with additional technical
conditions) and completely positive maps, over an arbitrary
†-compact category C, in order to study the interaction of
classical and quantum systems in a single categorical setting:
classical systems are precisely the commutative algebras and
completely positive maps are quantum channels, that is, phys-
ically realisable processes between systems. Interestingly, in
accordance with the content of the no-broadcasting theorem
for quantum systems the multiplication of a commutative
algebra is a completely positive morphism while the mul-
tiplication of a non-commutative algebra is not. It is clear
that the meaning composition of words in a sentence is only
commutative in exceptional cases. The non commutativity of
the grammatical structure reﬂects this. However, in earlier
methods of composition, this complexity was lost in translation
when passing to semantics.
With linguistic applications in mind, the CP∗construction
suggests various ways of composing the meaning of words,
each corresponding to a speciﬁc Frobenius algebra operation.
Conceptually, this idea makes sense since a verb does not
compose with its subject in the same way that an adjective
composes with the noun phrase to which it applies. The various
ways of composing words may also offer a theoretical base
for the introduction of logic in distributional models of natural
language.
B. A purely quantum algebra
This is where the richness of D(C) reveals itself: algebras
in this category are more complex and, in particular, allow
us to study the action of non-commutative structures—a topic
of great interest to formal linguistics where the interaction of
words is highly non-commutative. Hereafter we introduce a
non-commutative †-Frobenius algebra that is not the doubled
image of any algebra in C.
Deﬁnition V.1. For every object A of D(C), the morphisms
of D(C), µ : A ⊗D A →A deﬁned by the following diagram
in C:
= (1A ⊗ǫA ⊗1A∗) ◦(1A⊗A ⊗σA,A∗)
7→
and ι : I →A with the following deﬁnition in C:
7→
= ηA∗
are the multiplication and unit of a †-Frobenius algebra FD—
where σ is the natural swap isomorphism in C.
Proof that the above construction is indeed a †-Frobenius
algebra can be found in [33]. The action of the Frobenius
multiplication µ on states I →A of D(C) is particularly
interesting; in fact, it implements the composition of operators
of C, in D(C), as evidenced by the next diagram:
ρ1
7→
=
= ⌜ρ1 ◦ρ2⌝
ρ1
ρ2
ρ2
The meaning of the “trembling shadows...” sentence using
the algebra FD becomes:
W
W
W W
W
W
W W
W
7→
Trembling shadows
play hide-and-seek
How does composition with the new algebra affect the ﬂow
of ambiguity in the simple case of an ambiguous word to
which we pass an unambiguous context? Given a projec-
tion onto a one-dimensional subspace |w⟩⟨w| and a density
operator ρ, the composition |w⟩⟨w|ρ is a (not necessarily
orthogonal) projection. In a sense, the meaning of the pure
word determined that of the ambiguous word as evidenced by
the disconnected topology of the following diagram:
N
N
7→
pure
ambiguous
context
word
VI. ADDING LEXICAL ENTAILMENT
We now demonstrate the advantage of fact that the CPM-
construction is an abstract construction, and hence can be
applied to any suitable (i.e. living in a †-compact closed
category) model of word meaning.
Besides ambiguity, another feature of language which is
not captured by the distributional model is the fact that
the meaning of one word (= hypernym) generalises that of
another word (= hyponym). This points at a partial ordering of
word meanings. For example, ‘painter’ generalises ‘Brueghel’.
Density matrices can be endowed with a partial ordering which
could play that role, e.g. the Bayesian ordering [34]. This
raises the question of how to accommodate both features
together in a model of natural language meaning.
Since CPM(C) is always †-compact closed, a canonical
solution is obtained by iterating the CPM-construction:
f
7→
7→
x∗
x
x∗
x
k∗
k
Given a word/phrase/sentence meaning:
7→
x∗
x
x∗
x
lack of any ambiguity or generality correspond to distinct
diagrams, respectively:
x∗
x
x∗
x
x∗
x
x∗
x
vs.
Ambiguity or generality can be then measured by taking the
von Neumann entropy of the following operators respectively:
x∗
x
x∗
x
x
x∗
x∗
x
vs.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we detailed a compositional distributional
model of meaning capable of explicitly handling lexical ambi-
guity. We discussed its theoretical properties and demonstrated
its potential for real-world natural language processing tasks
by a small-scale experiment. A large-scale evaluation will
be our challenging next step, aiming to provide empirical
evidence regarding the effectiveness of the model in general
and the performance of the different Frobenius algebras in
particular. On the theoretical side, the logic of ambiguity
in CPM(Rel), the non-commutative features of the D-
construction as well as further exploration of nested levels
of CPM, each deserve a separate treatment. In addition one
important weakness of distributional models is the represen-
tation of words that serve a purely logical role, like logical
connectives or negation. Density operators support a form of
logic whose distributional and compositional properties could
be examined, potentially providing a solution to this long-
standing problem of compositional distributional models.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Harris, Mathematical Structures of Language.
Wiley, 1968.
[2] H. Sch¨utze, “Automatic Word Sense Discrimination,” Computational
Linguistics, vol. 24, pp. 97–123, 1998.
[3] J. Curran, “From distributional to semantic similarity,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, 2004.
[4] T. Landauer and S. Dumais, “A Solution to Plato’s Problem: The Latent
Semantic Analysis Theory of Acquision, Induction, and Representation
of Knowledge,” Psychological Review, 1997.
[5] J. Lambek, “The mathematics of sentence structure,” American mathe-
matical monthly, pp. 154–170, 1958.
[6] R. Montague, “English as a formal language,” in Linguaggi nella Societ`a
e nella Tecnica.
Milan: Edizioni di Comunit`a, 1970, pp. 189–224.
[7] B. Coecke, M. Sadrzadeh, and S. Clark, “Mathematical Foundations for
a Compositional Distributional Model of Meaning. Lambek Festschrift,”
Linguistic Analysis, vol. 36, pp. 345–384, 2010.
[8] J. Lambek, From Word to Sentence.
Milan: Polimetrica, 2008.
[9] G. M. Kelly and M. L. Laplaza, “Coherence for compact closed
categories,” Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, vol. 19, pp. 193–213,
1980.
[10] T. Landauer, “Single representation of multiple meanings in latent
semantic analysis,” in On the consequences of meaning selection:
Perspectives on resolving lexical ambiguity, G. D.S., Ed.
Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association, 2001, pp. 217–232.
[11] S. Abramsky and B. Coecke, “A categorical semantics of quantum
protocols,” in 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
Science, 2004, pp. 415–425.
[12] S. Clark, B. Coecke, E. Grefenstette, S. Pulman, and M. Sadrzadeh,
“A quantum teleportation inspired algorithm produces sentence mean-
ing from word meaning and grammatical structure,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1305.0556, 2013.
[13] P. Selinger, “Dagger compact closed categories and completely positive
maps,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 170, pp.
139–163, 2007.
[14] M. Sadrzadeh, S. Clark, and B. Coecke, “The Frobenius anatomy of
word meanings I: subject and object relative pronouns,” Journal of Logic
and Computation, vol. Advance Access, October 2013.
[15] D. Kartsaklis, M. Sadrzadeh, S. Pulman, and B. Coecke, “Reasoning
about meaning in natural language with compact closed categories and
Frobenius algebras,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.5980, 2014.
[16] B. Coecke, D. Pavlovic, and J. Vicary, “A New Description of Orthogo-
nal Bases,” Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, vol. 1, 2008.
[17] D. Kartsaklis and M. Sadrzadeh, “Prior disambiguation of word
tensors for constructing sentence vectors,” in Proceedings of the
2013
Conference
on
Empirical
Methods
in
Natural
Language
Processing.
Seattle, Washington, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics,
October
2013,
pp.
1590–1601.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1166
[18] E. Balkır, “Using density matrices in a compositional distributional
model of meaning,” Master’s thesis, University of Oxford, 2014.
[19] W. Blacoe, E. Kasheﬁ, and M. Lapata, “A quantum-theoretic approach
to distributional semantics,” in Proceedings of NACL 2013. Association
for Computational Linguistics, June 2013, pp. 847–857.
[20] P. Bruza, K. Kitto, D. Nelson, and C. McEvoy, “Is there something
quantum-like about the human mental lexicon?” Journal of Mathemati-
cal Psychology, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 362–377, 2009.
[21] D. Widdows, “Orthogonal negation in vector spaces for modelling
word-meanings and document retrieval,” in Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics-Volume
1.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2003, pp. 136–143.
[22] R. Piedeleu, “Ambiguity in categorical models of meaning,” Master’s
thesis, University of Oxford, 2014.
[23] D. Kartsaklis, “Compositional Distributional Semantics with Compact
Closed Categories and Frobenius Algebras,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univer-
sity of Oxford, 2015.
[24] E. Bach, “An extension of classical transformational grammar,” in
Problems in Linguistic Metatheory: Proceedings of the 1976 Conference
at Michigan State University. Lansing: Michigan State University, 1976,
pp. 183–224.
[25] P. Selinger, “A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories,”
in New structures for physics, B. Coecke, Ed.
Springer, 2011, pp.
289–355.
[26] A. Preller and J. Lambek, “Free compact 2-categories,” Mathematical
Structures in Computer Science, vol. 17, no. 02, pp. 309–340, 2007.
[27] P. D. Turney and P. Pantel, “From frequency to meaning: Vector space
models of semantics,” Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 141–188, 2010.
[28] A. Preller and M. Sadrzadeh, “Bell states and negative sentences in
the distributed model of meaning,” in Electronic Notes in Theoretical
Computer Science, Proceedings of the 6th QPL Workshop on Quantum
Physics and Logic, P. S. B. Coecke, P. Panangaden, Ed.
University of
Oxford, 2010.
[29] E.
Grefenstette
and
M.
Sadrzadeh,
“Experimental
support
for
a categorical
compositional distributional
model of meaning,” in
Proceedings
of
the
2011
Conference
on
Empirical
Methods
in
Natural Language Processing.
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.: Association
for Computational Linguistics, July 2011, pp. 1394–1404. [Online].
Available: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D11-1129
[30] M. Sadrzadeh, S. Clark, and B. Coecke, “The Frobenius anatomy of
word meanings II: Possessive relative pronouns,” Journal of Logic and
Computation, June 2014.
[31] A. Carboni and R. Walters, “Cartesian Bicategories I,” Journal of Pure
and Applied Algebra, vol. 49, 1987.
[32] B. Coecke, C. Heunen, and A. Kissinger, “Categories of quantum and
classical channels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.3821, 2013.
[33] B. Coecke and R. W. Spekkens, “Picturing classical and quantum
Bayesian inference,” Synthese, vol. 186, no. 3, pp. 651–696, 2012.
[34] B. Coecke and K. Martin, “A partial order on classical and quantum
states,” in New Structures for Physics, ser. Lecture Notes in Physics,
B. Coecke, Ed.
Springer, 2011, pp. 593–683.
APPENDIX A
FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE
The purpose of this appendix is to show how the theoretical
ideas presented in this paper can take a concrete form using
standard natural language processing techniques. The setting
we present below has been used for the mini-experiments in
Sect. IV-F. We approach the creation of density matrices as a
three-step process: (a) we ﬁrst produce an ambiguous semantic
space; (b) we apply a word sense induction method on it in
order to associate each word with a set of sense vectors; and
ﬁnally (c) we use the sense vectors in order to create a density
matrix for each word. These steps are described in separate
sections below.
A. Creating a Concrete Semantic Space
We train our basic vector space using ukWaC, a corpus
of English text with 2 billion words (100 million sentences).
The basis of the vector space consists of the 2,000 most
frequent content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs),
excluding a list of stop words.6 Furthermore, the vector space
is lemmatized and unambiguous regarding syntactic informa-
tion; in other words, each vector is uniquely identiﬁed by a
(lemma,pos-tag) pair, which means for example that ‘book’
as a noun and ‘book’ as a verb are represented by different
meaning vectors. The weights of each vector are set to the ratio
of the probability of the context word ci given the target word
t to the probability of the context word overall, as follows:
vi(t) = p(ci|t)
p(ci) = count(ci, t) · count(total)
count(t) · count(ci)
where count(ci, t) refers to how many times ci appears in the
context of t (that is, in a 5-word window at either side of t)
and count(total) is the total number of word tokens in the
corpus.
B. Word Sense Induction
The notion of word sense induction, that is, the task of
detecting the different meanings under which a word appears
in a text, is intimately connected with that of distributional
hypothesis—that the meaning of a word is always context-
dependent. If we had a way to create a vectorial representation
6That is, very common words with low information content, such as the
verbs ‘get’ and ‘take’ or adverbs like ‘really’ and ‘always’.
Meaning 1: 24070 contexts
port owner cargo ﬂeet sailing ferry craft Navy merchant cruise
navigation ofﬁcer metre voyage authority deck coast launch ﬁshery
island charter Harbour pottery radio trip pay River Agency Scotland
sell duty visit ﬁsh insurance skipper Roman sink War shore sail
town Coastguard assistance Maritime registration call rescue bank
Museum captain incident customer States yacht mooring barge
comply landing Ireland sherd money Scottish tow tug maritime
wreck board visitor tanker freight purchase lifeboat
Meaning 2: 5930 contexts
clot complication haemorrhage lymph stem VEGF Vitamin glucose
penis endothelium retinopathy spasm antibody clotting AMD
coagulation marrow lesion angina blindness medication graft vitamin
vasoconstriction virus proliferation Ginkgo diabetic ventricle
thickening tablet anaemia thrombus Vein leukocyte scleroderma
stimulation degeneration homocysteine Raynaud breathe mediator
Biloba Diabetes LDL metabolism Gene inﬁltrate atheroma arthritis
lymphocyte lobe C’s histamine melanoma gut dysfunction vitro
triglyceride infarction lipoprotein
TABLE II
DERIVED MEANINGS FOR WORD ‘VESSEL’.
for the contexts in which a speciﬁc word occurs, then, a clus-
tering algorithm could be applied in order to create groupings
of these contexts that hopefully reveal different usages of the
word—different meanings—in the training corpus.
This intuitive idea was ﬁrst presented by Sch¨utze [2] in
1998, and more or less is the cornerstone of every unsuper-
vised word sense induction and disambiguation method based
on semantic word spaces up to today. The approach we use is
a direct variation of this standard technique. For what follows,
we assume that each word in the vocabulary has already been
assigned to an ambiguous semantic vector by following typical
distributional procedures, for example similar to the setting
described in Sect. A-A.
We assume for simplicity that the context is deﬁned at
the sentence level. First, each context for a target word wt
is represented by a context vector of the form 1
n
Pn
i=1 |wi⟩,
where |wi⟩is the semantic vector of some other word wi ̸= wt
in the same context. Next, we apply hierarchical agglomerative
clustering on this set of vectors in order to discover the latent
senses of wt. Ideally, the contexts of wt will vary according to
the speciﬁc meaning in which this word has been used. Table
II provides a visualization of the outcome of this process for
the ambiguous word ‘vessel’. Each meaning is visualized as a
list of the most dominant words in the corresponding cluster,
ranked by their TF-IDF values.
We take the centroid of each cluster as the vectorial rep-
resentation of the corresponding sense/meaning. Thus, each
word w is initially represented by a tuple (|w⟩, Sw), where
|w⟩is the ambiguous semantic vector of the word as created
by the usual distributional practice, and Sw is a set of sense
vectors (that is, centroids of context vectors clusters) produced
by the above procedure.
Note that our approach takes place at the vector level (as
opposed to tensors of higher order), so it provides a natural
way to create sets of meaning vectors for “atomic” words of
the language, that is, for nouns. It turns out that the generaliza-
tion of this to tensors of higher order is straightforward, since
the clustering step has already equipped us with a number of
sets consisting of context vectors, each one of which stands
in one-to-one correspondence with a set of contexts reﬂecting
a different semantic usage of the higher-order word. One then
can use, for example, the argument “tensoring and summing”
procedure of [29] (brieﬂy described in Sect. II-E) in order to
compute the meaning of the ith sense of a word of arity n as:
|word⟩i =
X
c∈Ci
n
O
k=1
|argk,c⟩
(32)
where Ci is the set of contexts associated with the ith sense,
and argk,c denotes the kth argument of the target word in
context c. Of course, more advanced statistical methods could
be also used for learning the sense tensors from the provided
partitioning of the contexts, as long as these methods respect
the multi-linear nature of the model. This completes the word
sense induction step.
C. Creating Density Matrices
We have now managed to equip each word with a set
of sense vectors (or higher-order tensors, depending on its
grammatical type). Assigning a probability to each sense is
trivial and can be directly derived by the number of times the
target word occurs under a speciﬁc sense divided by the total
occurrences of the word in the training corpus. This creates a
statistical ensemble of state vectors and probabilities that can
be used for computing a density matrix for the word according
to Deﬁnition IV.1.
