Title: Large-scale photonic natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.13649v1
--------------------------------------------------

Large-scale photonic natural language
processing
CARLO MICHELE VALENSISE1, IVANA GRECCO2, DAVIDE
PIERANGELI3,2,1,*, AND CLAUDIO CONTI2,3,1
1 Enrico Fermi Research Center (CREF), 00184 Rome, Italy
2 Physics Department, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy
3 Institute for Complex Systems, National Research Council (ISC-CNR), 00185 Rome, Italy
*davide.pierangeli@roma1.infn.it
Abstract: Modern machine learning applications require huge artiﬁcial networks demanding in
computational power and memory. Light-based platforms promise ultra-fast and energy-eﬃcient
hardware, which may help in realizing next-generation data processing devices. However, current
photonic networks are limited by the number of input-output nodes that can be processed in a
single shot. This restricted network capacity prevents their application to relevant large-scale
problems such as natural language processing. Here, we realize a photonic processor with a
capacity exceeding 1.5 × 1010 optical nodes, more than one order of magnitude larger than any
previous implementation, which enables photonic large-scale text encoding and classiﬁcation. By
exploiting the full three-dimensional structure of the optical ﬁeld propagating in free space, we
overcome the interpolation threshold and reach the over-parametrized region of machine learning,
a condition that allows high-performance natural language processing with a minimal fraction of
training points. Our results provide a novel solution to scale-up light-driven computing and open
the route to photonic language processing.
© 2022 Optical Society of America
1.
INTRODUCTION
Advanced artiﬁcial intelligence systems are becoming extremely demanding in terms of training
time and energy consumption [1, 2], since an ever-larger number of trainable parameters is
required to exploit over-parametrization and achieve state-of-the-art performances [3,4]. In turn,
large-scale, energy-eﬃcient computational hardware is becoming a subject of intense interest.
Photonic neuromorphic computing systems [5–7] oﬀer large throughput [8] and energetically
eﬃcient [9] hardware accelerators, based on integrated silicon photonic circuits [10–14],
engineered meta-materials [15], or 3D printed diﬀractive masks [16, 17]. Other light-based
computing architectures leverage Reservoir Computing (RC) [18] and Extreme Learning Machine
(ELM) [19] computational paradigms, in which the input data is mapped into a feature space
through a ﬁxed set of random weights and training is performed only on the readout linear
layer. Optical reservoir computers [20–33] and Photonic Extreme Learning Machines (PELMs)
[34,35,37,51] applies successfully to various learning tasks, ranging from time series prediction
[38,39] to image classiﬁcation [40,41]. In spite of the remarkable performances achieved by
these architectures, their impact on large-scale problems is limited, mainly due to size constraints.
Here, we demonstrate photonic machine learning at an ultra-large scale by mapping the optical
output layer in the full three-dimensional (3D) structure of the optical ﬁeld. This original approach
oﬀers inherent scalability to the optical device and eﬀortless access to the over-parametrized
learning region. The 3D-PELM that we implement is able to process simultaneously up to 250000
total input-output nodes via spatial light modulation, featuring a total network capacity one order
of magnitude larger than existing optical reservoir computers. Our large-scale photonic network
allows us to optically implement a massive text classiﬁcation problem, the sentiment analysis
of the Image Movie Database (IMDb) [44], and enable, for the ﬁrst time to our knowledge, the
arXiv:2208.13649v1  [cs.ET]  29 Aug 2022
(A)
text
one-hot sparse
tf-idf sparse
Hadamard
(B)
optical encoding
plane 1
plane 2
plane 3
SLM
network capacity 𝐶> 1010
photonic natural language processing
(C)
(D)
rating
# users > 106
postive
negative
Fig. 1. Three-dimensional PELM for natural language processing. (A) The text
database entry is a paragraph of variable length.
Text pre-processing: a sparse
representation of the input paragraph is mapped into an Hadamard matrix with phase
values in [0, 𝜋]. (B) The mask is encoded into the optical wavefront by a phase-
only spatial light modulator (SLM). Free-space propagation of the optical ﬁeld maps
the input data into a 3D intensity distribution (speckle-like volume). (C) Sampling
the propagating laser beam in multiple far-ﬁeld planes enables the up-scaling of the
corresponding feature space. (D) Intensities picked from all the spatial modes form the
output layer H3D that undergoes training via ridge regression. By using three planes
(𝑗= 3) we get a network capacity 𝐶> 1010. The inset example shows a binary text
classiﬁcation problem for large-scale rating.
observation of the double descent phenomenon [45–47] on a photonic computing device. We
demonstrate that, thanks to its huge number of optical output nodes, the 3D-PELM successfully
classiﬁes text by using only a limited number of training points, realizing energy-eﬃcient
large-scale text processing.
2.
RESULTS
Three-dimensional PELM
A PELM classiﬁes a dataset with 𝑁points X = [𝑋1, ..., 𝑋𝑁] by mapping the input sample
𝑋𝑖∈R𝐿into a high-dimensional feature space through a nonlinear transformation that is
performed by a photonic platform [34]. To perform the classiﬁcation, the output matrix H, which
contains the measured optical signals, is linearly combined with a set of 𝑀trainable readout
weights 𝛽(see Appendix A). In all previous PELM realizations [25,34,35,39,41], the intensities
stored in H only contain information on the optical ﬁeld at a single spatial or temporal plane.
Here, to scale up the optical network, we exploit the entire three-dimensional optical ﬁeld. Figure
1(B) shows a schematic of our 3D-PELM: the photonic network uses as output nodes the full
3D structure of the optical ﬁeld propagating in free space. The transformation of the input data
sample into an optical intensity volume occurs through linear wave mixing by coherent free-space
propagation and intensity detection. Speciﬁcally, the 3D optical mapping reads as
H3D =
∑︁
𝑗
H 𝑗,
(1)
H 𝑗= 𝐺𝑗(M𝑗exp𝑖(X + W)) ,
(2)
where M 𝑗is the transfer matrix that models coherent light propagation to the 𝑗th detection
plane, e.g., the discretized diﬀraction operator. The M𝑗have complex coeﬃcients, and thus the
photonic scheme implements a complex-valued neural network [42,43]. In Eq. (2) the input
dataset is encoded by phase modulation, while W is a pre-selected random matrix that embeds the
input signal and provides network biases. 𝐺𝑗is the response function of the 𝑗th detector to the
impinging light ﬁeld. In experiments, to collect uncorrelated output data H 𝑗, we employ multiple
cameras that simultaneously image the intensity in distinct far-ﬁeld planes (see Appendix B).
These intensity distributions are uncorrelated in order to acquire non-redundant information.
Therefore, the speckle-like pattern detected by each camera (Fig. 1(C)) represents the optical
projection of the 𝑋𝑖input data on a distinct portion of the entire feature space.
Optical encoding of natural language sentences
The NLP task we considered is the classiﬁcation of the IMDB dataset, constructed by Maas et
al. [44]. To encode natural language on the optical setup, we need to develop an optics-speciﬁc
representation of the text data. Since text classiﬁcation tasks have remained elusive in photonic
neuromorphic computing, we here introduce the problem. A similar issue is crucial also in digital
NLP, where the text encoding problem consists in obtaining a numerical representation of the
input that is convenient for digital learning architectures [48]. Speciﬁcally, given a vocabulary,
i.e., the set of all unique words in the corpus, a basic encoding method is the one-hot technique,
in which each word corresponds to a boolean vector with vocabulary size 𝑉. Consequently,
paragraph of diﬀerent lengths can be represented by boolean vectors of size 𝑉, with the element
𝑥𝑘𝑖= 1 that indicates the presence of the 𝑘th vocabulary word in the paragraph 𝑋𝑖[Fig. 1(A)].
An input dataset with 𝑁samples, in which each database entry is a text paragraph [see Fig. 1(A)],
thus becomes a 𝑁× 𝑉matrix. The dimension of the single entry 𝑋𝑖to encode thus scales with
the number of words 𝑉in the vocabulary (104 −105). Photonic text processing hence necessitates
an optical platform able of encoding huge input data. Given the large number of input modes
𝐿supported by spatial light modulation, our 3D-PELM is the most convenient scheme for the
scope.
Optical encoding of natural language in the 3D-PELM requires using a SLM with a ﬁxed
number of input modes for sentences with variable lengths. We can thus follow the one-hot
method employed in digital NLP. We leverage an extension of one-hot encoding, the so-called
tf-idf representation, and construct the input representation Xtﬁdf. In information retrieval, the
tf-idf(𝑖, 𝑗) statistics reﬂect how important is a word 𝑘to a document 𝑗(frequency 𝑛𝑘𝑗) in a
collection of documents. It is deﬁned as: tf-idf(𝑘, 𝑗) = 𝑛𝑘𝑗
𝑉· log10

𝑁
𝑆𝑘

, where 𝑉is the length
of a paragraph, and 𝑆𝑘is the number of sentences containing the 𝑘th word. Within the tf-idf
representation, each paragraph becomes a sparse, real vector [see Fig. 1(A)] whose non-zero
elements are the tf-idf values of the words composing it. To optically encode these sparse data,
we applied to Xtﬁdf the Walsh-Hadamard transform (WHT) [49], which decomposes a discrete
function in a superposition of Walsh functions. The transformed dataset XWHT is a dense matrix
[Fig. 1(A)], which is displayed on the SLM as a phase mask within the [0,𝜋] range (X = XWHT
in Eq. (2)). By exploiting the large number of available input pixels, we encode paragraphs with
a massive size 𝑉that contain hundreds of thousands of words.
+ Ntest
Fig. 2. Photonic NLP. (A-B) Train and test accuracy of the 3D-PELM on the IMDb
dataset as a function of the number of output channels. The shaded area corresponds
to the over-parametrized region. The conﬁguration in (B) allows reaching very high
accuracy in the over-parametrized region with a dataset limited to 𝑁train = 1186 training
points. In (A) the same accuracy is reached in the under-parametrized region with
𝑁train = 12278. Black horizontal lines correspond to the maximum test accuracy
achieved (0.77). (C) IMDb classiﬁcation accuracy by varying the number of features 𝑀
and training dataset size 𝑁train. The boundary between the under and over-parametrized
region (interpolation threshold), 𝑁train = 𝑀, is characterized by a sharp accuracy drop
(cyan contour line).
Observation of the photonic double descent
Machine learning models with a very large number of trainable parameters show unique features
with respect to smaller models, such as the double descent phenomenon. This eﬀect is a resonance
in the neural network performance, ruled by the ratio between the number of trainable parameters
𝑀and the number of training points 𝑁train. In the under-parametrized regime (𝑀< 𝑁train), good
performances are obtained by balancing model bias and variance. As 𝑀grows, models tend
to overﬁt training data, and prediction performances get worse until the interpolation threshold
(𝑀= 𝑁train) is reached, a point where the model optimally interpolates the training data and
the prediction error is maximum. Beyond this resonance, in the over-parametrized regime, the
model keeps interpolating training points, but performances on the test set reach the global
optimum [50].
We experimentally implement photonic NLP and investigate the double descent eﬀect on our
large-scale 3D-PELM. Speciﬁcally, we analyze the classiﬁcation accuracy for the IMDb task
(Appendix D) as a function of the features 𝑀and training set size 𝑁train. In Figure 2(A) we
report the observation of the double descent. We observe a dip in test accuracy as the number of
channels 𝑀reaches the number of training points 𝑁train. Beyond this resonance, also known as
Fig. 3. Performances at ultra-large scale. (A-C) Accuracy as a function of 𝑀for
diﬀerent input sizes 𝐿. In all cases, the 3D-PELM performance saturates in the
over-parameterized region reaching a plateau. A linear ﬁt of the data preceding the
plateau shows that the onset of the saturation is faster for datasets with a larger input
space. The corresponding angular coeﬃcient 𝑚is inset in each panel. (D) Test accuracy
varying the training set size, for 𝑀= 0.8 × 105 and 𝑀= 1.2 × 105.
interpolation threshold, we ﬁnd the over-parametrized region in which maximum accuracy on the
training set is achieved. The behavior is obtained via training on 𝑁train ≃1.2 × 104 examples and
using ﬁxed train/test split ratio of 0.67/0.33. In this case, the larger classiﬁcation accuracy is
found in the under-parametrized region (0.77). Conversely, in Figure 2(B), we consider a much
smaller number of training points, 𝑁train ≃103. Remarkably, we reach the same optimal accuracy
despite we are using only a fraction of the available training points. This observation reveals
a particularly favourable learning region of the 3D-PELM in which only a reduced number of
training points is required to reach high-accuracy levels. In fact, from the operational standpoint,
it is much more eﬃcient to measure in parallel a large number of modes rather than sequentially
processing many training examples. In Figure 2(C) we report the full dynamics of the double
descent phenomenon, by continuously varying both 𝑀and 𝑁train. We observe the accuracy dip
shifts with a constant velocity. This result shows the existence of an optimal learning region that
is accessible on the 3D-PELM thanks to its large number of photonic nodes.
NLP at ultra-large scale
The observed operational advantage of the over-parametrized region indicates that by further
increasing the number of output modes one can increase training eﬀectiveness and/or performances
[3]. In our 3D-PELM we reached 𝑀= 120000 readout channels that are independent from
each other. We also considered larger input spaces, extending the vocabulary so as to include
the whole set of words in the corpus (𝑉≃217). Figure 3(A) shows that the test accuracy
reaches a plateau as 𝑀increases in the over-parametrized region. Saturation indicates that all the
essential information encoded within the optical ﬁeld has been extracted through the available
channels. However, we observe a change in the performance as we employ more input features
Working principle
M
L
C
Machine learning task
Ref.
Time-multiplexed cavity
1400
7129
107
Regression
[39]
Amplitude modulation
16384
2000
108
Human action recognition
[27]
Frequency multiplexing
200
640
105
Time series recovery
[41]
Optical multiple scattering
50000
64
106
Chaotic series prediction
[38]
Amplitude Fourier filtering
1024
43263
107
Image classification
[30]
Multimode Fiber
240
240
105
Classification, Regression
[35]
Free-space propagation
6400
784
106
Classification, Regression
[34]
3D optical field
120000
131044
1010
Natural Language
Processing
3D-PELM
Table 1. Maximum network capacity of current photonic neuromorphic computing
hardware.
𝐿, Fig. 3(B-C). To estimate the rate by which performance improves as more channels were
used for training, we estimate the angular coeﬃcient 𝑚of the linear growth that precedes the
plateau. Although the onset of saturation can be estimated using diverse criteria, and 𝑚varies
depending on the measured range, its trend when increasing 𝐿remain unaltered. We note a
relevant enhancement of 𝑚for 𝐿= 362 × 362, which indicates that PELMs featuring larger input
spaces are able to reach optimal performances with a lower number of parameters. Figure 3(D)
reports the accuracy as a function of the training-test split ratio (keeping ﬁxed 𝑁train = 6.7 × 103)
for 𝑀= 0.8 × 105 and 𝑀= 1.2 × 105. Importantly, a limited number of examples (∼20%) is
enough to reach maximum accuracy in the over-parametrized region.
Optical network capacity
To establish a comparison among the various photonic neuromorphic computing devices, we
introduce the optical network capacity as a useful ingredient related to the over-parametrization
context. We deﬁne the capacity C of a generic optical neural network as the product between the
number of input and output nodes that can be processed in a single iteration, C = 𝐿× 𝑀. This
quantity gives direct information on the kind of large-scale problems that can be implemented
on the optical setup. It depends only the number of controllable nodes, which is the quantity
that is believed to play the main role in big data processing [3]. Speciﬁcally, 𝐿sets the size
of the dataset that can be encoded, while 𝑀reﬂects the embedding capacity of the network,
as larger dataset necessitate larger feature spaces to be learned. Moreover, C also furnishes an
indication on how far is the over-parametrized regime for a given task. Useful over-parametrized
conditions can be reached only if 𝐶≫𝑁× 𝐿. We remark that the capacity is not a measure
of the processor accuracy. It is instead a useful quantity to compare the scalability of diﬀerent
photonic computing devices.
In Tab. 1 we report the optical network capacity for various photonic processors that have been
recently demonstrated. We focus on photonic platforms that exploit RC and ELM paradigms, since
these devices are suitable for big data processing and may present the so-called photonic advantage
at a large scale [51]. Our 3D-PELM has a record capacity C = 362 × 362 × 120000 ≃1.5 × 1010,
more than one order of magnitude larger than any other optical processor. Moreover, while
increasing the capacity is challenging on many optical reservoir computers, our 3D-PELM can
be further scaled up by simply enlarging the measured volume of the optical ﬁeld.
(A)
3D-PELM
device
3D-PELM
numerics
8-bit
Ntrain=6700
Ntrain= 1500
(B)
RP
SVM
CNN
under-parametrized
over-parametrized
(A)
8-bit
8-bit
8-bit
under-parametrized
over-parametrized
0.75
0.74
Fig. 4. Analysis of the IMDb accuracy. (A-B) The comparison report the accuracy
for the experimental device (3D-PELM device), the simulated device (3D-PELM
numerics), the random projection method with ridge regression (RP), the support
vector machine (SVM) and a convolutional nueral network (CNN) in both the under-
parameterized (𝑀= 1 × 103) and over-parametrized (𝑀= 4 × 104 ) regime, for (A)
𝑁train = 6700, and (B) 𝑁train = 1500. 8-bit numerical results, when applicable, refer to
the over-parametrized regime.
Comparison with digital machine learning
To further validate the capability of our photonic setup for text processing, we compare the
accuracy of our 3D-PELM with various general-purpose digital neural networks on the IMDb task.
To underline the overall impact of the over-parameterization on the performance, we consider two
opposite parametrization regimes, respectively 𝑀= 1 × 103 and 𝑀= 4 × 104, and two distinct
condition for the dataset size, 𝑁train = 6700 [Fig. 4(A)] and 𝑁train = 1500 [Fig. 4(B)]. Since the
learning principle of the 3D-PELM is based on kernel methods (see Ref. [34]), we implement
a support vector machine (SVM) and a ridge regression based on nonlinear random projetions
(RP) [25] as representative models of the kernel algorithms class. The input for the SVM and
the RP is the tﬁdf-encoded dataset, but no signiﬁcant diﬀerences are found using the Hadamard
dataset. We also simulate the 3D-PELM, i.e., we evaluate our photonic scheme by using Eq. (2)
to generate the output data. A convolutional neural network (CNN) with the same number of
trainable weights is used as an additional benchmark model. Details on the various digital models
are reported in Appendix E. The results, for a split ratio 𝑁train/𝑁test = 0.67/0.33, are shown
in Figure 4. Overall, we observe that the photonic device performs sentiment analysis on the
IMDb with an accuracy comparable with standard digital methods. The SVM sets the maximum
expected accuracy (0.86). The device over-parametrized accuracy (0.75 for 𝑁train = 6700) is
mainly limited by the limited precision of the optical components and noise, and could be
enhanced up to 0.83 (3D-PELM numerics) by using a 64-bit camera. In fact, when operating
with 8-bit precision, both the simulated 3D-PELM and the RP model achieves performances
that agree well with the experiments. Interestingly, Fig. 4(B) indicates that, for a limited set
of training samples, the 3D-PELM surpasses the SVM and also the CNN. This points out an
additional advantage that the photonic setup achieves thanks to over-parametrization. Not only
its accuracy is improved with respect the standard under-parametrized regime, but the device can
operates eﬀectively in conditions where digital models are less accurate.
3.
DISCUSSION
We have reported the ﬁrst photonic implementation of natural language processing by performing
sentiment analysis on the IMBd dataset. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of modern
large-scale computing tasks in photonic hardware, and can be potentially improved both in terms
of performance, via low-noise high-resolution cameras and more complex encoding/training
algorithms, and applications. Further developments include the implementation of advanced
tasks such as multiclass sentiment analysis, which allows discriminating positive and negative
sentences into diﬀerent levels. Moreover, using diﬀerent datasets such as the Stanford Sentiment
Treebank (SST-5), we could train our 3D-PELM for providing ratings. On the other hand,
our versatile optical setting may allow implementing alternative strategies for photonic NLP,
these including dimensionality reduction of the input data via optical random projection [52].
An optical scheme that preserves the sequential nature of language may be also conceived by
introducing recurrent mechanisms in our 3D-PELM. Another interesting direction is developing
speciﬁc encoding schemes for representing text in the optical domain. Viable approaches includes
adapting bi-dimensional text representations such as Quick-Response (QR) codes. Furthermore,
by following the concept of word embedding used in digital NLP [53], photonic hardware may be
used to learn a purely optical word embedding, including semantics, word ordering, and syntax.
In conclusion, modern machine learning architectures rely on over-parametrization to reach
the global optimum of objective functions. However, as better performances are associated with
larger training sets, to reach an over-parametrized regime the number of adjustable parameters has
to grow accordingly, requiring in turn longer training times and more energy consumption [54].
This trend is evident in NLP: the state-of-the-art NLP model, GPT-3 [55], features 175 billions
of parameters, in line with the exponential growth in the number of parameters of latest NLP
models [1], and requires a dedicated supercomputing hardware for training. On the other hand,
achieving over-parametrization for large-scale problems is challenging in photonic computing.
Here, we realize a novel photonic computing device that, thanks to its huge network capacity,
naturally operates in the over-parametrized region. The 3D-PELM is a very promising solution
for developing a fully-scalable photonic learning platform. Our photonic processor enables the
ﬁrst link between NLP and optical computing hardware, opening a new vibrant research stream
towards fast and energetically eﬃcient artiﬁcial intelligence tools.
APPENDIX A: PELM framework
In ELMs a dataset with 𝑁data points X = [(𝑋1, 𝑦1), . . . , (𝑋𝑁, 𝑦𝑁)], with (𝑋𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) ∈R𝐿× R, is
mapped into a higher-dimensional feature space through a nonlinear transformation 𝑔(X), yielding
the hidden-layer output matrix H = [𝑔(𝑋1), . . . , 𝑔(𝑋𝑁)], with 𝑔(𝑋𝑖) ∈R𝑀. A set of weights
𝛽is learned via ridge regression such that the linear combination ˜Y = H𝛽well approximates
the true label vector Y = [𝑦1, . . . , 𝑦𝑁]. An explicit solution is 𝛽= (H𝑇H + 𝜆I)−1 H𝑇Y
where 𝜆is the regularization parameter, I the identity. The use of ridge regression allows
reducing at minimum the training costs, which is crucial in applications requiring fast and
reconﬁgurable learning. In a free-space PELM, the nonlinear mapping of input data is realized
by a combination of free-space optical propagation and intensity detection [34]. The speckle-like
pattern detected by a camera forms the nonlinear features of the input sample. The optical
mapping reads as H = 𝐺[M exp𝑖(X + W)], where the input dataset X is phase-encoded via
spatial light modulation. W is the embedding matrix, 𝐺the detector response function, and M
the discrete Fourier transform that models propagation to the focal plane. For more details on the
PELM architecture and its working principle see Ref. [34].
APPENDIX B: Experimental setup
The optical setup of the 3D-PELM is sketched in Figure 1(B). A CW laser beam (532 nm, 100
mW) is expanded and collimated onto a phase-only SLM (Hamamatsu X13138, 1280 × 1024
pixels, 60 Hz, 8 bits), that encodes data on the optical wavefront. The SLM operates in the
[0, 2𝜋] interval with a linear response function. Both the input and the embedding signal are
encoded within the [0, 𝜋] range and superimposed. After free-space propagation through a lens
( 𝑓= 150mm), the far-ﬁeld three-dimensional intensity distribution is accessed simultaneously
by three separated imaging systems and detected by three cameras (Basler Ace 2 Pro, 1920
× 1200 pixels, 12 bits). The speckle-like ﬁeld spatially decorrelates during propagation; the
transverse intensity is transformed in a random way from one plane to the other, provided that
these planes are at distances larger than the longitudinal ﬁeld correlation length. To carry out
the measurements, the propagating beam is divided by a series of beam splitters into separated
imaging paths with diﬀerent tunable optical paths. The far-ﬁeld planes are selected in order to
sample three speckle-like distribution having a negligible mutual intensity correlation. This is
conﬁrmed by intensity correlation measurements. Every additional plane contains additional
information. In fact, keeping ﬁxed 𝑀, we ﬁnd an improvement in the classiﬁcation accuracy
when using three far-ﬁeld planes instead of a single intensity distribution. In this condition, each
camera maps a distinct portion of the high-dimensional feature space in which the input ﬁeld is
projected.
The measured set of speckle-like patterns is elaborated on a conventional computer. Speckle
grains typically extend over adjacent pixels [Fig. 1(C)]. To avoid spatial correlations within the
single speckle pattern, pixels are grouped into square modes (channels) and the average intensity
on each channels forms the output signals.
APPENDIX C: 3D-PELM training
Training operates by loading the randomly-ordered input dataset on the SLM and measuring three
speckle-like intensity distributions for each input sample (paragraph). From the acquired signals
we randomly select 𝑀of the available channels, and we use the corresponding 𝑀intensity
values to form the output dataset. This dataset is split randomly into a training and test dataset
by using a split ratio 𝑁train/𝑁test = 0.67/0.33, which is kept ﬁxed throughout the analysis. All
the classiﬁcation accuracies we obtained refer to this hyperparameter. The training dataset is
the output matrix H used for training (see Appendix A). Since our task corresponds to a binary
classiﬁcation problem, the target labels are 𝑦𝑖∈{0, 1}. According to the PELM framework,
training by ridge regression consists in solving the equation for the 𝛽vector. This matrix inversion
is performed using the ML Python Library Sci-kit learn. The regularization parameter 𝜆is varied
in the [10−4, 102] range. As its value does not inﬂuence considerably the testing accuracy, we use
𝜆= 10−4. Given a predicted output ˆ𝑦𝑖, the predicted label is given by ˜𝑦𝑖= Θ( ˆ𝑦𝑖−0.5), where Θ
is the Heaviside step function. Text classiﬁcation performances are evaluated via the accuracy
Í
𝑖[𝑦𝑖= ˜𝑦𝑖] /𝑁, where [·] are the Iverson bracket deﬁned as [𝑃] = 1 if 𝑃is true and 0 otherwise.
APPENDIX D: NLP task, text pre-processing and optical encoding
We consider the IMDb dataset [44], a widely used benchmark for polarity-based text classiﬁcation
[56]. The dataset consists of 5 × 104 movie reviews, each one forming the 𝑖-th input data
sample. Each review is made of a paragraph consisting of multiple sentences, and expresses
an overall positive or negative sentiment (target variable). This sentiment analysis task hence
consists in a large-scale binary classiﬁcation. To implement the problem, the whole set of IMDb
sentences is pre-processed by removing special characters (e.g. html), lowercasing, removing
stop words and lemmatizing. The length of the resulting vector can be varied by neglecting
words that appears in the corpus with a frequency lower than a given threshold. To compute the
Walsh-Hadamard transform and obtain a dense text representation, zero-padding is used to reach
a vector length 𝑑=

log2 𝑉
. For example, results in Fig. 2 refer to data with 𝑉= 104 that are
padded to 𝐿= 214 = 16384 and reshaped as a 128 × 128 square matrix, while the full vocabulary
(𝑉= 131044) requires zero-padding and paragraphs are arranged on 362 × 362 input modes (Fig.
3). After WHT computation, the values are normalized in the [0, 𝜋] range and loaded on the
SLM. Each element of the input XWHT is displayed onto a square block of SLM pixels. The
embedding matrix W is a uniformly distributed random matrix for all the experiments. Its values
𝑤𝑖𝑗are selected in [0, 𝜋] before the training and kept ﬁxed for a given photonic computation.
APPENDIX E: Digital machine learning
The 3D-PELM is numerically simulated by following the optical mapping model in Eq. (1) (see
also Ref. [34]). Data encoding and training operates in the same way as the photonic device,
and the output matrix is computed by using Eq. (2) with 𝐺(𝑧) = |𝑧|2 (quadratic nonlinearity).
In the RP model, data projection in the feature space is obtained by matrix multiplication with
a real-valued uniformly-distributed random matrix and using a quadratic activation function.
Training occurs by ridge regression. For simulating the 8-bit machines, the input data and
the output values forming the linear readout layer are properly discretized to values with 8-bit
precision. The SVM is a binary classiﬁer and thus it is especially suited for the IMDb task. We use
the Sci-kit learn built-in function on the tﬁd-processed dataset and the over-parametrized regime
is evaluated by using 𝑀= 103. The CNN is composed by four convolutional layer with nonlinear
activation and a fully connected layer. The CNN scheme is designed to have 𝑀total nodes, and
its accuracy does not depend signiﬁcatively on the network details and hyperparameters.
Funding. We acknowledge funding from the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research (PRIN PELM 20177PSCKT), Sapienza Research, and Enrico Fermi Research Center
(CREF).
Author Contributions. D.P. and C.C. conceived the research. C.M.V. proposed application
to NLP. D.P. developed the 3D photonic network. I.G. and D.P. carried out experimental
measurements. C.M.V. and I.G. performed data analysis. D.P and C.C. co-supervised the project.
All authors contributed to the manuscript.
Acknowledgments. We thank I. MD Deen, V.H. Santos, and F. Farrelly for technical support
in the laboratory.
Disclosures. The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Data availability. The data that support the results presented in this study are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Code availability. The codes developed within this research are available from the corre-
sponding author upon reasonable request.
References
1.
D. Narayanan et al., Eﬃcient large-scale language model training on GPU clusters using megatron-LM,
arXiv:2104.04473 (2021).
2.
E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, Energy and policy considerations for modern deep learning research, Proc.
AAAI Conf. on Artif. Intell. 34, 13693–13696 (2020).
3.
A. Chatelain, A. Djeghri, D. Hesslow, J. Launay, and I. Poli, Is the number of trainable parameters all that actually
matters?, arXiv:2109.11928 (2021).
4.
N.C. Thompson, K. Greenewald, K. Lee, and G.F. Manso, The computational limits of deep learning, arXiv:2007.05558
(2020).
5.
G. Wetzstein, A. Ozcan, S. Gigan, S. Fan, D. Englund, M. Soljačić, C. Denz, D.A.B. Miller and D. Psaltis, Inference
in artiﬁcial intelligence with deep optics and photonics, Nature 588, 39-47 (2020).
6.
B.J. Shastri, A.N. Tait, T.F. de Lima, W.H.P. Pernice, H. Bhaskaran, C.D. Wright, and P.R. Prucnal, Photonics for
artiﬁcial intelligence and neuromorphic computing, Nat. Photonics 15, 102–114 (2021).
7.
H. Zhou et al., Photonic matrix multiplication lights up photonic accelerator and beyond, Light Sci. Appl. 11, 1-21
(2022).
8.
X. Xu, M. Tan, B. Corcoran, J. Wu, A. Boes, T.G. Nguyen, S.T. Chu, B.E. Little, D.G. Hicks, R. Morandotti, A.
Mitchell, and D.J. Moss, 11 TOPS photonic convolutional accelerator for optical neural networks, Nature 589, 44-51
(2021).
9.
T. Wang, S.-Y. Ma, L.G. Wright, T. Onodera, B. Richard, and P.L. McMahon, An optical neural network using less
than 1 photon per multiplication, Nat. Commun. 13, 1-8 (2022).
10. Y. Shen, N.C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D. Englund,
and M. Soljacic, Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits, Nat. Photon. 11, 441–446 (2017).
11. A.N. Tait , T.F. de Lima, E. Zhou, A.X. Wu, M-A. Nahmias, B.J. Shastri, P.R. Prucnal, Neuromorphic photonic
networks using silicon photonic weight banks, Sci. Rep. 7, 7430 (2017).
12. J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, C.D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran and W.H.P. Pernice, All-optical spiking neurosynaptic
networks with self-learning capabilities, Nature 569, 208-214 (2019).
13. F. Stelzer, A. Röhm, R. Vicente, I. Fischer, and S. Yanchuk, Deep neural networks using a single neuron: folded-in-time
architecture using feedback-modulated delay loops,Nat. Commun. 12 (2021).
14. J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, M. Karpov, H. Gehring, X. Li, M. Stappers, M. Le Gallo, X. Fu, A. Lukashchuk, A.S.
Raja, J. Liu, C.D. Wright, A. Sebastian, T.J. Kippenberg, W.H.P. Pernice, and H. Bhaskaran, Parallel convolutional
processing using an integrated photonic tensor core, Nature 589, 52-58 (2021).
15. N. Mohammadi Estakhri, B. Edwards, and N. Engheta, Inverse-designed metastructures that solve equations, Science
363, 1333 (2019).
16. X. Lin, Y. Rivenson, N. T. Yardimci, M. Veli, Y. Luo, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, All-optical machine learning using
diﬀractive deep neural networks, Science 361, 1004–1008 (2018).
17. T. Zhou, X. Lin, J. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Xie, Y. Li, J. Fan, H. Wu, L. Fang, and Q. Dai, Large-scale neuromorphic
optoelectronic computing with a reconﬁgurable diﬀractive processing unit, Nat. Photonics 15, 367–373 (2021).
18. D. Verstraeten, B. Schrauwen, M. D’Haene, and D. Stroobandt, An experimental uniﬁcation of reservoir computing
methods, Neural Networks 20, 391–403 (2007).
19. G.B. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Ding, and R.Zhang, Extreme Learning Machine for Regression and Multiclass Classiﬁcation,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics) 42, 513-529 (2012).
20. G. Van der Sande, D. Brunner, and M.C. Soriano, Advances in photonic reservoir computing, Nanophotonics 6,
561–576 (2017).
21. D. Brunner, M.C. Soriano, C. Mirasso, I. Fischer, Parallel photonic information processing at gigabyte per second
data rates using transient states, Nat. Commun. 4, 1364 (2013).
22. Q. Vinckier, F. Duport, A. Smerieri, K. Vandoorne, P. Bienstman, M. Haelterman, and S. Massar, High-Performance
Photonic Reservoir Computer Based on a Coherently Driven Passive Cavity, Optica 2, 438 (2015).
23. L. Larger, A. Baylón-Fuentes, R. Martinenghi, V.S. Udaltsov, Y.K. Chembo, and M. Jacquot, High-speed photonic
reservoir computing using a time-delay based architecture: million words per second classiﬁcation, Phys. Rev. X 7,
011015 (2017).
24. D. Ballarini et al., Polaritonic neuromorphic computing outperforms linear classiﬁers, Nano Lett.20, 3506–3512
(2020).
25. A. Saade, F. Caltagirone, I. Carron , L. Daudet, A. Dremeau, S. Gigan, F. Krzakala, Random projections through
multiple optical scattering: approximating kernels at the speed of light, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) 6215–6219 (2016).
26. J. Bueno, S. Maktoobi, L. Froehly, I. Fischer, M. Jacquot, L. Larger, and D. Brunner, Reinforcement learning in a
large-scale photonic recurrent neural network, Optica 5, 756–760 (2018).
27. P. Antonik, N. Marsal, D. Brunner, and D. Rontani, Human action recognition with a large-scale brain-inspired
photonic computer, Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 530–537 (2019).
28. A. Röhm, L. Jaurigue, and K. Lüdge, Reservoir Computing Using Laser Networks, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum
Electron. 26, 1 (2020).
29. U. Paudel, M. Luengo-Kovac, J. Pilawa, T.J. Shaw, and G.C. Valley, Classiﬁcation of time-domain waveforms using a
speckle-based optical reservoir computer, Opt. Express 28, 1225 (2020).
30. M. Miscuglio, Z. Hu, S. Li, J. George, R. Capanna, P.M. Bardet, P. Gupta, and V.J. Sorger, Massively Parallel
Amplitude-Only Fourier Neural Network, Optica 7, 1812 (2020).
31. S. Sunada and A. Uchida, Photonic neural ﬁeld on a silicon chip: large-scale, high-speed neuro-inspired computing
and sensing, Optica 8, 1388 (2021).
32. M. Borghi, S. Biasi, and L. Pavesi, Reservoir computing based on a silicon microring and time multiplexing for
binary and analog operations, Sci. Rep. 11, 15642 (2021).
33. X. Porte, A. Skalli, N. Haghighi, S. Reitzenstein, J. A. Lott, and D. Brunner, A complete, parallel and autonomous
photonic neural network in a semiconductor multimode laser, J. Physics: Photonics 3, 024017 (2021).
34. D. Pierangeli, G. Marcucci, and C. Conti, Photonic extreme learning machine by free-space optical propagation,
Photonics Res. 9, 1446 (2021).
35. U. Teğin, M. Yıldırım, İ. Oğuz, C. Moser, and D. Psaltis, Scalable optical learning operator, Nat. Comput. Sci. 1,
542–549 (2021).
36. D. Pierangeli, G. Marcucci, and C. Conti, (2021, August). Neuromorphic computing device using optical shock
waves, In OSA Nonlinear Optics 2021 (pp. NTh1A-3), OSA Technical Digest (Optica Publishing Group, 2021).
37. Z. Denis, I. Favero , and C. Ciuti, Photonic Kernel Machine Learning for Ultrafast Spectral Analysis, Phys. Rev.
Appl.17, 034077 (2022).
38. M. Rafayelyan, J. Dong, Y. Tan, F. Krzakala, and S. Gigan, Large-Scale Optical Reservoir Computing for
Spatiotemporal Chaotic Systems Prediction, Phys. Rev. X 10, 041037 (2020).
39. S. Ortín, M. C. Soriano, L. Pesquera, D. Brunner, D. San-Martín, I. Fischer, C. R. Mirasso, and J. M. Gutiérrez, A
uniﬁed framework for reservoir computing and extreme learning machines based on a single time-delayed neuron,
Sci. Reports 5 (2015).
40. R. Mirek, A. Opala, P. Comaron, M. Furman, M. Król, K. Tyszka, B. Seredyński, D. Ballarini, D. Sanvitto, T.C.H.
Liew, W. Pacuski, J. Suﬀczyński, J. Szczytko, M. Matuszewski, and B. Piętka, Neuromorphic binarized polariton
networks, Nano Lett. 21, 3715–3720 (2021).
41. A. Lupo and S. Massar, Parallel extreme learning machines based on frequency multiplexing, Appl. Sci. 12, 214
(2021).
42. G. Marcucci, D. Pierangeli, and C. Conti, Theory of neuromorphic computing by waves: machine learning by rogue
waves, dispersive shocks, and solitons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 093901 (2020).
43. H. Zhang at al., An optical neural chip for implementing complex-valued neural network, Nat. Commun. 12,
457 (2021).
44. A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. Potts, Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,
in Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 142–150 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Portland, Oregon, USA, 2011).
45. M. Belkin, D. Hsu, S. Ma, and S. Mandal, Reconciling modern machine-learning practice and the classical
bias–variance trade-oﬀ, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 15849–15854 (2019).
46. M. S. Advani, A. M. Saxe, and H. Sompolinsky, High-dimensional dynamics of generalization error in neural
networks,Neural Networks 132, 428–446 (2020).
47. S. Mei and A. Montanari, The generalization error of random features regression: Precise asymptotics and double
descent curve, arXiv:1908.05355 (2020).
48. K. Babić, S. Martinčić-Ipšić, and A. Meštrović, Survey of neural text representation models, Information 11, 511
(2020).
49. A. Ashraﬁ, Walsh–hadamard transforms: A review, in Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics, 1-55 (Elsevier,
2017).
50. M. Soltanolkotabi, A. Javanmard, and J. D. Lee, Theoretical insights into the optimization landscape of overparame-
terized shallow neural networks, IEEE Transactions on Inf. Theory 65, 742–769 (2019).
51. D. Pierangeli, M. Rafayelyan, C. Conti, and S. Gigan, Scalable Spin-Glass Optical Simulator, Phys. Rev. Appl. 15,
034087 (2021).
52. M.-A. Miri, Integrated random projection and dimensionality reduction by propagating light in photonic lattices, Opt.
Lett 46, 4936 (2021).
53. T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space,
arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
54. A. Lacoste, A. Luccioni, V. Schmidt, and T. Dandres, Quantifying the carbon emissions of machine learning,
arXiv:1910.09700 (2019).
55. T.B. Brown et al., Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, arXiv:2005.14165 (2020).
56. A.U. Rehman et al., A hybrid CNN-LSTM model for improving accuracy of movie reviews sentiment analysis,
Multimedia Tools and Applications 78, 26597 (2019).
