Title: Lay Text Summarisation Using Natural Language Processing: A Narrative Literature Review
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14222v1
--------------------------------------------------

 
 
1
Lay Text Summarisation Using Natural Language Processing: A Narrative Literature Review. 
 
Oliver Vinzelberg1, Mark David Jenkins1, Gordon Morison2, David McMinn4 and Zoë Tieges1,3.5* 
 
1School of Computing, Engineering and Built Environment, Glasgow Caledonian University, 
70 Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G4 0BA, Scotland, UK; oliver.vinzelberg@gmail.com; 
mark.jenkins@gcu.ac.uk; zoe.tieges@gcu.ac.uk. 
2School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of the West of Scotland, High 
St, Paisley PA1 2BE, Scotland, UK; gordon.morison@uws.ac.uk. 
3SMART Technology Centre, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. 
4Lay Summaries Ltd, East Kilbride, Scotland, UK; davidmcminn@laysummaries.com 
5Ageing and Health, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 
 
*Correspondence: zoe.tieges@gcu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
2
ABSTRACT 
 
Summarisation of research results in plain language is crucial for promoting public understanding of 
research findings. The use of Natural Language Processing to generate lay summaries has the 
potential to relieve researchers' workload and bridge the gap between science and society. The aim of 
this narrative literature review is to describe and compare the different text summarisation approaches 
used to generate lay summaries. We searched the databases Web of Science, Google Scholar, IEEE 
Xplore, Association for Computing Machinery Digital Library and arXiv for articles published until 6 
May 2022. We included original studies on automatic text summarisation methods to generate lay 
summaries. We screened 82 articles and included eight relevant papers published between 2020 and 
2021, all using the same dataset. The results show that transformer-based methods such as 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) and Pre-training with Extracted 
Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization (PEGASUS) dominate the landscape of lay text 
summarisation, with all but one study using these methods. A combination of extractive and 
abstractive summarisation methods in a hybrid approach was found to be most effective. Furthermore, 
pre-processing approaches to input text (e.g. applying extractive summarisation) or determining 
which sections of a text to include, appear critical. Evaluation metrics such as Recall-Oriented 
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) were used, which do not consider readability. To 
conclude, automatic lay text summarisation is under-explored. Future research should consider long 
document lay text summarisation, including clinical trial reports, and the development of evaluation 
metrics that consider readability of the lay summary. 
 
Keywords: automatic lay text summarisation; natural language processing; transformers; machine 
learning 
 
 
 
 
3
INTRODUCTION 
 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is the discipline concerned with how computers can understand, 
manipulate, or summarise human language in forms of text or speech (see Appendix A: Table A1 for 
a list of abbreviations and acronyms). A key focus lies in a model’s ability to capture important 
information in language using machine learning and rule-based language modelling [1]. Selecting and 
retaining important parts of an input sequence and understanding context remains a challenge for 
machines [2]. 
 
Automatic text summarisation, a subfield of NLP, involves creating a concise and accurate 
overview of a text document whilst preserving the critical content and the overall context. Automatic 
text summarisation has been mostly oriented towards news or science articles, due to the high 
availability of human annotated data sets [3]. Given the exponential increase in the amount of 
research published every year, there is an overwhelming amount of scientific information available. 
Automatic text summarisation has the potential to help reduce this information overload, potentially 
leading to time and cost savings [4]. Concise summaries make the exponential growth of scientific 
publications each year more manageable to read [5]. Indeed, there has been growing interest in 
automatic text summarisation as a method for helping researchers, clinicians and other stakeholders 
seeking information to efficiently obtain the “gist” in a given topic by producing a textual summary 
from one or multiple document [6]. 
 
A common distinction in text summarisation methods is between extractive and abstractive 
approaches [7, 8]. In extractive text summarisation, phrases of the original text are ranked according 
to their importance, reordered, and used to create the summary. The ranking is done by assigning 
relative weights based on the frequency of a word or phrase, or by comparing it to a corpus and 
determining whether a phrase belongs to a particular domain. 
 
Due to the rise in deep learning methods in recent years, the focus has shifted toward abstractive 
summarisation [9]. Abstractive text summarisation is more closely aligned with human-created 
summaries. In contrast to extractive summarisation, abstractive summarisation generates words and 
phrases that are not present in the original text which are then used for the summary. This method is 
more challenging than extractive summarisation methods because it does not guarantee a baseline in 
terms of grammar quality or accuracy of information. Recent advances have made it possible to 
generate longer abstract summaries using pre-trained transformer models [10]. A comprehensive 
review of text summarisation methods has been published previously, including detailed discussion 
on extractive and abstractive approaches [11], as well as their application to the summarisation of 
medical content [12]. 
 
 
 
4
Lay text summarisation is a subfield of automatic text summarisation, concerned with generating 
summaries of text in lay language (i.e. summaries that are understandable to a non-expert audience). 
This supports the greater goal of making research findings more accessible to the wider public, 
particularly to people unfamiliar with academic writing, and people of all age groups. Plain language 
summarisation presents specific challenges, including the need to provide relevant background 
information for certain concepts, clarification of terminology, and the use of simple sentence 
structures; aspects that are not necessary for general text summarisation [13]. Extractive 
summarisation approaches may not be as suitable for lay text summarisation because the source text 
should not only be summarised, but also simplified. 
 
While there are review articles on research and news article summaries (e.g. [14]), none focus 
on lay text summarisation. Our review therefore seeks to give an overview and narrative synthesis of 
the literature on state-of-the-art automatic text summarisation approaches for the purpose of 
generating lay summaries.  
 
While this review focuses on NLP methods for text summarisation, especially transformer models, we 
do not thoroughly discuss the underlying models.  Below, we provide a brief introduction to 
transformer models and evaluation metrics for NLP. We refer the interested reader to Wolf et al. [15] 
and Appendix B for further theoretical background on NLP and transformer models. 
 
Transformer models for NLP 
Transformers have rapidly become the standard architecture for NLP, surpassing convolutional and 
recurrent neural networks in performance for both natural language understanding and generation 
tasks. Transformers allow parallel training with high efficiency, capturing long-range sequence 
features, and scaling according to training data and model size [15]. Transformers are non-recurrent 
sequence-to-sequence tools that combine an encoder with a decoder and usually consist of attention 
mechanisms to improve context capturing [16]. In principle, self-attention maps the relationships 
between words at different positions in an input sequence to create a representation and capture the 
relative importance of tokens compared to others [17]. In the encoder, self-attention calculates an 
attention score based on the output of the previous layer and compares the score with all other scores 
of words of the input sequence. The advantages of transformers include easier parallelisability and 
shorter training time compared with recurrent or convolutional approaches. Self-attention layers are 
usually stacked multiple times in the encoder and decoder to improve the computation of dependency 
relationships between words of the same sentence.  
 
Transformers have opened a new chapter in NLP. Some authors go as far as to call them a 
revolution [18, 19]. To illustrate, pre-trained transformer models (e.g. Open AI Transformer) were 
able to achieve 10-20% better results than the previous state-of-the-art models in various NLP 
challenges, such as SQuAD (Stanford Question Answering Dataset) [20, 21], SNLI (Stanford Natural 
 
 
5
Language Inference Corpus) [22], SRL (Semantic Role Labelling) and SST-5 (Stanford Sentiment 
Treebank [23]. Transformers are pre-trained on large data sets and can be fine-tuned to solve a variety 
of NLP tasks, similar to computer vision models which are pre-trained on ImageNet and then fine-
tuned to work on different computer vision tasks [24] [25]. 
 
Evaluation metrics 
 
Metrics are important for model evaluations and comparisons. Popular metrics in machine 
learning include accuracy, recall, precision, and F1-Score (the harmonic mean of precision and 
recall). Yet, in text summarisation, the choice of metrics is not straightforward because generated 
words, phrases, and whole sentences need to be evaluated instead of labels. One approach is to have 
humans, ideally subject matter experts, evaluate the generated summaries based on readability, 
coherence, grammar, and information value. However, this is time-consuming, which renders this 
approach unfeasible for most cases since developers rely on quick performance evaluation of their 
models [13]. 
 
Commonly used evaluation metrics for text summarisation models are Recall-Oriented 
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE [26, 27]), Bi-Lingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU 
[28]), and Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering (METEOR [29]). ROUGE 
measures the lexical overlaps between generated summaries and the corresponding full texts. Bi-
Lingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) is a precision focused metric for evaluating generated texts, 
which is mainly used for evaluating machine translation tasks [28]. This can also be applied to text 
summarisation as it compares the closeness of a generated text to a reference text by matching n-
grams (i.e., a sequence of N words). METEOR calculates the harmonic mean (F1) of unigram 
precision and recall, while weighting recall higher than precision. Developing metrics for NLP tasks 
is an ongoing research area, and suitability varies greatly depending on the task and dataset. 
 
Aims of the study 
The aim of this narrative literature review is to describe and compare the different text summarisation 
approaches used to generate lay summaries. As a background to this literature review stands the 
recently proposed EU Regulation No. 536/2014 [30], which requires pharmaceutical companies to 
publish a summary in lay terms alongside the full clinical trial report. Its goal is to make clinical trial 
reports more accessible to the general public with a view to empowering them to make more informed 
health-related decisions. The Clinical Trials Expert Group (CTEG) [31] argue that lay summaries 
should be written in plain and clear language, accessible for people from the age of 12 upwards, and 
be as short as possible. Moreover, it must cover the main objectives and findings of a study while 
using everyday conversational language and avoid statistical terms or scientific language. 
 
The following research questions are addressed: 
 
 
6
• 
Which text summarisation methods using NLP have been applied to the domain of lay text 
summarisation? 
• 
How is the performance of models for lay text summarisation assessed? 
• 
Which lay text summarisation approaches are the most effective? 
• 
What are the current challenges and future outlooks of research in this area? 
 
 
 
 
7
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
This narrative literature review provides an overview and narrative synthesis of the existing 
knowledge on automated lay text summarisation using NLP, based on available published research. 
While there are no acknowledged reporting guidelines for narrative reviews, we followed best 
practice recommendations, including clear inclusion and exclusion criteria for literature search and a 
critical evaluation of selected articles (e.g., regarding key results, limitations, interpretation of results 
and the impact of conclusions on the field) [32]. Relevant papers were identified using comprehensive 
electronic searches of Google Scholar, Web of Science, IEEE Xplore, Association for Computing 
Machinery (ACM) Digital Library and arXiv for articles published from inception until 6 May 2022, 
using a combination of search terms for (lay) text summarisation of clinical trial reports or research 
articles with automatic text summarisation methods as follows: (lay summarisation OR lay sum OR 
lay term summarisation OR automatic text summarisation OR clinical trial reports OR research 
articles) AND (nlp OR machine learning OR deep learning OR transformers OR nlp metrics). 
Bibliographies of relevant papers and books were scanned for further articles of potential relevance.  
 
Studies were included if they presented original work concerned with automatic text 
summarisation methods addressing the task of lay summarisation. Studies were excluded if they were 
not relevant to the topic of automatic generation of lay text summaries, or if they did not cover NLP 
techniques relevant to lay text summarisation. 
 
One study author (O.V.) collected the relevant literature and assessed each paper against the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria to determine whether it should be included in the review. Papers for 
which a clear decision could not be made were discussed with another study author (Z.T.) and a 
consensus reached. Information was extracted from each paper on pre-processing, methodology 
including data sources and models, training and hyperparameters, main findings and conclusions, 
choice of evaluation metrics and model performance. 
 
 
 
 
8
 
RESULTS 
 
Study identification 
The search yielded 82 articles which subsequently underwent full-text review to assess eligibility. 
This resulted in a final selection of eight papers that were included in the narrative synthesis [3, 7, 10, 
33-37]. The main reasons for exclusion were a lack of addressing lay text summarisation or focusing 
on other NLP areas such as text translation rather than summarisation. The included articles were 
published in 2020 and 2021 and were all linked to the Scholarly Document Processing workshop 
2020 [7] at the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 
2020), which proposed three tasks: CL-SciSumm (Scientific Research Summarisation), LaySumm 
(Lay Summarisation) and LongSumm (Long Scientific Document Summarisation) to improve the 
state-of-the-art for different aspects of scientific document summarisation. For the LaySumm task, a 
corpus comprising 572 author-generated lay summaries from a multidisciplinary series of journals in 
Materials Science, Archaeology, Hepatology and Artificial intelligence, along with their 
corresponding abstracts and full text articles, was provided by Elsevier. Yu et al. [34] note that there 
were a few outliers not containing an abstract or introduction. An example of the data set is available 
on GitHub [38]. According to the organisers of this challenge, LaySumm should aim to give a 
succinct summary spanning around 100 words stating the aim and results of the research and its 
potential impact whilst omitting technical jargon [7]. In addition, it should be coherent in its structure 
and semantics, and interesting to read. The lay summary should cover all the main points of an article 
whilst not being redundant. 
 
Of the eight included papers, one paper was published by the organisers of the challenge [7], 
with the others being published by participants proposing their methods [3, 10, 33-37]. Two articles 
were published on arXiv [10, 34], and the other six articles were published in Proceedings of the First 
Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing [3, 7, 33, 35-37]. 
 
In the following sections, we describe and compare the selected studies, focusing on the study 
methodologies, including use of extractive/abstractive approaches, use of transformer models, input 
data format/structure, model training strategies, and data augmentation techniques. To conclude, a 
number of recommendations are proposed based on the findings from the review. 
 
Automatic text summarisation methods for lay summaries 
Table 1 provides an overview of study characteristics: models, methodologies, input data, training and 
results (ROUGE scores) of the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge. The table is ranked from best to worst 
ROUGE scores. Table 2 provides an overview of the main study findings and conclusions. 
 
 
9
 
A combination of extractive and abstractive summarisation methods in a hybrid approach was 
found to be the most successful strategy to generate lay summaries. DimSum [34], the winners of the 
competition according to ROUGE scores, combined a Pre-training with Extracted Gap-sentences for 
Abstractive Summarization (PEGASUS) model [39] for abstractive text summarisation in addition to 
a Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model for extractive text 
summarisation [3]. BERT is a language representation model that is pre-trained on large unlabelled 
text data which allows fine tuning on smaller data sets for a wide range of downstream tasks. Context 
is encoded bidirectionally by masking words of the input data, thereby resolving the issue of earlier 
transformers that could only encode unidirectionally [40]. On the other hand, PEGASUS is tailored 
for the task of abstractive text summarisation. It is pre-trained by using Gap-Sentence Generation, and 
similar to BERT, works well on small data sets [39]. 
 
The PEGASUS transformer was used to generate most of the lay summaries. However, when 
the lengths of the produced summaries were too short, a BERT transformer model was used in an 
extractive manner to identify important sentences to add if they met an author-defined readability 
metric [3]. 
 
Four of the seven participating groups addressed this challenge by combining elements of extractive 
and abstractive summarisation methods in a hybrid approach [3, 10, 34, 36] (Table 1). Roy et al. [10]  
experimented with a hybrid approach, using SummaRuNNer [41] pre-trained on the PubMed data set 
for extractive summarisation as well as Bidirectional Auto-Regressive Transformers BART and T5 to 
generate abstractive summaries. However, compared with the hybrid approach, they were able to 
achieve better results using a purely abstractive approach based on BART. Similarly, Seungwon  [3] 
generated summaries using PreSumm (which uses BERT) for extractive summarisation in 
combination with PEGASUS for abstractive summarisation. Chaturvedi et al. [36] extracted sentences 
from the introduction, discussion and conclusion sections using BioBERT [42]. The abstract and 
extracted sentences were summarised separately in an abstractive manner, using BART, and then 
concatenated. These groups all achieved higher ROUGE extracted sentences were summarised 
separately in an abstractive manner, using BART, and then concatenated. These groups all achieved 
higher ROUGE scores compared with the groups that focused on a single summarisation method 
(either extractive or abstractive). This suggests that a hybrid approach may be key to a successful lay 
summarisation process (Table 2). 
 
Transformer-based methods such as BERT or PEGASUS were the most commonly used 
models, with six of the seven groups utilising these methods [3, 10, 34-37]. Four groups used 
Bidirectional Auto-Regressive Transformers (BART) [10, 34, 36, 37], two groups used PEGASUS [3, 
35], whereas SummaRuNNer [34], Presumm (which requires a pre-trained BERT model [3]) and 
BioBERT [36] were only used once each (Table 1). 
 
 
10
 
Yu [34], Roy [10], Chaturvedi et al. [36] and Mishra [37] followed an abstractive 
summarisation approach using BART. BART is a similar large pre-trained transformer to BERT, 
however, BART follows a different pre-training method by reconstructing a text that was corrupted 
using a noise function [47], whereas BERT is pre-trained using Masked Language Modelling (MLM) 
and Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) [40]. Mishra et al. [37] achieved mixed results with their 
abstractive approach, whereas the other groups achieved better performance scores because they used 
a hybrid approach combining their abstractive approach with an extractive step. 
 
Participants used transformers pre-trained on different data sets, such as CNN/DM, PubMed, 
PMC and arXiv articles. Transformer models pre-trained on the CNN/DM news corpus were among 
the top performers. Two groups [34] [3] used BART models pre-trained on the CNN/ DM data set 
which includes over one million news articles and their summaries. This seems to indicate that pre-
training on diverse general domain data is effective, even in the context of scientific lay text 
summarisation. Yet, Gu et al. [44] showed that pre-training BERT on domain-specific data may be 
advantageous since the model can operate on in-domain vocabulary. Indeed, several domain-specific 
pre-trained BERT models have been proposed in recent years, for example BioBERT, pre-trained on 
the PubMed data set [42], SciBERT, pre-trained on research areas of computer science and 
biomedicine [45], BERTweet, pe-trained on tweets [52], Med-BERT, pre-trained on electronic health 
records [46], and FinBERT, pre-trained on financial data [47]. However, in this challenge only one 
group [36] made use of a domain-specific transformer (BioBERT) though they were not among the 
top performers according to ROUGE scores (Table 1). 
 
Input data 
With regards to input data, Cohan et al. [48] show that section-level processing of scientific 
documents is an effective approach to improve summarisation results. Further, Collins [49] conclude 
that not all sections are equally useful. Recent research has shown that a hierarchical or hybrid 
approach to summarising scientific documents, whereby an extractive summary of each section is 
produced independently at the first level and the sectional output is then abstracted into a brief 
summary at the second level, is highly effective [50]. This concept could also be applied to lay 
summarisation. In fact, two of the groups that participated in the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge 
reported that not all sections of a paper were equally important for creating lay summaries [10, 34] 
(Table 2). Most groups only used particular sections of a text (Abstract, Introduction, Conclusion, 
and/or Discussion) as input data, which improved the model performance especially when the 
Abstract was included. All of the groups, apart from Mishra et al. [37], reported using the Abstract (or 
a combination of the Abstract with extracted sentences of the full text) as the sole input to generate 
their lay summaries. This decision was informed by experimenting with using different sections of the 
input data, as well as the limited token size of the available transformers (Table 1). 
 
 
 
11
Model training 
With regards to training the model, a training data set split of around 80-90% was common among the 
top performers. The three poorest performing groups did not provide details of their data split ratio. 
Of note, the two top performing models reported by Yu et al. [34] and Seungwon [3] differ in the 
number of training steps used, namely 6,000 versus 20,000 to 50,000, respectively. Both used a batch 
size (i.e., the number of training examples used by one GPU in one training step) of 1 due to the 
limited available computing power. 
 
On the other hand, no consistent pattern of data pre-processing was evident. In general, the top 
performing groups provide a more detailed overview of hyperparameters, methodology, and pre-
processing compared with the other groups. 
 
Although the lowest-performing group [37] did not elaborate on their methodologies, based on 
the information provided it can be assumed that they were the only group not utilising a transformer-
based model. Instead, they used the Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) metric to classify 
sentences according to their importance. 
 
A common criticism reported by authors was the small data set size of only 572 sample articles 
[3, 34]. It is likely that a larger data set would have resulted in increased ROUGE scores and could 
have prevented overfitting. 
 
Data augmentation 
Finally, data augmentation involves artificially increasing the amount of data by manipulating or 
modifying existing data. Small data sets, such as the one used in the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge, 
tend to cause overfitting, and data augmentation can provide a regularisation effect. Li [51] 
categorised data augmentation methods for NLP into three categories, namely methods based on 
paraphrase, noising, and sampling. Paraphrase-based methods are concerned with replacing words 
with their synonyms, or round-trip translating data, whereas noising-based methods are concerned 
with swapping, deleting, and substituting words. Sampling-based methods are based on language 
models and self-training to change sentence structure while maintaining grammatical correctness. 
 
Only one group in the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge tried to enhance the data set by a data 
augmentation method where words from the original corpus were replaced by synonyms [34]. 
However, this resulted in an increased level of noise rather than improved model performance. 
 
Other studies have reported data augmentation methods for fine tuning and improving 
pretrained models for summarisation. For example, Fabbri et al. [52] used data augmentation to 
improve abstractive text summarisation models by performing round-trip translations on their data, 
which has been shown to be an effective way to paraphrase text while preserving semantic meaning. 
The authors found that this approach increased their models’ performance. Thus, data augmentation 
can be an effective strategy to enrich a data set. More investigation in the area of data augmentation 
for lay summarisation is needed. 
 
 
12
 
Recommendations 
To conclude, we propose a number of recommendations for automatic lay text summarisation based 
on the reviewed literature: 
• 
Hybrid approaches combining extractive with abstractive text summarisation methods may be 
important for successful lay text summarisation.  
• 
Extractive summarisation applied to each section of an input text document can be useful to 
identify the most important sections for a summary (e.g. the Abstract, Introduction or 
Conclusion). 
• 
Transformers are the state-of-the-art for lay text summarisation. The most appropriate 
transformer depends on the specific use case. 
 
 
 
 
13
DISCUSSION 
 
This literature review outlines the NLP methodologies that have been applied to the area of lay text 
summarisation. It is demonstrated that, while text summarisation is a widely researched topic in NLP, 
there is a surprising lack of research focusing on lay text summarisation. We were able to identify 
only 8 relevant papers, published between 2020 and 2021, highlighting the novelty of this research 
area. All papers were linked to the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge from the Scholarly Document 
Processing workshop 2020. 
 
Successful approaches for lay text summarisation 
The evidence base, though small, suggests that lay text summarisation is best approached using a 
hybrid method that combines the advantages of both extractive and abstractive summarisation by first 
ranking sentences or paragraphs of a text in order of importance and then creating an abstractive 
summary of the extracted sentences. Moreover, the success of transformer models for text 
summarisation is well documented, and they are also the preferred models for lay text summarisation. 
However, it is not possible to conclude from the studies reviewed here which combination of 
transformers, hyperparameters, pre-training and fine tuning achieves the best results. Comparing the 
participants’ approaches to the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge showed that hyperparameters and pre-
processing applications varied greatly and were not consistently reported. We tentatively conclude 
that the following steps may contribute to high model performance: pre-processing the data by 
applying sentence ranking, cleaning, dividing the text into different parts by prioritising local over 
global context or truncating the text according to the token size of the transformer; hyperparameter 
optimisation; and experimenting which sections to use as input. Lay text summarisation can further 
benefit from first applying extractive approaches to each section individually and then feeding the 
results into a transformer for abstractive summarisation. This approach is supported by Xiao and 
Carenini [50], who showed that local context is crucial to improve a summarisation method, whereas 
global context may be neglected. 
 
CL-LaySumm 2020 was the only data set for lay summaries found in the literature, however, it 
is not publicly available. Most research in text summarisation has relied on public data sets (such as 
WikiDes [53]) while only a small number of studies have used private data sets. This is supported by 
Widyassari et al. [54] who looked at 85 text summarisation studies, of which 55 operated on public 
data sets, most commonly Document Understanding Conferences (DUC) news data sets. Interestingly, 
as the field of text summarisation grows, so too do the amount of data sets, including benchmarks, 
which combine datasets with evaluation metrics and baselines. These benchmarks provide an 
integrated evaluation setup for comparing NLP systems systematically (e.g. CiteSum [5] and 
CiteBench [55]). 
 
 
 
14
Considerations for future research into lay text summarisation 
There is a clear need for further research into lay text summarisation to provide a wider audience with 
access to scientific results. The available studies on lay text summarisation only focused on short 
research articles. In future work, lay summarisation of longer documents should be explored, for 
example clinical trial reports. Similar to the EU Regulation No. 536/2014, which requires 
pharmaceutical companies to publish a lay summary of clinical trials, this type of ‘mandated’ 
provision of lay summaries could also be implemented across other fields. Such mandated lay 
summarisation would go a long way to help promote the dissemination, and potential uptake, of 
important scientific findings. Lay text summarisation based on NLP could help automate these 
processes, saving time and money for those responsible for their development [56]. Yet, automating 
this task remains a challenge, given that the source documents for these summaries often vary in 
structure and format, are typically lengthy, and the nature of the content can be complex and esoteric. 
As such, this area warrants further research. 
 
One area requiring specific attention is the automatic text summarisation of long documents. 
This task is challenging because transformers cannot encode long sequences due to their self-attention 
mechanisms, which enable transformers to retain contextual information contained in a sequence. 
These self-attention steps scale quadratically with sequence length. In this respect, the effectiveness of 
the Longformer transformer, a linearly scaling self-attention mechanism-based transformer model 
([57]), in generating lay summaries of long text documents should be explored. Similarly, Zaheer [58] 
proposed a linear self-attention mechanism that retains all functions of full self-attention mechanisms. 
Longformer was not utilised by the participants of the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge, even though 
some groups reported struggling with the token size [34, 36]. 
 
Previous workarounds split documents into different sections, such as the divide and conquer 
approach by Chaturvedi et al. [36], or simply cut off sections of text, such as Roy et al. [10]. Notably, 
this approach may cause loss of important information. Similarly, Xiao and Carenini [50] had success 
by taking local and global contexts into account. However, they observed that large transformer 
models such as BERT performed poorly in such cases. Consequently, they opted for an alternative 
LSTM-based approach. 
 
With regards to evaluation metrics, ROUGE was used in the reviewed studies to evaluate model 
performance. However this metric is limited in that it does not consider readability (i.e. how easily a 
passage can be understood by a reader) or semantic and factual accuracy [26, 27]. Indeed, there have 
been calls for new evaluation metrics needed in the area of NLP [59]. Ng and Abrecht [60] introduced 
ROUGE-WE, an extension to ROUGE, which considers the cosine similarity during matching. 
Similarly, BertScore compares generated and original text at the token level while also considering 
cosine similarity [61]. In addition, readability indices and human evaluation are also important to 
assess model performance. Readability evaluation metrics such as Flesch-Kincaid grade level [62] 
 
 
15
estimate the years of education generally required to understand the text. Yet, while these metrics are 
useful, they do not capture key aspects of the output text, such as fluency, grammaticality, style, and 
factual correctness. To consider these properties, methods for assessing the summary quality by 
human evaluators are needed [13, 63]. 
 
The lack of comprehensive up-to-date studies on evaluation metrics for text summarisation and 
a lack of consensus on evaluation protocols continue to hinder progress [64]. As such, there is a need 
for the development of metrics that more effectively evaluate the performance of lay summary 
models. Notably, other metrics such as COMET have shown promise in a summarisation context [65]. 
 
Conclusions 
We reviewed the literature on state-of-the-art text summarisation approaches to generate lay text 
summaries. Our results show that (i) research on automatic lay text summarisation has received little 
attention to date; (ii) the most effective models are based on transformers; (iii) a hybrid approach 
combining abstractive and extractive text summarisation is recommended; and (iv) pre-processing the 
input texts, such as applying extractive summarisation or determining which sections of a text to 
include appear to be a major factor in the effectiveness of models. 
 
To our knowledge, this is the first literature review on automatic lay text summarisation. Some 
limitations of this review should be acknowledged. We identified a relatively small number of studies, 
which do not allow definitive conclusions regarding the most effective approaches for lay text 
summarisation. Only one author (O.V.) performed the literature search. Further, all studies used the 
same dataset (not publicly available) and the same group of evaluation metrics (ROUGE), and all 
papers were linked to the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge, which clearly limits generalisability of 
findings.   Chandrasekaran et al. [7] summarise the methodologies of the studies from the CL-
LaySumm 2020 challenge and provide a comparison between lay summaries and typical paper 
abstracts (Technical Summaries). Our literature review adds to the Chandrasekaran et al. paper by 
providing additional detail and critical discussion on the methods of the selected studies (including 
pre-processing, model training and data augmentation). Further, our review highlights the 
methodological aspects that may contribute to successful lay summarisation, thereby providing a 
starting point for further development and fine tuning. 
 
The development of lay summaries of scientific findings across different fields would help to 
facilitate the dissemination and uptake of important discoveries, potentially having a positive impact 
on the broader society. Automatic lay text summarisation based on NLP techniques is a promising 
method to help automate these processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Supplementary Materials 
Appendix A: Table A1, List of abbreviations and acronyms used in the literature review. 
Appendix B: Theoretical background on Natural Language Processing and Transformer models. 
 
Author Contributions 
Conceptualisation, all authors; methodology, O.V., M.D.J., Z.T., and G.M.; investigation, O.V.; 
resources, M.D.J.; writing—original draft preparation, O.V. and Z.T.; writing—review and editing, 
O.V., Z.T., and M.D.J..; supervision, Z.T., M.D.J. and G.M.; project administration, O.V., Z.T., D.M., 
and G.M.; funding acquisition, D.M., Z.T. and G.M. All authors have read and agreed to the 
published version of the manuscript. 
 
Funding 
This research was funded by The Data Lab (Principal Investigator: Z.T.) and Lay Summaries Ltd. 
 
Informed Consent Statement 
Not applicable. 
 
Data Availability Statement 
Not applicable 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
O.V., M.D.J., Z.T., and G.M. declare no conflicts of interest. D.M. is a shareholder of Lay Summaries 
Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
17
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Voytovich, L., and Greenberg, C. "Natural Language Processing: Practical Applications in 
Medicine and Investigation of Contextual Autocomplete." In Machine Learning in Clinical 
Neuroscience Foundations and Applications, edited by Victor E. Staartjes, Luca Regli and Carlo 
Serra. Cham, Switzerland: Springer 2021. 
2. 
Tsang, G., Xie, X., and Zhou, S. M. "Harnessing the Power of Machine Learning in Dementia 
Informatics Research: Issues, Opportunities, and Challenges." IEEE Reviews in Biomedical 
Engineering 13, no. 113-129 (2019). 
3. 
Seungwon, Kim. "Using Pre-Trained Transformer for Better Lay Summarization " Proceedings 
of the First Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 328-35. 
4. 
Bornmann, L., Haunschild, R., and Mutz, R. "Growth Rates of Modern Science: A Latent 
Piecewise Growth Curve Approach to Model Publication Numbers from Established and New 
Literature Databases." Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 8, no. 1 (2021): 1-15. 
5. 
Mao, Y., Zhong, M., and Han, J. "Citesum: Citation Text-Guided Scientific Extreme 
Summarization and Domain Adaptation with Limited Supervision." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2205.06207 (2022). 
6. 
Mishra, R., Bian, J., Fiszman, M., Weir, C. R., Jonnalagadda, S., Mostafa, J., and Del Fiol, G. 
"Text Summarization in the Biomedical Domain: A Systematic Review of Recent Research." J 
Biomed Inform 52 (2014): 457-67. 
7. 
Chandrasekaran, M. K., Feigenblat, G., Hovy, E., Ravichander, A., Shmueli-Scheuer, M., and 
de Waard, A. "Overview and Insights from the Shared Tasks at Scholarly Document Processing 
2020: Cl-Scisumm, Laysumm and Longsumm." In Proceedings of the First Workshop on 
Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 214-24. 
8. 
El-Kassas, W. S., Salama, C. R., Rafea, A. A., and Mohamed, H. K. "Automatic Text 
Summarization: A Comprehensive Survey." Expert Systems with Applications 165 (2021): 
113679. 
9. 
Klymenko, O., Braun, D., and Matthes, F. "Automatic Text Summarization: A State-of-the-Art 
Review." International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS) 1 (2020): 648-
55. 
10. 
Roy, S. G., Pinnaparaju, N., Jain, R., Gupta, M., and Varma, V. "Summaformers@ Laysumm 
20, Longsumm 20." arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03553 (2021). 
11. 
Sharma, G., and Sharma, D. "Automatic Text Summarization Methods: A Comprehensive 
Review." SN Computer Science 4, no. 1 (2022): 33. 
12. 
Mallick, C., and Das, A.K. "Hybridization Of fuzzy Theory And nature-Inspired Optimization 
For medical Report Summarization." In Nature-Inspired Optimization Methodologies in 
 
 
18
Biomedical and Healthcare, edited by Janmenjoy Nayak, Asit Kumar Das, Bighnaraj Naik, 
Saroj K. Meher and Sheryl Brahnam, 147-74. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2023. 
13. 
Guo, Yue, Qiu, Wei, Wang, Yizhong, and Cohen, Trevor. "Automated Lay Language 
Summarization of Biomedical Scientific Reviews." Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence 35, no. 1 (2021): 160-68. 
14. 
Suleiman, D., and Awajan, A.. "Deep Learning Based Abstractive Text Summarization: 
Approaches, Datasets, Evaluation Measures, and Challenges." Mathematical Problems in 
Engineering 2020 (2020): 9365340. 
15. 
Wolf, T, Debut, L., Sanh, V. Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, 
R., and Funtowicz, M.. "Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing." 
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: 
System Demonstrations. 2020. 
16. 
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., and 
Polosukhin, I. "Attention Is All You Need." Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 30 (2017). 
17. 
Tay, Y., Bahri, D., Metzler, D., Juan, D.C., Zhao, Z., and Zheng, C. "Synthesizer: Rethinking 
Self-Attention for Transformer Models." International Conference on Machine Learning (2021): 
10183-92. 
18. 
Chernyavskiy, A., Ilvovsky, D., and Nakov, P. "Transformers:“The End of History” for Natural 
Language Processing." Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases (2021): 677-93. 
19. 
Farha, I.A., and Magdy, W. "Benchmarking Transformer-Based Language Models for Arabic 
Sentiment and Sarcasm Detection." Proceedings of the sixth Arabic natural language processing 
workshop (2021): 21-31. 
20. 
Squad2.0: The Stanford Question Answering Dataset. Available online: 
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/ (Accessed 22 February 2023). 
21. 
Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R., and Liang, P.. "Know What You Don’t Know: Unanswerable Questions 
for Squad." Melbourne, Australia 2018. 
22. 
MacCartney, B., and Manning, C. D. "Modeling Semantic Containment and Exclusion in 
Natural Language Inference." Paper presented at the 22nd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), Manchester, UK 2008. 
23. 
Papers with code. "Sentiment Analysis on Sst-5 Fine-Grained Classification." Available online:  
https://paperswithcode.com/sota/sentiment-analysis-on-sst-5-fine-grained (Accessed 16 
February 2023). 
24. 
He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R. "Mask R-Cnn." Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Computer Vision (2017): 2961-69. 
 
 
19
25. 
Zhao, H., Shi, J., Qi, X., Wang, X., and Jia, J. "Pyramid Scene Parsing Network." Proceedings 
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2017): 2881-90. 
26. 
Gabriel, S., Celikyilmaz, A., Jha, R., Choi, Y., and Gao, J. "Go Figure: A Meta Evaluation of 
Factuality in Summarization." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12834 (2020). 
27. 
Maynez, J., Narayan, S., Bohnet, B., and McDonald, R. "On Faithfulness and Factuality in 
Abstractive Summarization." arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00661 (2020). 
28. 
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.J. "Bleu: A Method for Automatic Evaluation 
of Machine Translation." Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (2002): 311-18. 
29. 
Banerjee, S., and Lavie, A. "Meteor: An Automatic Metric for Mt Evaluation with Improved 
Correlation with Human Judgments." Proceedings of the ACL Eorkshop on Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization (2005): 65-72. 
30. 
European Commission. "Clinical Trials - Regulation Eu No 536/2014." Available online:  
https://ec.europa.eu/health/medicinal-products/clinical-trials/clinical-trials-regulation-eu-no-
5362014_en (Accessed 24 Feb 2022). 
31. 
Clinical Trials Expert Group (CTEG). "Good Lay Summary Practice." Available online:  
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-10/glsp_en_0.pdf (Accessed 9 February /2022). 
32. 
Ferrari, Rossella. "Writing Narrative Style Literature Reviews." Medical Writing 24, no. 4 
(2015): 230-35. 
33. 
Reddy, S., Saini, N., Saha, S., and Bhattacharyya, P. "Iiitbh-Iitp@ Cl-Scisumm20, Cl-
Laysumm20, Longsumm20." Proceedings of the First Workshop on Scholarly Document 
Processing (2020): 242-50. 
34. 
Yu, T., Su, D., Dai, W., and Fung, P. "Dimsum@ Laysumm 20: Bart-Based Approach for 
Scientific Document Summarization." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09252. (2020). 
35. 
Gidiotis, A., Stefanidis, S., and Tsoumakas, G. . "Auth@ Clscisumm 20, Laysumm 20, 
Longsumm 20." Proceedings of the First Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 
251-60. 
36. 
Chaturvedi, R., Dhani, J. S., Joshi, A., Khanna, A., Tomar, N., Duari, S., and Bhatnagar, V. 
"Divide and Conquer: From Complexity to Simplicity for Lay Summarization." Proceedings of 
the First Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 344-55. 
37. 
Mishra, S. K., Kundarapu, H., Saini, N., Saha, S., and Bhattacharyya, P. "Iitp-Ai-Nlp-Ml@ Cl-
Scisumm 2020, Cl-Laysumm 2020, Longsumm 2020." Proceedings of the First Workshop on 
Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 270-76. 
38. 
Scisumm-Corpus. Available online: https://github.com/WING-NUS/scisumm-
corpus/tree/master/data/LAYSUMM_SAMPLE (Accessed 15 Feb 2023). 
39. 
Liu, Y., and Lapata, M. "Text Summarization with Pretrained Encoders." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1908.08345 (2019). 
 
 
20
40. 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., and Sutskever, I. "Language Models Are 
Unsupervised Multitask Learners." OpenAI blog 1, no. 8 (2019): 9. 
41. 
Nallapati, R., Zhai, F., and Zhou, B.. "Summarunner: A Recurrent Neural Network Based 
Sequence Model for Extractive Summarization of Documents." In Proceedings of the Thirty-
First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 3075–81. San Francisco, California, USA: 
AAAI Press, 2017. 
42. 
Lee, J., Yoon, W., Kim, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., So, C.H., and Kang, J. "Biobert: A Pre-Trained 
Biomedical Language Representation Model for Biomedical Text Mining." Bioinformatics 36, 
no. 4 (2020): 1234-40. 
43. 
Goldstein, Jade, and Carbonell, Jaime. "Summarization: (1) Using Mmr for Diversity- Based 
Reranking and (2) Evaluating Summaries." Baltimore, Maryland, USA 1998. 
44. 
Gu, Y., Tinn, R., Cheng, H., Lucas, M., Usuyama, N., Liu, X., Naumann, T., Gao, J., and Poon, 
H. "Domain-Specific Language Model Pretraining for Biomedical Natural Language 
Processing." ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH) 3, no. 1 (2021): 1-23. 
45. 
Beltagy, I., Lo, K., and Cohan, A. "Scibert: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientific Text." 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10676 (2019). 
46. 
Rasmy, L., Xiang, Y., Xie, Z., Tao, C., and Zhi, D. "Med-Bert: Pretrained Contextualized 
Embeddings on Large-Scale Structured Electronic Health Records for Disease Prediction." NPJ 
digital medicine 4, no. 1 (2021): 1-13. 
47. 
Yang, Y., Uy, M.C.S., and Huang, A. "Finbert: A Pretrained Language Model for Financial 
Communications." arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08097 (2020). 
48. 
Cohan, A., Dernoncourt, F., Kim, D. S., Bui, T., Kim, S., Chang, W., and Goharian, N.. "A 
Discourse-Aware Attention Model for Abstractive Summarization of Long Documents." arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1804.05685. (2018). 
49. 
Collins, E., Augenstein, I., and Riedel, S. "A Supervised Approach to Extractive Summarisation 
of Scientific Papers." arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03946. (2017). 
50. 
Xiao, W., and Carenini, G. "Extractive Summarization of Long Documents by Combining 
Global and Local Context." arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08089 (2019). 
51. 
Li, B., Hou, Y., and Che, W. "Data Augmentation Approaches in Natural Language Processing: 
A Survey." arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01852 (2021). 
52. 
Fabbri, A.R., Han, S., Li, H., Li, H., Ghazvininejad, M., Joty, S., Radev, D., and Mehdad, Y. 
"Improving Zero and Few-Shot Abstractive Summarization with Intermediate Fine-Tuning and 
Data Augmentation." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12836 (2020). 
53. 
Ta, H. T., Rahman, A. B. S., Majumder, N., Hussain, A., Najjar, L., Howard, N., Poria, S., and 
Gelbukh, A. "Wikides: A Wikipedia-Based Dataset for Generating Short Descriptions from 
Paragraphs." Information Fusion 90 (2023): 265-82. 
 
 
21
54. 
Widyassari, A. P., Rustad, S., Shidik, G. F., Noersasongko, E., Syukur, A., and Affandy, A. 
"Review of Automatic Text Summarization Techniques & Methods." Journal of King Saud 
University-Computer and Information Sciences (2020). 
55. 
Funkquist, M., Kuznetsov, I., Hou, Y., and Gurevych, I. "Citebench: A Benchmark for 
Scientific Citation Text Generation." arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09577 (2022). 
56. 
Dang, H., Benharrak, K., Lehmann, F., and Buschek, D.. "Beyond Text Generation: Supporting 
Writers with Continuous Automatic Text Summaries." Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 2022. 
57. 
Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., and Cohan, A. "Longformer: The Long-Document Transformer." 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150 (2020). 
58. 
Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, K.A., Ainslie, J., Alberti, C., Ontanon, S., Pham, P., 
Ravula, A., Wang, Q., Yang, L., and Ahmed, A. "Big Bird: Transformers for Longer 
Sequences." Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020): 17283-97. 
59. 
Gehrmann, S., Adewumi, T., Aggarwal, K., Ammanamanchi, P.S., Anuoluwapo, A., Bosselut, 
A., Chandu, K.R., Clinciu, M., Das, D., Dhole, K.D., and Du, W. "The Gem Benchmark: 
Natural Language Generation, Its Evaluation and Metrics." arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01672 
(2021). 
60. 
Ng, J.P., and Abrecht, V. "Better Summarization Evaluation with Word Embeddings for 
Rouge." arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.06034 (2015). 
61. 
Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K.Q., and Artzi, Y. "Bertscore: Evaluating Text 
Generation with Bert." arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 (2019). 
62. 
Flesch, R. "A New Readability Yardstick." J Appl Psychol 32, no. 3 (1948): 221-33. 
63. 
Iskender, Neslihan, Polzehl, Tim, and Möller, Sebastian. Reliability of Human Evaluation for 
Text Summarization: Lessons Learned and Challenges Ahead, 2021. 
64. 
Fabbri, Alexander R., Kryściński, Wojciech, McCann, Bryan, Xiong, Caiming, Socher, Richard, 
and Radev, Dragomir. "Summeval: Re-Evaluating Summarization Evaluation." Transactions of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021): 391-409. 
65. 
Mateusz, Krubiski, and Pecina, Pavel. "From Comet to Comes–Can Summary Evaluation 
Benefit from Translation Evaluation?" Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Evaluation and 
Comparison of NLP Systems 2022.
 
 
22 
Table 1. Overview of the methodologies and results of the CL-LaySumm 2020 challenge. ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) was 
used as the main evaluation metric. ROUGE-1 compares the overlap of unigrams, ROUGE-2 calculates the overlap of bigrams, and ROUGE-L-F1 calculates 
the F1 score of the longest overlapping phrases. 
Model name, 
publication 
Pre-processing 
Model/ 
Algorithm 
Methodology 
Input text sections used. 
Training 
ROUGE 
DimSum, Yu et 
al. 2020 [34] 
Removed tags and 
outliers and removed 
input data samples 
that had no abstract 
or introduction. 
Truncated input texts 
to a maximum length 
of 1024 tokens. 
BART and 
SummaRuNNer. 
Hybrid approach. 
Abstractive summarisation 
(BART) combined with 
extractive model 
(SummaRuNNer) to 
maximise ROUGE. 
Experimented with 
different combinations of 
the Abstract, Introduction 
and Conclusion. 
Best results achieved by 
only using the abstracts. 
90/10 split of data set. 
Hyperparameters: dynamic 
learning rate, warm up 1000 
iterations. 
Batch size (i.e., the number 
of training examples used 
by one GPU in one training 
step) of 1 (due to GCU 
memory limitations). 
Training for 6000 
iterations. 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.4600 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.2070 
RougeL-F1: 
0.2876 
Seungwon 
(2020) [3] 
Not provided 
PEGASUS and 
Presumm.(which 
uses BERT) 
Hybrid approach. 
Abstractive summarisation 
(PEGASUS) combined 
with extractive 
summarisation (Presumm) 
to improve quality of 
produced summary. 
Only the Abstracts used for 
abstractive summarisation. 
The entire text used for 
extractive summarisation 
but prioritising the Abstract 
(to generate additional 
sentences for the produced 
summary). 
80/10/10 split of data set. 
Hyperparameters: 
Approach 1: 20,000 steps 
training, batch size of 1 
(due to GCU memory 
limitations), learning rate 
0.0001. 
Approach 2: Pre-training 
for 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.4596 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.2146 
RougeL-F1: 
0.2977 
 
 
23 
50,000, fine-tuning for 
10,000 steps. 
Summaformers, 
Roy et al. 2021 
[10] 
Not provided 
BART 
Abstractive summarisation 
approach (BART). 
Experimented with using 
different sections of the 
texts. 
Concluded that using 
Abstracts as the only 
section is most effective. 
 
80/20 split of data set. 
Hyperparameters: Adam 
optimiser, learning rate 
0.00005, learn rate schedule 
based on ROUGE-1, 
repetition penalty of 1.8 in 
the hyperparameter tuning 
phase. 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.4594 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.1902 
RougeL-F1: 
0.2744 
AUTH, 
Gidiotis et al. 
[35] 
Lowercased the text, 
replaced Greek 
symbols with distinct 
words, re-moved 
unwanted tokens, 
equations and 
references. 
PEGASUS. 
Abstractive summarisation 
(PEGASUS). 
Solely used Abstracts to 
generate abstractive 
summaries. 
6/2/2 split of data set. 
Model fine-tuning. 
Hyperparameter details not 
provided. 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.4456 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.1936 
RougeL-F1: 
0.2772 
DUCS, 
Chaturvedi et 
al. 2020 [36] 
Removed redundant 
white spaces, hyper-
links, references and 
sentences containing 
more than 1/5 of 
special characters.  
BART and 
BioBERT. 
Hybrid approach. 
Abstractive summarisation 
(BART) combined with 
extractive summarisation 
(BioBERT). 
Extractive step performed 
on the Introduction, 
Discussion and Conclusion 
sections. 
Abstractive summarisation 
performed on the extracted 
sentences combined with 
Not provided. 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.4253 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.1748 
RougeL-F1: 
0.2526 
 
 
24 
Replaced common 
acronyms by their 
full meaning. 
Removed all 
punctuation except 
full stops, 
exclamation and 
question marks. 
the Abstract, and 
abstractions systematically 
merged. 
IIITBH-IITP, 
Reddy et al. 
2020 [33] 
Removed complex 
words.  
Lemmatised words 
and removed 
advanced symbols 
from texts. 
Maximum 
Marginal 
Relevance 
(MMR). 
Extractive summarisation 
approach using the MMR 
ranking algorithm. 
Experimented with using 
the full text, Abstract and 
Conclusion. 
Best results achieved by 
only using the Abstract. 
Not provided. 
Rouge1-
F1:0.4048 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.1690 
RougeL-
F1:0.2244 
IITP-AI-NLP-
ML, Mishra et 
al. 2020 [37] 
Not provided. 
BART. 
Abstractive summarisation 
approach (BART). 
Not provided. 
Two Adam optimisers with 
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99. 
For the encoder: learning 
rate of 0.002 and 20,000 
warm-up steps. 
For the decoder: learning 
rate of 0.1 and 10,000 
warm-up steps. 
Data set split not provided. 
Rouge1-F1: 
0.3132 
Rouge2-F1: 
0.0631 
RougeL-
F1:0.1662 
Note: Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE; score range 0-1, higher scores indicate better model performance), Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers (BERT), Pre-training with Extracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization (PEGASUS), Term Frequency-
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), Text Summarisation with Pretrained Encoders (PreSumm) which is a framework based on BERT that also allows for 
abstractive summarisation [43]. 
 
 
25 
Table 2 Overview of the main study findings and conclusions of the included papers.  
Model name, 
publication 
Main study findings and conclusions 
DimSum, Yu et al. 
2020 [34] 
Experimented with using different section combinations of texts as input data. 
Explored data augmentation by replacing words with their synonyms in texts.  
Data set too small, data augmentation not helpful, adding CLS (classification) tokens to the beginning of sentences increased precision. 
Seungwon (2020) [3] 
Calculated ROUGE scores of lay summaries and Abstracts/ full texts of the data set. 
Abstracts were selected as input data for abstractive summarisation. The entire text was used for extractive summarisation but prioritising the 
Abstract (to generate additional sentences for the produced summary). 
A hybrid approach, combining abstractive and extractive text summarisation, was found to be most effective. compared to either extractive or 
abstractive summarisation methods alone. 
Without the concatenation of extracted sentences, summaries would be too short in length.   
Readability metric was included to evaluate quality of the output which improved the performance slightly. 
Summaformers, Roy et 
al. 2021 [10] 
Using the Abstract alone as input source to generate lay summaries, compared to using Abstracts combined with other sections, achieved the 
best results.  
Sequence lengths of 140 for BART resulted in the best performance. 
AUTH, Gidiotis et al. 
[35] 
The PEGASUS model pretrained on the PubMed data set (compared to the pre-trained PEGASUS model and a model fine-tuned on the arXiv 
dataset) performed the best, especially regarding ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L scores. 
The model pre-trained on the arXiv data set also performed well. 
DUCS, Chaturvedi et 
al. 2020 [36] 
Following extractive text summarisation, the abstractive summarisation step improved the performance significantly.  
Dividing the text into segments (Abstract, Conclusion, Introduction, and Discussion sections) as input source for extractive summarisation, is 
most useful for generating lay summaries. Model performance improved when creating extractive summaries for individual sections compared 
to the entire text.  
 
 
26 
Using Weighted Minimum Vertex Cover (wMVC) further improved ROUGE scores. 
IIITBH-IITP, Reddy et 
al. 2020 [33] 
Performance increased through consideration of the Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) metric and using Abstracts to generate summaries. 
A word removal approach using a lexical database like WordNet failed due to non-presence of scientific terms. The need for a more 
sophisticated approach is acknowledged. 
IITP-AI-NLP-ML, 
Mishra et al. 2020 [37] 
Not provided 
Note: Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE; score range 0-1, higher scores indicate better model performance), Pre-training with 
Extracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization (PEGASUS), Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF).
 
 
27
Appendix A List of abbreviations and acronyms used in the literature review. 
 
Table A1. Abbreviations and acronyms used in the literature review. 
Abbreviation/ Acronym 
Meaning 
LaySumm 
Lay summarisation 
BART 
BERT 
Bidirectional Auto-Regressive Transformers 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
BLEU 
Bilingual Evaluation Understudy 
CLS 
CNN 
Special Classification Token 
Convolutional Neural Network 
CNN - DM 
Cable News Network - Daily Mail 
CTEG 
Expert Group on Clinical Trials 
DUC 
Document Understanding Conference(s) 
ELMo 
Embeddings from Language Model 
GPU 
Graphics Processing Unit 
GRU 
Gated Recurrent Units 
LSTM 
Long Short-Term Memory 
METEOR 
Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering 
MLM 
Masked Language Modelling 
MMR 
Maximal Marginal Relevance 
NLP 
Natural Language Processing 
NSP 
Next Sentence Prediction 
PEGASUS 
Pre-training with Extracted Gap-sentences for 
Abstractive Summarisation 
RNN 
Recurrent Neural Networks 
ROUGE 
Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation 
SVM 
Support Vector Machines 
TF-IDF 
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency 
TPU 
Tensor Processing Unit 
ULMFiT 
Universal Language Model Fine-Tuning 
wMVC 
Weighted Minimum Vertex Cover 
 
 
 
 
 
28
Appendix B Theoretical background on Natural Language Processing and Transformer models. 
 
Natural language processing 
Natural Language Processing (NLP; see Appendix A: Table A1 for a list of abbreviations and 
acronyms) is the discipline concerned with how computers can understand, manipulate, or 
summarise human language in forms of text or speech. A key focus lies in a model’s ability to 
capture important information in language using machine learning and rule-based language 
modelling [1]. Selecting and retaining important parts of an input sequence and understanding 
context remains a challenge for machines [2]. 
 
Automatic text summarisation, a subfield of NLP, involves creating a concise and accurate 
overview of a text document whilst preserving the critical content and the overall context. 
Automatic text summarisation has been mostly oriented towards news or science articles, due to 
the high availability of human annotated data sets [3]. Given the exponential increase in the 
amount of research published every year, there is an unprecedented volume of diverse textual 
data which leads to an overwhelming amount of scientific information. Automatic text 
summarisation has the potential to help reduce this information overload, potentially leading to 
time and cost savings [4]. Concise summaries make the exponential growth of scientific 
publications each year more manageable to read [5]. Indeed, there has been growing interest in 
automatic text summarisation as a method for helping researchers, clinicians and other 
stakeholders seeking information to efficiently obtain the ‘‘gist’’ in a given topic by producing a 
textual summary from one or multiple document [6]. 
 
A common distinction in text summarisation methods is between extractive and 
abstractive approaches [7, 8]. In extractive text summarisation, phrases of the original text are 
ranked according to their importance, reordered, and used to create the summary. The ranking is 
done by assigning relative weights based on the frequency of a word or phrase, or by comparing 
it to a corpus and determining whether a phrase belongs to a particular domain. 
 
Due to the rise in deep learning methods in recent years, the focus has shifted toward 
abstractive summarisation [9]. Abstractive text summarisation is more closely aligned with 
human-created summaries. In contrast to extractive summarisation, abstractive summarisation 
generates words and phrases that are not present in the original text which are then used for the 
final summary. This method is more challenging than extractive summarisation methods 
because it does not guarantee a baseline of grammar and correctness of information. Recent 
advances have made it possible to generate longer abstract summaries using pre-trained 
transformer models [10]. A comprehensive review of text summarisation methods has been 
published previously, including detailed discussion on extractive and abstractive approaches 
[11], as well as its application to the summarisation of medical content [12]. 
 
 
 
29
Early Generations of NLP methods 
Before the introduction of transformers and inductive transfer learning in NLP, the focus was on 
stemming (i.e., cutting off the end or the beginning of the word) or lemmatising (i.e., converting 
a word to its meaningful base form, considering the context) and creating shallow models such 
as Support Vector Machines. This bore the necessity of training models from scratch for every 
task, which became increasingly difficult when data for particular tasks were lacking. Moreover, 
there was a reliance on manually created features rather than learning deep hierarchical 
representations [13]. 
 
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have 
transformed the area of machine learning due to their success in image recognition, time-series 
forecasting, language understanding and other application areas[14, 15]. CNNs are good at 
extracting features while RNNs are better at dealing with sequential data and retaining 
temporary input information which is important in language processing for contextualised word 
embedding. Yin and colleagues [16] compared RNNs and CNNs on a variety of NLP tasks and 
found that it was not possible to determine which method was superior. However, the authors 
did not compare these approaches in relation to text summarisation in general. 
 
Traditional RNNs were extended to support gated architectures. Two of the most 
prominent RNN extensions are Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units 
(GRUs). Both methods overcome the exploding and vanishing gradient problem which can 
occur in training RNNs where the gradient can get very small, preventing the weights from 
updating, or very large when activation functions whose derivatives can get large, are used [17]. 
Goldberg [18] argues that LSTM and GRU models have provided the most significant 
contribution to NLP until 2017, as they are adept at capturing key information and retaining it 
over the long term, which is a vital attribute for language processing. This is also supported by 
Van Houdt [19] who found that LSTM greatly improved NLP technology embedded in Google 
Translate, Speech Recognition and Amazon’s Alexa. LSTM itself has seen multiple generations 
of improvements over time, such as the 'forget gate' [20]. 
 
To conclude, LSTM models consist of memory blocks, which are able to retain key 
information long term, however they are still not ideally suited to many NLP tasks due to their 
sequential nature, which means that words in a sentence are processed word by word rather than 
as whole sentences as with Transformer models.  
 
Transformer models 
Transformers were introduced into machine translation with the aim of avoiding recursion to 
increase parallel computation (to reduce training time) and also to reduce performance drops 
due to long dependencies. Transformers are non-recurrent sequence-to-sequence tools that 
combine an encoder with a decoder and usually consist of attention mechanisms to improve 
 
 
30
context capturing [21]. In principle, self-attention maps the relationships between words at 
different positions in an input sequence to create a representation and capture the relative 
importance of tokens compared to others [22]. In the encoder, self-attention calculates an 
attention score based on the output of the previous layer and compares the score with all other 
scores of words of the input sequence. The advantages of transformers include easier 
parallelisability and shorter training time compared to recurrent or convolutional approaches. 
Self-attention layers are usually stacked multiple times in the encoder and decoder to improve 
the computation of dependency relationships between words of the same sentence.  
 
Transformers have opened a new chapter in NLP. Some authors even go as far as to call 
them a revolution[23, 24]. To illustrate, pre-trained transformer models (e.g.  Open AI 
Transformer) were able to achieve 10-20% better results than the previous state of the art in a 
variety of NLP challenges, such as SQuAD (Stanford Question Answering Dataset) [25, 26], 
SNLI (Stanford Natural Language Inference Corpus) [27], SRL (Semantic Role Labelling) and 
SST-5 (Stanford Sentiment Treebank [28]. Ruder [29] calls the emergence of large pre-trained 
transformers NLP’s ImageNet moment because both high- and low-level features are now learnt 
by models, similar to the transfer-learning approach with ImageNet in the computer vision 
research community. 'Transfer learning' is based on the human ability to acquire knowledge in 
one area and use this knowledge to approach a related task. In contrast, earlier NLP techniques 
were shallower because the features were mainly analysed in the first embedding layer. 
Transformers are pre-trained on large data sets and can be fine-tuned to solve a variety of NLP 
tasks, similar to computer vision models which are pre-trained on ImageNet and then fine-tuned 
to work on different computer vision tasks [30] [31]. 
 
Evaluation metrics 
 
Metrics are important for model evaluations and comparisons. Popular metrics in machine 
learning include accuracy, recall, precision, and F1-Score (the harmonic mean of precision and 
recall). However, in text summarisation, the choice of metrics is not straightforward because 
generated words, phrases, and whole sentences need to be evaluated instead of labels. One 
approach is to have humans, ideally subject matter experts, evaluate the generated summaries 
based on readability, coherence, grammar, and information value. Yet this is time-consuming 
which renders this approach unfeasible for most cases since developers rely on quick 
performance evaluation of their models [32]. 
 
A good metric should be reliable, consistent yet sensitive to changes in the model or data, 
and generally applicable to a wide range of tasks [33]. This criterion, however, may be difficult 
to satisfy with a single metric. Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) is 
a common metric used in text summarisation. ROUGE measures the lexical overlaps between 
generated summaries and the corresponding full texts. A major limitation of this approach is 
 
 
31
that it does not give any indication of how meaningful, fact-based, or relevant the generated text 
bodies are [34, 35]. Moreover, ROUGE tends to assign higher scores to longer summaries [36]. 
There have been calls for new evaluation metrics needed in the area of NLP [37]. Ng and 
Abrecht [38] introduced ROUGE-WE, an extension to ROUGE, which considers the cosine 
similarity during matching. Similarly, BertScore compares generated and original text at the 
token level while also considering cosine similarity [39]. 
 
Bi-Lingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) is a precision focused metric for evaluating 
generated texts, which is mainly used for evaluating machine translation tasks [40]. However, it 
can also be applied to text summarisation as it compares the closeness of a generated text to a 
reference text by matching n-grams (i.e., a sequence of N words). BLEU has been criticised for 
not offering a recall-based metric that would indicate the quality of the produced summary. 
Subsequently, Banerjee and Lavie [33] introduced the Metric for Evaluation of Translation with 
Explicit ORdering (METEOR), a metric that was designed to address BLEU’s weaknesses. 
METEOR calculates the harmonic mean (F1) of unigram precision and recall, while weighting 
recall higher than precision. 
 
In summary, ROUGE, BLUE and METEOR are commonly used evaluation metrics for 
text summarisation models. Developing metrics for NLP tasks is an ongoing research area, and 
suitability varies greatly depending on the task and dataset, therefore there are no general 
recommendations on which metric to use. 
 
References 
1. 
Voytovich, L., and Greenberg, C.. "Natural Language Processing: Practical Applications 
in Medicine and Investigation of Contextual Autocomplete." In Machine Learning in 
Clinical Neuroscience Foundations and Applications, edited by Victor E. Staartjes, Luca 
Regli and Carlo Serra. Cham, Switzerland: Springer 2021. 
2. 
Tsang, G., Xie, X., and Zhou, S. M. "Harnessing the Power of Machine Learning in 
Dementia Informatics Research: Issues, Opportunities, and Challenges." IEEE reviews in 
biomedical engineering 13, no. 113-129 (2019). 
3. 
Seungwon, Kim. "Using Pre-Trained Transformer for Better Lay Summarization " 
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 328-35. 
4. 
Bornmann, L., Haunschild, R., and Mutz, R. "Growth Rates of Modern Science: A Latent 
Piecewise Growth Curve Approach to Model Publication Numbers from Established and 
New Literature Databases." Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 8, no. 1 
(2021): 1-15. 
5. 
Mao, Y., Zhong, M., and Han, J. "Citesum: Citation Text-Guided Scientific Extreme 
Summarization and Domain Adaptation with Limited Supervision." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2205.06207 (2022). 
 
 
32
6. 
Mishra, R., Bian, J., Fiszman, M., Weir, C. R., Jonnalagadda, S., Mostafa, J., and Del Fiol, 
G. "Text Summarization in the Biomedical Domain: A Systematic Review of Recent 
Research." J Biomed Inform 52 (2014): 457-67. 
7. 
Chandrasekaran, M. K., Feigenblat, G., Hovy, E., Ravichander, A., Shmueli-Scheuer, M., 
and de Waard, A. . "Overview and Insights from the Shared Tasks at Scholarly Document 
Processing 2020: Cl-Scisumm, Laysumm and Longsumm." In Proceedings of the First 
Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing (2020): 214-24. 
8. 
El-Kassas, W. S., Salama, C. R., Rafea, A. A., and Mohamed, H. K. "Automatic Text 
Summarization: A Comprehensive Survey." Expert Systems with Applications 165 (2021): 
113679. 
9. 
Klymenko, O., Braun, D., and Matthes, F. "Automatic Text Summarization: A State-of-
the-Art Review." International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS) 1 
(2020): 648-55. 
10. 
Roy, S. G., Pinnaparaju, N., Jain, R., Gupta, M., and Varma, V. "Summaformers@ 
Laysumm 20, Longsumm 20." arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03553 (2021). 
11. 
Sharma, G., and Sharma, D.. "Automatic Text Summarization Methods: A Comprehensive 
Review." SN Computer Science 4, no. 1 (2022): 33. 
12. 
Mallick, Ch., and Das, A. K.. "Hybridization Of fuzzy Theory And nature-Inspired 
Optimization For medical Report Summarization." In Nature-Inspired Optimization 
Methodologies in Biomedical and Healthcare, edited by Janmenjoy Nayak, Asit Kumar 
Das, Bighnaraj Naik, Saroj K. Meher and Sheryl Brahnam, 147-74. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing, 2023. 
13. 
Young, T., Hazarika, D., Poria, S., and Cambria, E. "Recent Trends in Deep Learning 
Based Natural Language Processing." IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine 13, no. 
3 (2018): 55-75. 
14. 
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. . "Learning Representations by Back-
Propagating Errors." Nature 323, no. 6088 (1986): 533-36. 
15. 
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haffner, P. . "Gradient-Based Learning Applied to 
Document Recognition." Proceedings of the IEEE 86, no. 11 (1998): 2278-324. 
16. 
Yin, W., Kann, K., Yu, M., and Schütze, H. "Comparative Study of Cnn and Rnn for 
Natural Language Processing." arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01923 (2017). 
17. 
Hochreiter, S. "The Vanishing Gradient Problem During Learning Recurrent Neural Nets 
and Problem Solutions." International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-
Based Systems 6, no. 02 (1998): 107-16. 
18. 
Goldberg, Y. "Neural Network Methods for Natural Language Processing." Synthesis 
lectures on human language technologies 10, no. 1 (2017): 1-309. 
 
 
33
19. 
Van Houdt, G., Mosquera, C., and Nápoles, G. "A Review on the Long Short-Term 
Memory Model." Artificial Intelligence Review 53, no. 8 (2020): 5929-55. 
20. 
Gers, F. A., Schmidhuber, J., and Cummins, F. "Learning to Forget: Continual Prediction 
with Lstm." Neural computation 12, no. 10 (2000): 2451-71. 
21. 
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., 
and Polosukhin, I. "Attention Is All You Need." Advances in neural information 
processing systems 30 (2017). 
22. 
Tay, Y., Bahri, D., Metzler, D., Juan, D.C., Zhao, Z., and Zheng, C. "Synthesizer: 
Rethinking Self-Attention for Transformer Models." International Conference on 
Machine Learning (2021): 10183-92. 
23. 
Chernyavskiy, A., Ilvovsky, D., and Nakov, P. "Transformers:“The End of History” for 
Natural Language Processing." Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and 
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (2021): 677-93. 
24. 
Farha, I.A., and Magdy, W. "Benchmarking Transformer-Based Language Models for 
Arabic Sentiment and Sarcasm Detection." Proceedings of the sixth Arabic natural 
language processing workshop (2021): 21-31. 
25. 
Squad2.0: The Stanford Question Answering Dataset. Available online: 
https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/ (Accessed 22 February 2023). 
26. 
Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R., and Liang, P.. "Know What You Don’t Know: Unanswerable 
Questions for Squad." Melbourne, Australia 2018. 
27. 
MacCartney, B., and Manning, C. D. "Modeling Semantic Containment and Exclusion in 
Natural Language Inference." Paper presented at the 22nd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), Manchester, UK 2008. 
23. 
Papers with code. "Sentiment Analysis on Sst-5 Fine-Grained Classification." Available 
online:  https://paperswithcode.com/sota/sentiment-analysis-on-sst-5-fine-grained 
(Accessed 16 February 2023). 
29. 
Ruder, Sebastian. "Nlp's Imagenet Moment Has Arrived."  https://ruder.io/nlp-imagenet/ 
(Accessed 07 Feb 2022). 
30. 
He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R. "Mask R-Cnn." Proceedings of the IEEE 
international conference on computer vision (2017): 2961-69. 
31. 
Zhao, H., Shi, J., Qi, X., Wang, X., and Jia, J. "Pyramid Scene Parsing Network." 
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (2017): 
2881-90. 
32. 
Guo, Yue, Qiu, Wei, Wang, Yizhong, and Cohen, Trevor. "Automated Lay Language 
Summarization of Biomedical Scientific Reviews." Proceedings of the AAAI Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence 35, no. 1 (2021): 160-68. 
 
 
34
33. 
Banerjee, S., and Lavie, A. "Meteor: An Automatic Metric for Mt Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments." Proceedings of the ACL Eorkshop on 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or 
Summarization (2005): 65-72. 
34. 
Gabriel, S., Celikyilmaz, A., Jha, R., Choi, Y., and Gao, J. "Go Figure: A Meta Evaluation 
of Factuality in Summarization." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12834 (2020). 
35. 
Maynez, J., Narayan, S., Bohnet, B., and McDonald, R. "On Faithfulness and Factuality in 
Abstractive Summarization." arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00661 (2020). 
36. 
Sun, S., Shapira, O., Dagan, I., and Nenkova, A. "How to Compare Summarizers without 
Target Length? Pitfalls, Solutions and Re-Examination of the Neural Summarization 
Literature." Proceedings of the Workshop on Methods for Optimizing and Evaluating 
Neural Language Generation (2019): 21-29. 
37. 
Gehrmann, S., Adewumi, T., Aggarwal, K., Ammanamanchi, P.S., Anuoluwapo, A., 
Bosselut, A., Chandu, K.R., Clinciu, M., Das, D., Dhole, K.D., and Du, W. "The Gem 
Benchmark: Natural Language Generation, Its Evaluation and Metrics." arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2102.01672 (2021). 
38. 
Ng, J.P., and Abrecht, V. "Better Summarization Evaluation with Word Embeddings for 
Rouge." arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.06034 (2015). 
39. 
Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K.Q., and Artzi, Y. "Bertscore: Evaluating 
Text Generation with Bert." arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 (2019). 
40. 
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.J. "Bleu: A Method for Automatic 
Evaluation of Machine Translation." Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (2002): 311-18. 
 
