Title: Token-Modification Adversarial Attacks for Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00676v3
--------------------------------------------------

Token-Modification Adversarial Attacks for
Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Tom Roth a,b, Yansong Gao b, Alsharif Abuadbba b, Surya Nepal b and Wei Liu a
a University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
E-mails: thomas.p.roth@student.uts.edu.au, wei.liu@uts.edu.au
b CSIRO’s Data61, Sydney, NSW, Australia
E-mails: garrison.gao@data61.csiro.au, sharif.abuadbba@data61.csiro.au, surya.nepal@data61.csiro.au
Abstract. Many adversarial attacks target natural language processing systems, most of which succeed through modifying the
individual tokens of a document. Despite the apparent uniqueness of each of these attacks, fundamentally they are simply a
distinct configuration of four components: a goal function, allowable transformations, a search method, and constraints. In this
survey, we systematically present the different components used throughout the literature, using an attack-independent framework
which allows for easy comparison and categorisation of components. Our work aims to serve as a comprehensive guide for
newcomers to the field and to spark targeted research into refining the individual attack components.
Keywords: text adversarial attacks, security, robustness, natural language processing
1. Introduction
Adversarial machine learning investigates the susceptibility of machine learning models to manipulations by an
adversary through an adversarial attack [1]. While the majority of adversarial machine learning research has focused
on image processing, there has been rapidly increasing interest in the natural language processing (NLP) domain,
motivated by the unique challenges and opportunities presented by textual data. In this work, we survey the recent
advancements in adversarial attacks within the NLP domain.
An adversarial example is a carefully crafted instance created by introducing a perturbation to an original exam-
ple. This perturbation is designed in such a way that the attacked victim model processes the original example as
expected but fails on the adversarial example in a manner predetermined by the attacker. To illustrate this concept,
[2] have aimed to perturb a document reading “Save me it’s over 100F” to introduce a specific token “22C” into the
output of an English-to-German translation model (see Figure 1). Their attack algorithm achieved this by replacing
“100F” with “102F”. While the model translates the original example correctly as “Rette mich, es ist über 100F”,
it now translates the adversarial example as “Rette mich, es ist über 22C”, thereby introducing the specific token,
and in turn, effectively demonstrating the potential potency of adversarial attacks.
Usually text adversarial examples must also meet a set of constraints. For example, one constraint might specify
that the semantic meaning of the original example is maintained. In this case, “Save me it’s above 100F” would be
valid, but not the proposed “Save me it’s over 102F”. A second constraint might require that the adversarial example
appear non-suspicious to a human. This rules out “Save MySeLFFFFF it’s xxoverxx 100F”, but our example “Save
me it’s over 102F” would pass.
Many methods have been developed to create text adversarial examples, with the literature predominantly focus-
ing on what we term token-modification attacks. These attacks strategically modify individual document tokens at
various granularities (e.g., words, characters) to achieve the desired adversarial effect. (Our above example illus-
trates a token-modification attack, and Table 1 gives more examples.) In these attacks, the adversary maintains the
syntactic structure of the document, unlike, say, a paraphrase or style-transfer model. Token-modification attacks
arXiv:2103.00676v3  [cs.CL]  7 Jan 2024
Save me it’s over 100°F
Original Text
English-to-German
Translator
Rette mich, es ist über 100°F
Translated Text
Save me it’s over 102°F
Adversarial Text
Rette mich, es ist über 22°C
Translated Target Text
Fig. 1. Example of a token-modification adversarial attack on a machine translation model.
treat the document as an ordered set of tokens and systematically apply transformations to individual tokens. These
transformations can include operations such as replacing a word with its synonym, deleting a character, or inserting
a phrase into the document. The attack process continues iteratively until the adversary achieves its predefined goal
or until a specific stopping criterion is met. This results in a controlled and targeted manipulation of the text that can
“fool” the victim model.
Previous surveys, such as those conducted by [3] and [4], categorise text attacks based on various criteria: token
granularity, adversary goal, model access, targeted NLP task, and so forth. While this categorisation scheme provides
a structured overview, it tends to over-emphasise the differences between attacks. In reality, many attack algorithms
may only differ in their use of a single component, leading to a situation where algorithms can shift between cat-
egories with only trivial modifications. Recognising this limitation, in this survey, we adopt a novel perspective by
categorising based on the individual attack components, rather than the attacks themselves. This approach offers a
more nuanced understanding of the underlying mechanisms and commonalities across different attacks. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first survey to adopt this component-centric approach.
Granularity
Example
Original
The movie was absolutely fantastic and I loved it!
Character-level
The movie was absolutely f4ntastic and I loved it!
Subword-level
The movie was absolutely fantastical and I loved it!
Word-level
The film was absolutely fantastic and I loved it!
Phrase-level
The cinematic experience was absolutely fantastic and I loved it!
Table 1
Another example of a token-modification adversarial attack on a sentiment classifier. The original example is categorised as positive, and the
adversarial attack attempts to change the predicted label to negative through changing its tokens, which can be at a range of granularities.
2. Attack framework
Recently, [5] introduced a comprehensive framework that defines four essential components of a textual adver-
sarial attack: (a) a goal function, which determines the success criteria of the attack; (b) a set of transformations,
outlining the specific actions that the adversary can undertake; (c) a search method, dictating the sequence in which
transformations are applied; and (d) a set of constraints, establishing the boundaries for a valid adversarial example.
This formulation casts each text attack as a constrained search problem, defined by its unique combination of these
components.
Inspired by the work of [5], who also used their framework to develop a software library for rapidly implementing
text adversarial attacks, we extend this framework and conduct a systematic survey of the various attack components.
Our focus is specifically on token-modification attacks, as they represent the predominant attack type in the current
landscape. While the framework could theoretically be extended to other attack classes, its application is not straight-
forward for methods such as those that train a model to generate adversarial examples. Therefore, we restrict our
survey to this prevalent and well-defined category of attacks. Our categorisation, along with an exploration of the
range and nuances of attack components, is summarised in Figure 2.
Fig. 2. This example, from the TextAttack [5] documentation, neatly demonstrates how token-modification attacks ([6] and [7] here) are made up
of a combination of four components. For an easy comparison, the TextAttack paper [5] also provides a table that summarises the combinations
of a number of popular attacks. We cover the individual components in detail in Sections 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Victim model architectures. The model targeted by an adversarial attack is called the victim model, which
in this context are models that perform various NLP tasks. The majority of modern NLP models follow a neural
network-based architecture, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
long short-term memory networks (LSTMs), and transformers. This class of models currently achieve the state-of-
the-art performance across many NLP tasks and are hence widely used.
While many adversarial attacks are agnostic to the model’s architecture, some techniques assume the victim pos-
sesses specific architectural features, such as embedding layers, attention modules, or gradient information. Simpler
models, such as a bag-of-words classifier, might not possess these features and the attack will not work. However,
it’s arguable that these simpler models also inherently possess a multitude of ’adversarial’ examples, due to their
basic nature and lower performance on legitimate inputs. As such, the assumption is usually made that the victim
models targeted are neural network-based.
Notation. Let Ex be the original example with label ytrue. All examples are documents, and each document is made
up of a set of tokens {t1, · · · , tn}, for which a token ti has the numeric representation eti (e.g. word embeddings). The
document Ex is transformed to a numeric representation x and then acted on by a model f. Likewise, the adversarial
example is Ex′ (also with label ytrue), its numeric representation is x′, and we denote its output f(x′) by y′. We use
l to represent a generic loss function that acts on a single example.
3. Adversary goals
The adversary goal defines what the adversary aims to achieve. Many tasks in NLP, ranging from sentiment
analysis and spam detection to more complex tasks like question answering and machine translation, can be broadly
classified as having either classification goals or sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) goals, depending on the task the
victim model addresses.
3.1. Classification
Attacks on text classifiers, which include tasks such as document categorisation and sentiment analysis, can be
broadly considered as either targeted or untargeted attacks. Targeted attacks attempt to induce the model to classify
Ex′ as a specific class ytarget different from ytrue by minimising l(f(x′), ytarget). Untargeted attacks only require that
Ex is misclassified, and their algorithms typically aim to maximise l(f(x′), ytrue). The two are equivalent for binary
classification, and for multiclass classification, converting between the two is usually straightforward.1
There also exist alternate goal functions. For example, [8] propose an availability attack goal function that aims
to maximise the model processing time.
1For example, instead of perturbing x towards a specific decision boundary, an untargeted attack perturbs x towards the nearest decision
boundary.
3.2. Sequence-to-sequence
The seq2seq tasks in NLP cover a wide spectrum, including machine translation, text summarisation, paraphrase
generation, speech recognition, speech synthesis, and image generation from captions. These tasks often involve
complex transformations and mappings between input and output sequences. Unlike classification tasks, where the
adversary goals are more standardised, seq2seq tasks do not have a uniform set of adversary goals. Consequently,
we adopt a broad classification for seq2seq attacks, categorising them as either untargeted or targeted, to capture the
range of possible adversarial objectives within this domain.
Untargeted attacks: Untargeted attacks in the seq2seq context aim to degrade the quality of the output sequence
as much as possible, as measured by a specific metric. The objective is to disrupt the model’s performance without
necessarily guiding the output towards a particular target. This form of attack is prevalent in seq2seq tasks and has
been employed in various contexts [e.g. 9–14].
Targeted attacks: Targeted attacks, on the other hand, seek to induce specific alterations in the output sequence.
The goals can be diverse, ranging from changing a particular output token to any other token [13, 15, 16], altering
every output token from its original value [17], modifying a set of specific output tokens to another set of specific
tokens [2, 13], to introducing a set of specific output tokens anywhere in the output sequence [9, 16, 17], or even
finding an incorrect input sequence that generates a specific output sequence [2, 18]. These attacks necessitate the
careful formulation of an attack-dependent loss function, which is then optimised to either maximise or minimise,
depending on the specific adversarial goal.
4. Transformations
A transformation is a function that alters one ordered set of tokens into another. These transformations can be
grouped into several broad categories, referred to here as transformation types. Common transformation types in-
clude replacing one token with another, inserting a token, deleting a token, changing token ordering, and merging
two tokens [e.g. 19]. Among these, replacing a token is the most prevalent transformation type, and thus, we give it
special emphasis in the following discussion.
When executing a token replacement, where a token t is substituted with a replacement tr, the attack algorithm
must select tr from a set of replacements, denoted by S(t), with the parameterisation indicating its dependence on
t. The method for constructing S(t) is a core component of many attack algorithms. Typically, the process involves
generating an initial set of candidates and then applying constraints to filter the set. For instance, an algorithm
might use a dictionary to generate a set of synonyms for t and then filter out candidates that do not share the same
part-of-speech (POS) tag with t.
Below, we categorise methods that have been employed to generate the initial set of replacement candidates, while
deferring the discussion of filtering constraints to Section 6. Attacks can, and do, employ a combination of these
methods, and have devised a wide range of nuanced strategies to effectively deceive the victim model.
4.1. Any replacement
The adversary may replace token t with any token of the same granularity. While this approach is straightforward
and can be highly effective in degrading the victim model’s performance, it often results in ungrammatical con-
structions and loss of semantic meaning. Effectively, these attacks are prioritising minimising the perturbation size
without attempting to maintain semantics, and consequently, this method is rarely employed, except in character-
level attacks that permit any alphanumeric character (upper or lower case) or punctuation as a valid replacement
[13, 20–22].
Transform type
Example
Sample references
Any token replacement
dog →!og
[13, 20–22]
Adjacent keyboard typos
achieve →axhieve
[23, 24]
Common misspellings
achieve →acheive
[23]
Number to word form
12 →twelve
[25]
Leetspeak conversions
leet →l33t
[26]
Vowel removal, letter shuffling, etc
letters →ltetrs
[27]
Phonetic replacements
fair →fare
[28, 29]
Homograph adjective manipulation
short lead →hot lead
[30]
Unicode-based replacements
a →à
[31]
Visual character mapping
cl →d
[32, 33]
Invisible characters
abc →abc<U+200B>
[8]
Inflectional perturbations
run →running
[34]
Thesaurus-based synonyms
happy →joyful
[35–37]
Word to emoji
love →♡
[38]
Word embedding-based
fast →swift
[24, 39, 40]
Counter-fitted synonyms
happy →content
[6, 41]
Context-aware embeddings
bank →credit union
[42]
Masked language model infill
go [MASK](here) fast →go very fast
[6, 19, 42–45]
Phrase replacements
quickly run →swiftly sprint
[38, 45, 46]
Predefined parse template filling
[Noun] runs [Adverb] →The dog runs quickly
[46]
Derived rule-based
What NOUN →Which NOUN
[47]
Table 2
Examples of different transformation types, and some examples of methods where they were used.
4.2. Human errors
The adversary may replace token t with a token that simulates an innocent human-made mistake, such as a
typographical error. These transformations leverage the natural imperfections in human writing to craft adversarial
examples that blend seamlessly into genuine text, making detection more challenging.
Several transformation types fall under this category:
• Typos: Mimicking keyboard typos by replacing letters with adjacent characters on a QWERTY keyboard [23,
24].
• Common misspellings: Substituting a word with a commonly-misspelled variant, using resources like
Wikipedia or corpora tracking document edit history [23].
• Number expansion: Expanding numbers into their word form [25].
• Leetspeak: Converting characters to their "leetspeak" equivalents [26].
• Other simple transformations: Examples include removing vowels, shuffling letters, inserting symbols, joining
or truncating words, and using phonetic or visually-similar words [27].
• Phonetic similarity: Choosing replacements that are phonetically similar. This can be done with algorithms like
the SOUNDEX algorithm [48] or using the Pinyin equivalents for Chinese characters [28, 29].
• Homograph adjectives: Homographs are words with the same spelling as another but with a different meaning.
[30] constructed an attack where they inserted or replaced the adjectives in front of homographs, with the intent
to mimic word sense ambiguity errors.
Table 2 provides examples and references for each of these transformation types.
4.3. Visually similar
The adversary may replace token t with a visually similar token, intending that a human reader overlooks the
discrepancy. These transformations can be applied at the character level, including many-to-one or one-to-many
character replacements (e.g., replacing cl with d). The effectiveness of these attacks may vary depending on the font
used and the specific replacements chosen.
Several methods have been proposed to achieve visually similar transformations:
• Manual mapping: Creating a mapping between each token in the vocabulary and a manually chosen replace-
ment [24, 31]. For instance, characters may be replaced with versions that include diacritics (e.g., c to ˇc) [31].
Unicode descriptions of characters can also be used to find replacements of the same character and case. In
languages like Chinese, characters may be replaced with those sharing partial pictographs [29].
• Visual embeddings: Representing each character as a grid of pixels and numerically encoding them, either with
raw pixel vectors [31] or dense representations from the intermediate layers of a CNN [e.g. 32, 33]. The set of
replacements S(t) can be constructed by selecting the closest points to the character in the latent space.
• Imperceptible characters: Designing attacks that are truly imperceptible to the human eye by using invisible
characters, homoglyphs, reordering characters, or deletion characters [8].
These visually similar transformations present a unique challenge in adversarial attacks, as they exploit the human
tendency to overlook subtle visual discrepancies. The diversity of methods employed reflects the complexity of
crafting attacks that are both effective against machine learning models and inconspicuous to human readers.
4.4. Synonyms
Adversarial attacks may replace a token t with a synonym that maintains the same meaning. This can be achieved
through various methods, including using predefined synonym lists or pre-trained token embedding spaces. Both
approaches aim to maintain the semantic content of the original text, while keeping perturbations small and local.
4.4.1. Predefined list
The adversary replaces t with a replacement tr taken from a predefined list of tokens that share the same meaning.
Various lists can be used:
• Thesaurus, lexical database, or knowledge database, such as WordNet [35, 36], HowNet [37, 49], or DrugBank
[50] for biomedical data [25].
• Inflectional perturbations of words with the same base meaning [34]. Inflectional perturbations modify a word’s
form while retaining its core meaning, such as changing run to running.
• Emoji equivalents for words [38].
This method often struggles to distinguish the sense in which a word is used, leading to replacements that may read
strangely or not fit well in context. Some attacks add constraints to mitigate this issue, but the problem often persists
[e.g. 37].
4.4.2. Embedding space
The adversary replaces token t with a token tr corresponding to a nearby point in a token embedding space. This
approach assumes that tokens with similar meanings cluster together in embedding space, forming a natural set of
synonyms. Different embedding spaces can be used:
• Using word embeddings like GloVe [24, 39, 40], though this may include related words like antonyms or words
with similar concepts but different meanings. Example of antonyms (e.g. east and west, or fast and slow) or
words with similar concepts but different meanings (e.g. English, American, and Australian).
• Using counter-fitted embeddings [41] as a post-processing step for word embeddings. This technique pushes
together similar words while also pushing apart related words, resulting in an embedding space where proximity
indicates synonymy. It enhances the precision of synonym selection in adversarial attacks [6, 7, 42, 51].
• Considering contextual embeddings such as BERT [52] to provide context-aware token representations. Tradi-
tional token embeddings represent a token with a single point, leading to replacements that may not match the
token’s sense in a specific context. Contextual embeddings like BERT mitigate this issue by considering the
surrounding text, enabling more accurate and contextually relevant replacements [9].
Different methods have been used to define “closeness” in embedding space, to identify the set of replacements.
Techniques have included:
• K-nearest neighbours (KNN): This approach identifies the k closest tokens to the original in the embedding
space, based on distance metrics such as Euclidean distance or cosine similarity [e.g. 24, 40].
• Distance thresholding: Tokens within a specific distance δ to the original token are considered. The distance
can be measured using various metrics, providing flexibility in defining semantic closeness [e.g. 43].
• Hybrid approach: Methods can combine the KNN and distance thresholding methods, attempting to ensure
that the chosen substitutes are both close and relevant [e.g. 6, 7, 9].
• Synonym clustering: Creating clusters of synonyms in the embedding space allows for the replacement of a
“central” word with any word in the cluster [51].
• Continuous algorithms: In many image-based adversarial attacks, the algorithm iteratively perturbs the input
image in a continuous space to cross the decision boundary of the classifier, effectively fooling the model. In
the text domain, this concept can be adapted to select the synonyms that move the adversarial example closer
to the victim model’s decision boundary in the embedding space. For example, [53] adapted the DeepFool
algorithm [54] for this purpose. Generally, without modification these methods struggle to maintain semantic
coherence [55], as Figure 3 illustrates. [56] attempt to circumvent this by mapping the text to continuous space
and back with tree-based autoencoders and decoders.
Fig. 3. Continuous perturbations in a numerical space work for image adversarial attacks, where the human eye cannot pick up subtle colour
changes, but in the text domain, will be very conspicuous. In other words: while x∗fools the model, its text form Ex′ may not be semantically
valid. The red arrow shows the problematic step.
4.5. Language model predictions
Language models (LMs) can be used by adversaries to find replacements for tokens, often through masked lan-
guage modeling. The typical process involves replacing the target token with a mask, obtaining predictions from the
LM, and using the top predictions as the set of replacements. Variations on this approach are common [6, 19, 42–
45]. For example, consider the sentence “The technology accelerates rapidly”. The token accelerates is masked
and then replaced with a top LM prediction, such as evolves, resulting in “The technology evolves rapidly”. The
advantages of this approach class include higher-quality replacements, as context is considered, and a tendency to
avoid rare tokens, which appear suspicious [57]. Drawbacks include the need for complex and memory-intensive
LMs, slower replacement generation, and the inability to cache synonyms between documents (as they depend on
document context). Some approaches mitigate these by combining both LMs and word embeddings [6, 43].
Related techniques have included occlusion and language models (OLM) [58]; a method from the interpretability
literature that identifies relevant words to replace [59], or Dropout Substitution [60]; a technique that applies dropout
to internal embeddings of target words to enhance candidate quality [26].
4.6. Phrase manipulations
Attacks have been developed that identify and manipulate whole phrases, rather than tokens. The motivation is
to create more linguistically diverse and rich adversarial examples than is possible through a series of individual
token-level transforms. We show some examples in Table 3.
To add a phrase into the sentence, a number of approaches can be taken. Another option is to make use of a parse
template, which in this context can be thought of as a predefined format or structure for a sentence. For example,
say the adversary wishes to add an adverb phrase to a sentence. The adversary would first identify the examples
that it would makes make to add an adverb phrase too, perhaps by comparing the example to the template. Then the
adversary would identify an adverb phrase that makes sense in the sentence context, perhaps by using a language
model. This is the method used by [46].
For a controllable phrase replacement process, [45] propose using two stages to the attack process: identifying
phrases in the original sentence suitable to attack, and proposing adversarial replacements that still keep the textual
quality.
To identify the phrase chunks from the original sentence, one approach is to use a syntactic parser, such as the
Stanford Parser [61]. Parsers like this one identify phrases by first tokenising the text and then tagging each token
with its part-of-speech (e.g. noun, verb), dependent on its role in the sentence. It then applies a parsing algorithm
to construct a hierarchical syntactic tree that represents the grammatical structure of the sentence. From this tree,
phrases can be identified. To identify which phrase to attack, any of the methods in 5 can be used.
To find a suitable replacement phrase, a number of methods can be used. A simple approach is to replace individual
words with their dictionary definitions, maintaining the same part-of-speech [38]. While this does add a phrase in,
it is easy to introduce a phrase that does not make sense in the overall sentence context. A second approach is to use
the mask-infill models described in Section 4.5, where the phrase is masked and then infilled by a language model.
The language model chooses the replacement to best suit the context that it is used in the original sentence [45].
4.7. Set of rules
One broad approach is to create a set of rules that, when applied, successfully create adversarial examples. These
rules are derived from patterns found among successful adversarial examples. [62] is one example, selecting rules
that maximise semantic similarity and have broad applicability. Extending this idea, [47] crafted rules by identifying
adversarial example patterns effective against many different types of models.
Manipulation and Method
Example
Add a phrase using parse template and language
model
Original: “Birds fly.”
Template: “Birds fly [ADVP].”
Adversarial: “Birds fly quickly and quietly.”
Replace a phrase with its dictionary definition
Original: “White beaches surrounded by azure seas. ”
Definition: “azure: bright blue in color like a cloudless sky”
Adversarial: “White beaches surrounded by bright blue in color like a cloudless
sky seas”
Replace a phrase using a mask-infill model
Original: “The cat sat on the mat.”
Masked infill: “The cat [MASK] the mat.”
Adversarial: “The cat lay down on the mat.”
Table 3
Examples of some phrase-level manipulation techniques.
4.8. Homographs
[30] have devised an attack that makes use of homographs in the document. Homographs are words that are spelled
the same, but have different meanings in different contexts, and also might be pronounced differently. This particular
attack targets the words in front of the homograph to subtly change the context of the sentence. For example, the
attack might change “They were discussing a strike in the meeting.” to “They were discussing a lightning strike in
the meeting.” Originally, the sentence might suggest a discussion about a labour protest, but the addition of lightning
changes the context to a weather-related incident. As not every sentence contains targetable homographs in this way,
the attack will carefully select examples they can attack, and will leave the rest.
5. Search methods
The search method, also referred to as the optimisation method, aims to identify an effective sequence of trans-
formations that satisfies the given constraints of the adversarial problem. The search process terminates either upon
achieving the adversarial goal, after a specified number of queries, or when further exploration is restricted by the
constraints.
Search methods typically rank each transformation with a scoring function, also known as an objective or fitness
function, that evaluates the quality of the solution in the search space. In the context of adversarial attacks, the
scoring function quantifies or estimates the effect of the transformation on the adversarial loss function.
5.1. Preliminaries
5.1.1. Gradient approximations
The simplest scoring function calculates the increase in loss directly due to the transformation. While exact, this
method is computationally expensive because it requires a forward and backward pass through the model for each
candidate transformation, which becomes prohibitive for large models.
A widely-used alternative is to use a gradient-based scoring function [e.g. 63, 64], which employs the gradient of
the loss with respect to the input, denoted as ∂l/∂x. This gradient serves as a first-order approximation of how the
loss l changes when elements of x are altered.2 The transformations are then ranked based on their dot product with
the gradient, ∂l/∂x · (g(x) −x), where g(x) −x represents the relative change in the input due to the transformation
g.
This gradient-based approach is faster, requiring only a single backward pass, but it assumes the adversary has
access to the model parameters (white-box attack). It also rests on two assumptions: that the loss function l is nearly
linear around x, and that other features remain constant when evaluating a single feature’s importance [65]. While
these assumptions may not always hold, the method is generally effective in finding successful adversarial examples.
2Some attacks [e.g. 15] instead use the Jacobian matrix ∂f(x)/∂x and directly change model predictions.
As a compromise, [2] use a hybrid approach which has advantages of both approaches: the speed of the gradient
approximation, and the accuracy of direct-checking. They first use the gradient approximation to create a shortlist
of the top k transformations across all tokens in Ex. They then find the best transformation by directly checking the
loss change of each.
5.1.2. Proxy models
In black-box adversarial attacks, where direct access to the target model’s architecture or parameters is unavail-
able, attacks may use proxy models, also known as substitute or replacement models, to aid their attack. The proxy
model is intended to mimic the characteristics of the target model, including its gradients, predictions, and con-
fidence values. The attacker usually trains a proxy model on the same dataset as the victim model, or at least, a
dataset from a similar domain. The attack can then use the proxy model’s gradients or outputs to identify promising
replacements for a token, or select where to attack next. This approach has been used in various works, such as
[66–68].
5.2. Algorithms
A variety of optimisation algorithms have been proposed in the literature, which we categorise and present below.
5.2.1. Simple heuristics
The most straightforward is to apply transforms according to a simple heuristic. This is simple to understand but
may not find as good a solution as a more advanced algorithm. Some heuristics include
Batch application: This method applies a transformation to all eligible tokens in the example Ex at once. Em-
ployed by [34] and [13], it replaces each applicable word w ∈Ex. Variants include multiple runs with each selecting
a different transformation [23] or replacing each token with a probability p [31].
Sequential application: Tokens are transformed in the order they appear in the document. The algorithm iterates
through document tokens from start to finish and applying the best transformation for each token until the attack
succeeds, cycling if necessary. [43] use this method but select transformations based on predefined probabilities,
rather than selecting always the best one.
Random application: Tokens are randomly selected and transformed. Used as a baseline by [69] and [9], this
method replaces tokens either with the best or a random replacement.
5.2.2. Importance-based methods
This approach ranks tokens based on their influence on the loss function, transforming the most impactful tokens
first to minimise the perturbation size. [69] term this an importance ranking. Saliency maps can be an effective way
to visualise these importance rankings, as shown in Figure 4.
There are various ways to construct an importance ranking.
• Gradient-based ranking: The gradient magnitude ∥∂l/∂eti∥2 serves as a heuristic for token importance. While
this method doesn’t capture the direction of the gradient, it remains a widely-used heuristic [24, 40, 70].
• Perturbation-based ranking: Tokens are systematically perturbed to measure their impact on the loss. Methods
include token removal [7, 24, 44] and replacement with neutral tokens like the out-of-vocab, unknown or mask
token, or zero vectors [20, 35, 42]. [71] extend this to phrase-level importance.
• Temporal metrics: [21] propose metrics based on the document’s prefix and suffix relative to each token, termed
the temporal head score and temporal tail score, and that quantify the token’s influence on the model’s output.
• Attention-based ranking: Attention scores from the victim model’s layers are used to rank token importance
[9, 72, 73]. This is applicable only to models with attention mechanisms.
[69] found similar effectiveness across these methods,3 with gradient-based approaches being more computa-
tionally efficient.4 Subsequent works have proposed additional efficiency improvements, such as using Locality
Sensitive Hashing [72, 74] or predictive networks [75] to reduce the computational burden.
3They did not test the attention method.
4Systematic perturbation methods need many forward passes through the model, but gradient methods only need a single forwards and back-
ward pass.
Fig. 4. A saliency map visualising token importance for a sentiment analysis model. The map ranks the six most impactful words based on their
gradient magnitude, shown in shades from dark to light orange. Such visualisations can aid in identifying tokens that, when transformed, are
likely to influence model predictions. Obtained from AllenNLP Interpret [76].
5.2.3. Beam search and greedy search
Beam search is a widely-used optimisation technique, often employed in language model decoding, that maintains
multiple promising sequences (or “beams”) simultaneously. The number of sequences is determined by the beam
width parameter. A larger beam width generally leads to better solutions but increases computational cost. When the
beam width is set to one, the method simplifies to greedy search, which selects the best transformation at each step
without considering future implications.
In the context of adversarial attacks, beam search has been employed in works like [13, 20] and has been reported
to achieve high success rates, particularly for shorter documents, while being relatively query-efficient [69]. Variants
of beam search, such as those with added randomness, have also been explored [67]. On the other hand, greedy
search, used in [2, 10], is computationally less demanding but can get stuck in local minima and may not find the
global optimum. [77] introduce a method called local search, which offers a middle ground, and provide theoretical
performance bounds for it.
5.2.4. Population-based algorithms
Population-based algorithms have been widely used for generating adversarial examples. These algorithms typi-
cally evolve a set of candidate solutions over time, guided by a fitness function that evaluates their quality.
Genetic algorithms: Among the most prevalent are genetic algorithms, which have been adapted for text-based
adversarial attacks by [6, 51, 78]. The process begins by generating an initial population of S candidates by applying
S different transformations to the original example. In each iteration, new candidates are produced through a series of
steps: application of transforms, fitness score calculation based on the loss, parent selection, crossover, and mutation.
Different works employ various crossover functions; for instance, [6] randomly select words from parent documents,
while [51] splice parent documents at a specific point.
Differential evolution: As an alternative to genetic algorithms, differential evolution operates on continuous rep-
resentations and has been used by [8].
Particle swarm optimisation (PSO): PSO has also been applied in this context. The algorithm initialises a swarm
of particles, each with a position and velocity. Particles update their positions based on the best-known positions,
both locally and globally. They then update their positions based on these best-known positions, with some random-
ness and a bias towards either the local or global best, depending on the variant. [37] used PSO, while [79] explored
a variant known as quantum-behaved particle swarm optimisation (QPSO). [69] noted that PSO is query-inefficient
despite its effectiveness in finding good solutions.
5.2.5. Other
Various other search methods have been used. These have included
• Learning-based approaches: These methods integrate machine learning algorithms directly into the optimisa-
tion process. For instance, [26] use neural networks to identify which tokens in the text are most susceptible to
perturbation. Similarly, [80] use a reinforcement learning algorithm to choose synonym swaps.
• Minimising perturbation size: Some approaches focus on generating adversarial examples with small perturba-
tions to the original text. [81] introduce a rollback operation that iteratively removes unnecessary edits, thereby
reducing the perturbation size. In a similar vein, [82] use a Bayesian optimisation technique that is further
refined using importance scores and a post-processing step that minimises the perturbation size.
6. Constraints
As mentioned above, adversarial attacks all operate under a set of constraints. A constraint in this context refers
to a rule or set of rules that determine what is an acceptable adversarial example. These constraints generally ensure
that the perturbed input, while still being effective in misleading the classifier, remains as close as possible to the
original input in terms of semantics, structure, and readability. For instance, constraints may dictate that the modified
text should not deviate significantly in meaning from the original example (semantic drift), must retain readability
for human observers, should adhere to grammatical norms, and maintain a certain level of similarity between the
original and adversarial examples. These constraints preserve the linguistic integrity of the adversarial samples and
ensure that the attacks are realistic and plausible within the bounds of the assumed threat model.
As constraints will control the quality and characteristics of the generated adversarial examples, setting weaker
linguistic constraints will increase the success rate of attacks, as the adversary has more freedom to alter the input
text. However, the resultant adversarial examples will have lower text quality, which in this context, means they may
unnatural or easily identifiable as adversarial interventions. Conversely, stronger constraints will produce higher
quality adversarial examples that more closely resemble legitimate inputs. Yet, these constraints can also make it
more challenging to find successful perturbations, and will lower the attack’s success rate. This trade-off is why
attack success rate cannot be used to compare attack algorithms with different constraints, as the attack with weaker
constraints will perform better [69].
In the following subsections, we categorise and present the different constraints that have been used in the litera-
ture. Table 4 provides a top-level overview.
6.1. Readability
These constraints are intended to enforce that the adversarial example be as close to natural text as possible.
Grammar.
A simple constraint in this area is that the adversarial example be grammatical. The intention is that
adversarial examples that are more grammatical will naturally be of higher quality. This constraint can be checked
using grammar-checking software, such as LanguageTool [87], as done by [45]). However, this constraint is not
applicable to all attacks or threat models. It wouldn’t make sense when creating adversarial examples on data from
domains which are rarely grammatical, such as tweets or forum posts. For example, the attack by [34] is aimed
to deliberately mimic non-native English speakers, which makes grammar-checking less relevant in their context.
Here, a grammatically correct sentence, “The cat sat on the mat” could be transformed to “Cat sat on mat”, which
in this context is a legitimate adversarial example.
Fluency.
Attacks which value fluency wish to produce smooth, naturally flowing text that is easily comprehensible
and linguistically sound. These attacks preference fluent sentences, like “The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy
dog”, over non-fluent ones, such as “Quick brown fox jump over lazy dog”.
The most common approach to measure fluency is to score the text by computing its likelihood according to a
pre-trained language model, with the intention that more fluent text will score higher than less fluent text. Scoring
methods range from the simple measures of perplexity and entropy, to developed metrics like BARTScore [88] or
BERTScore [89]. These methods, akin to using one generative model to evaluate another [90] are widely used, often
as a heuristic to select token replacements [6, 84, 85].
An alternate approach is to assess the ‘linguistic acceptability’ of the text [5]. Linguistic acceptability is the task
of determining if a sentence is acceptable or not, as judged by native speakers [91]. This is evaluated using a model
that has been trained on a linguistic acceptability dataset, such as the Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability [91], and
that then assesses text as either acceptable or unacceptable. Fluent text is more likely to be marked as acceptable
because of its preservation of natural grammatical structures. As an example from this dataset, “The dog barked its
way out of the room.” would be acceptable, but “The dog barked out of the room.” would be unacceptable.
Description
Sample references
Apply spellchecker
[23]
Limit character transformations to words of specific length
[23]
Keep first and last letters of each word
[23]
Require pass through grammar checker
[45]
Check with linguistic acceptability model
[5]
Fluency via language model perplexity
[83]
Max of one transformation per token
[17, 20]
Max of k transformations per token
[51]
No replacing stop words
[7, 40]
Only replace specific word types (e.g. noun)
[34, 37]
Disallow stop words as replacements
[42]
Same part-of-speech tag for replacements
[7, 37, 40]
Filter replacements by fluency constraint
[6, 83–85]
Attack only sentences with homographs
[30]
Score replacements with class-conditioned language model
[45]
Min cosine similarity between document encodings
[7, 29, 44, 86]
Forbid replacement of sentiment or negation words
[43]
Min similarity on round-trip translation
[18]
Max edit distance
[13, 21, 24]
Include padding and unknown tokens in synonym set
[40]
Use lemmatisation and delemmatisation for candidate synonyms
[37]
Allow character transformations only for out-of-vocab words
[20]
Prioritize word replacements based on class and frequency
[35, 70]
Table 4
Summary of the different constraints used in adversarial attacks.
Character replacement constraints.
Certain constraints are specifically tailored for character-level attacks — the
attacks that add, remove or replace individual characters to achieve success. These attacks often introduce spelling
mistakes and typos. Hence, a constraint is to require that the adversarial example contain no spelling errors, accord-
ing to a spellchecker. To improve readability, [23] have enforced additional constraints on what character transfor-
mations are acceptable. They disallow character replacements for words less than a certain length, and require that
the first and last letters of each word are preserved. Examples of successful modifications under all these criteria
might be changing bead to bed, or house to horse.
6.2. Semantic
Semantic constraints aim to ensure that the adversarial example preserves the original document’s intent and
meaning. These constraints are essential because in text, a single token change can significantly change the docu-
ment’s meaning. Consider the sentence: "The doctor recommended regular exercise to improve health." Here, the
word “exercise” is a key component of the sentence. If this word is changed to “medication” the sentence becomes
“The doctor recommended regular medication to improve health”, and the entire meaning of the sentence has shifted
dramatically.
We can divide semantic constraints into a number of categories:
Token selection rules.
Constraints in this category govern how tokens in the original document can be transformed.
One type of constraint specifies which tokens can be acted upon, aiming to avoid changing tokens that are vital
for document structure. For instance, some methods forbid the replacement of stop words [7, 40], or using stop
words as a replacement [42]. Stop words are commonly used words in a language that contribute to the grammatical
structure but carry little semantic weight, such as “the”, “is”, “at”, and so on. For example, modifying stop words
in a sentence like “She is reading a book” to “She of reading a book” significantly degrades the sentence’s quality
and changes its interpretation. A version of this constraint only specifically allows the replacement of specific word
types, such as nouns, verbs, adverbs, or adjectives[34, 37].
Another common constraint is to allow only one transformation per token [17, 20], or more generally, up to k
transformations per token [51]. This helps to minimise potential semantic drift caused by multiple token changes.
For example, in the sentence “The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog”, say the attacker replaces the second
token, quick, with a synonym four times. The token changes from quick to swift to immediate to instantaneous, and
the adversarial example “The instantaneous brown fox jumps over the lazy dog” has lost the meaning of the original.
Some token selection rules are specific to a particular NLP task. One example is for sentiment analysis attacks,
where constraints may forbid the replacement of sentiment-expressing to avoid changing the ground-truth label
of the sentence. For example, if the original sentence is ‘‘I am extremely happy with the service”, the constraints
would prevent changing the sentiment-expressing word “happy”. Modifying negation words like “not” could also
be forbidden. These constraints are seen in [43].
Token replacement rules.
Constraints in this category aim to ensure that, when replacing one token with another,
the replacement is similar to the original in the context of the document.
One approach requires that replacements share the same part-of-speech tag as the original token, as seen in
approaches by [7, 37, 40]. This helps to eliminate potential synonyms that use an incorrect word sense. Consider
the sentence “She was absolutely ecstatic about her results.” The constraint would allow the adversary to change
ecstatic (adjective) to elated (adjective), forming “She was absolutely elated about her results.”, but would prohibit
changing ecstatic (adjective) to ecstasy (noun), and then forming “She was absolutely ecstasy about her results.”
Another approach by [45] attempts to maintain label preservation of the original class by evaluating replacements
using a class-conditioned language model [92]. This is a pre-trained language model that is then fine-tuned on only
examples of a particular class of the dataset, such as positive examples for a sentiment analysis dataset. If, after a
token replacement, a text has a high likelihood according to one of these models trained on the class of the original
example, the reasoning is that it must belong to a similar distribution as the training data — and hence, this text
should be truly labelled as of original class.
Document embeddings.
Document embeddings represent entire documents as fixed-size, dense numerical vectors.
They allow the rich and complex information contained in a document into a format that is easily interpretable by
machine learning models. An earlier way to create them was to aggregating individual word embeddings, such as
those from GloVe [39]. A more modern method would be to use a transformer, (e.g. T5 [93]) to process the document
and then pool the output embeddings. Adversarial attacks have tended to use the Universal Sentence Encoder [86]
(USE), a model designed to produce sentence embeddings; examples include [29] or [7]. A similar model used for
other NLP tasks is the Sentence-BERT model [94], which modifies the BERT architecture to produce embeddings
more suitable to semantic similarity tasks.
Document embeddings operate on the principle that documents with similar meanings should have closely re-
lated embeddings. To evaluate the similarity between the original document and its adversarial counterpart, their
embeddings can be compared. This comparison is often done using cosine similarity. If the similarity score is too
low (below a certain threshold), it indicates a significant deviation in meaning, and as a result, the proposed trans-
formation of the text is either avoided [7] or given a lower priority [44].
Distance limits.
In many adversarial attacks on images (e.g. [95]) it is common to put a constraint on the maximum
distance between the original and and adversarial example, typically measured with a Lp norm. This constraint is
intended to ensure that the adversarial changes are imperceptible to the human eye, and the image appears unaltered.
This concept of limiting the adversarial distance has been similarly applied in text-based adversarial attacks. As
imperceptible changes are not possible, perhaps the equivalent goal here is to keep the adversarial text semantically
and structurally close to the original, so that the changes are not so obvious to humans.
A common distance constraint is a maximum edit distance limit. Edit distance measures the number of transfor-
mations needed to change one text to another. One variant is the Hamming distance, which measures the minimum
number of token replacements needed to convert between the original and adversarial example. Another is the Lev-
enshtein distance, which also allows inserting and deleting tokens, on top of replacement. For instance, consider
again the sentence “The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.” If we change quick to swift and lazy to slow
the Hamming distance would be two, for the two token replacements. On the other hand, if we change quick to
swift, remove lazy and insert sleepy before dog, the Levenshtein distance would be three, for one replacement, one
deletion, and one insertion. Edit distance is commonly used [e.g. 13, 21, 24]
Other distance metrics could include n-gram based metrics: those that track the number of matching n-grams
between the original and adversarial examples. One example of this type of metric is BLEU [96], commonly used
in machine translation. Another proposed option is Word Mover Distance [3], which broadly speaking, tracks the
minimum distance that words from one text need to ‘travel’ in embedding space to match exactly with the words in
another document. However, these metrics have not been widely adopted.
6.3. Performance
Some constraints are intended to improve the attack’s success rate, rather than to necessarily increase the text
quality. Below are some examples of these.
Some approaches attempt to exploit the special tokens of the tokeniser to fool the victim model. For example, [40]
include padding and unknown tokens in the synonym set of words to increase the variety of potential replacements.
This allows adversarial examples like “The [PAD] brown fox jumps over the lazy dog”. Another approach along
these lines is to allow character-level transformations only if the resulting word is not in the model’s vocabulary,
as done by [20]. This is done so that victim models that tokenise on the word level will then represent the changed
word with an out-of-vocabulary token, rather than with a different, valid word token. This can lead to more effective
adversarial examples, as the model cannot leverage its understanding of the altered word. For example, if the sen-
tence was “I cannot sit down on this chair.”, the adversary could change chair to chbir, but not to chain. Then, chbir
would be replaced at tokenisation with the out-of-vocabulary token.
To improve the search space of the attack, [37] uses lemmatisation when searching for synonyms, and delem-
matisation afterwards to prevent grammatical mistakes. Lemmatisation reduces words to their base or root form
(lemma), while delemmatisation reverts lemmas back to their original inflected forms. For example, consider the
sentence “The cats are sleeping on the mat.” With lemmatisation, cats would be reduced to its base form cat and
similarly, sleeping to sleep. Then synonyms are searched for at the lemma level, which allows for a broader set of
synonyms. After synonyms are found, like feline for cat and rest for sleep, delemmatisation is applied to fit these
synonyms back into the original sentence context. The final sentence would then be “The felines are resting on the
mat.”
To increase attack strength, some attacks constrain replacements to those commonly seen in examples of other
classes. For example, [35] replace named entities with the most frequent same-type named entities from a different
class. Named entities are specific, identifiable elements in text, such as names of people or places, that are categorised
as distinct types through the task of named entity recognition. In this approach, named entities in a text are replaced
with other named entities of the same type but often seen with examples of a different class to the original in the
training dataset. For example, consider the sentence, “I bought a smartphone from Apple.” Here, Apple is a named
entity, categorised as an organisation. With this strategy, Apple might be replaced with another organisation, such as
Samsung, if Samsung is identified as a frequent entity for a different class. Similarly, [70] categorise each example
(e.g., by movie genre for a dataset of movie reviews) and then prioritise word replacements that are frequently used
both within that category and in examples from different classes.
7. Conclusion
In this survey, we have provided an overview of the key components that make up token-modification adversarial
attacks: goal functions, transformations, search methods, and constraints.
We have first covered goal functions, which define what the adversary would like to achieve, and allow for a
quantifiable measure of progress towards that goal. We have classified these as either classification or seq2seq goal
functions, and again as either targeted or untargeted attacks, depending on the NLP task and the specifics of the
attack goal. The majority of adversarial attacks have been for text classification, and it would be interesting to see
more attacks targeting the wide range of seq2seq tasks, such as dialogue systems, paraphrasing, text summarisation
and code generation.
We have then covered the wide range of proposed transformations: functions that alter one set of ordered tokens
into another, where the token can be at a range of different granularities. Typical transformations insert, replace or
delete tokens, with most attacks replacing and fewer inserting or deleting them. The type of transformation depends
on the intent of the adversary. If they simply wish to induce a label flip for a classifier, they can change tokens as
they like. If they wish to mimic human errors, they might introduce typos or phonetically similar words to the text.
If they wish to create close-to-imperceptible adversarial examples, they may replace with visually similar tokens or
use invisible characters. If they wish to preserve the fluency of the text, they might use a language model to mask a
word, and then replace it — and so on.
After, we covered search methods. Starting from an original example, the search method repeatedly applies trans-
formations until the adversarial example is found, or the search fails. They judge and choose transformations based
on scoring functions, which numerically rank the available options. Search methods may be allow access to the
gradients of the victim model (white-box) or they may forbid access (black-box). Should the victim model not be
available, search methods may use a substitute model instead. A variety of search methods have been proposed.
Simple methods and heuristics, such as greedy search, run quickly but give worse results. More complex methods,
such as particle swarm optimisation, give better results but are slower to run. Generally, there is a correlation be-
tween the number of times the victim model is queried, and the success of the search method; [69] has provided an
initial benchmark of the performance and query effectiveness of search methods. More efficient search methods are
continuing to be identified [e.g. 75, 77, 82].
We have also surveyed the constraints of the field. Constraints determine what makes successful or unsuccessful
adversarial examples. They are used to enforce minimum standards on readability, fluency, grammatically and se-
mantic similarity, or also to set a maximum allowed perturbation distance. Constraints can also increase the attack
strength, such as to exclude transformations less likely to degrade the performance of the victim model. Constraints
are often quantified using automated metrics, like the count of grammatical errors or language model entropy for
assessing fluency. These constraints are generally employed at each stage of the optimisation algorithm to prevent
the search process from deviating.
Finally, we will now propose some future directions that are motivated by the limitations of the field.
Standardise attack scenarios.
Currently the field is limited by a lack of standardised attack scenarios. The first
problem is that each study establishes its own threat model, transformations, and constraints, which does not eas-
ily allow for cross-study comparisons. The second problem is that most papers’ threat models do not align with
real-world attack scenarios, which limits their practical relevance [97]. Real-world scenarios might include, among
others: circumventing email spam filters; manipulating user reviews to deceive sentiment analysis models; caus-
ing errors in translation models; altering news articles to evade fact-checking models; challenging hate-speech,
offensive-language, or other automated content moderation systems; altering documents to evade piracy detection;
or prompting chatbots to provide incorrect advice.
Extend to multimodal scenarios.
This has been a survey of text attacks, but it is worth remembering that many
real-world systems are multimodal, integrating text, images, videos, audio, graphs, spatial data, structured data,
time-series data, and more. For instance, webpages and emails often contain a mix of text, hyperlinks, images,
video, and audio. Navigation systems meld text with images and geospatial data. A Facebook account may include
a profile bio, a feed of text, video, and image posts, a network of friends, and geographical details (e.g., country
of origin). Adapting text adversarial attack techniques to multimodal systems is a promising direction for future
research.
More multiple-token attacks.
Most attacks insert, delete or replace single tokens at each step, which significantly
limits the range of possible adversarial examples. By contrast, in Section 4.6 we discussed phrase-level attacks, such
as the attacks by [81] and [45] that alter multiple tokens per optimisation step. These attacks are capable of a much
larger range of adversarial examples, which is appealing, but to date they are much less explored. A promising option
could be to incorporate generative seq2seq models, such as paraphrase models, to identify high-quality phrase and
sentence-level transforms. Such an attack could modify phrases or idioms, which single-token attacks could not do.
Consider the idiom “Bite the bullet”, which refers to enduring a painful or unpleasant situation. Such an attack might
replace it with a similar idiom, such as “Grin and bear it” or “Tough it out”, which is not easily achievable with
single-token modification algorithms.
Incorporate human judgements.
Currently attacks are often judged and ranked by automated metrics, such as
fluency or semantic similarity scores. These metrics are flawed, however, and often correlate poorly with human
judgement [90, 98], leading to scenarios where many so-called ‘adversarial’ examples are non-fluent, ungrammat-
ical, do not preserve semantics, change the ground-truth label, etc. [99]. The core problem is that it is very hard
to capture all the required ‘adversarial’ properties with a collection of metrics, as the ultimate judge of adversarial
attacks is a human, and the metrics deviate from human judgement. Directly incorporating human feedback would
improve the quality of adversarial examples, but human judgements are typically difficult and expensive to obtain.
Two alternatives come to mind. The first is to allow the end user to construct the adversarial example, perhaps
with guidance from a user-friendly interface and assistance from a model, as demonstrated in [100]. The second is
to use techniques like Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). Here, an adversary would develop
a ’reward’ model that assigns scalar rewards to assess the quality of adversarial examples. The reward model would
be trained using human preferences, and would be applied as a constraint in the optimisation process. The use of
RLHF was key to the success of ChatGPT and other similar systems. It is particularly useful for scenarios where
defining an explicit reward function is difficult, such as for this one.
Statements and declarations
Authorship statement. All authors contributed to the conception and design of the paper. The first author, Tom
Roth, performed the literature search and wrote the manuscript. All authors then critically revised the work, com-
mented on previous versions, and read and approved the final manuscript.
Declarations. This research was supported by scholarships from Data61 and from the Australian Government Re-
search Training Program (RTP). The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest and that they have no other
sources of funding.
Data availability statement. Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed
during the current study.
References
[1] A. Kurakin, I.J. Goodfellow and S. Bengio, Adversarial Machine Learning at Scale, in: 5th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings, OpenReview.net, 2017. https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=BJm4T4Kgx.
[2] E. Wallace, M. Stern and D. Song, Imitation Attacks and Defenses for Black-box Machine Translation Systems, in: Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online,
2020, pp. 5531–5546. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.446. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.446.
[3] W.E. Zhang, Q.Z. Sheng, A. Alhazmi and C. Li, Adversarial Attacks on Deep-learning Models in Natural Language Processing, ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 11(3) (2020), 1–41. doi:10.1145/3374217.
[4] B. Alshemali and J. Kalita, Improving the Reliability of Deep Neural Networks in NLP: A Review, Knowledge-Based Systems 191 (2020),
105210. doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2019.105210.
[5] J. Morris, E. Lifland, J.Y. Yoo, J. Grigsby, D. Jin and Y. Qi, TextAttack: A Framework for Adversarial Attacks, Data Augmentation,
and Adversarial Training in NLP, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp. 119–126. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.16.
https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.16.
[6] M. Alzantot, Y. Sharma, A. Elgohary, B.J. Ho, M.B. Srivastava and K.W. Chang, Generating Natural Language Adversarial Examples,
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2018 (2020), 2890–2896. ISBN
9781948087841. doi:10.18653/v1/d18-1316.
[7] D. Jin, Z. Jin, J.T. Zhou and P. Szolovits, Is BERT Really Robust? A Strong Baseline for Natural Language Attack on Text Classification
and Entailment, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34(05) (2020), 8018–8025. doi:10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6311.
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6311.
[8] N. Boucher, I. Shumailov, R. Anderson and N. Papernot, Bad Characters: Imperceptible NLP Attacks, in: 43rd IEEE Symposium on Secu-
rity and Privacy, SP 2022, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2022, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1987–2004. doi:10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833641.
[9] Y.-L. Hsieh, M. Cheng, D.-C. Juan, W. Wei, W.-L. Hsu and C.-J. Hsieh, On the Robustness of Self-Attentive Models, in: Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy,
2019, pp. 1520–1529. doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1147. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1147.
[10] P. Michel, X. Li, G. Neubig and J. Pino, On Evaluation of Adversarial Perturbations for Sequence-to-Sequence Models, in: Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019, pp. 3103–3114.
doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1314. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1314.
[11] O.-M. Camburu, B. Shillingford, P. Minervini, T. Lukasiewicz and P. Blunsom, Make Up Your Mind! Adversarial Generation of Incon-
sistent Natural Language Explanations, in: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp. 4157–4165. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.382. https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/2020.acl-main.382.
[12] R. Jia and P. Liang, Adversarial Examples for Evaluating Reading Comprehension Systems, in: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2017, pp. 2021–
2031. doi:10.18653/v1/D17-1215. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D17-1215.
[13] J. Ebrahimi, D. Lowd and D. Dou, On Adversarial Examples for Character-Level Neural Machine Translation, in: Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, 2018,
pp. 653–663. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C18-1055.
[14] J. Wan, J. Yang, S. Ma, D. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. Yu and Z. Li, PAEG: Phrase-level Adversarial Example Generation for Neural Machine
Translation, in: Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, International Committee on Computa-
tional Linguistics, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, 2022, pp. 5085–5097. https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.451.
[15] N. Papernot, P.D. McDaniel, A. Swami and R.E. Harang, Crafting Adversarial Input Sequences for Recurrent Neural Networks, in:
2016 IEEE Military Communications Conference, MILCOM 2016, Baltimore, MD, USA, November 1-3, 2016, J. Brand, M.C. Valenti,
A. Akinpelu, B.T. Doshi and B.L. Gorsic, eds, IEEE, 2016, pp. 49–54. doi:10.1109/MILCOM.2016.7795300.
[16] Z. Zhao, D. Dua and S. Singh, Generating Natural Adversarial Examples, in: 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings, OpenReview.net, 2018. https://openreview.
net/forum?id=H1BLjgZCb.
[17] M. Cheng, J. Yi, P.-Y. Chen, H. Zhang and C.-J. Hsieh, Seq2Sick: Evaluating the Robustness of Sequence-to-Sequence Models with Adver-
sarial Examples, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34(04) (2020), 3601–3608. doi:10.1609/aaai.v34i04.5767.
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/5767.
[18] X. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen and K. He, Crafting Adversarial Examples for Neural Machine Translation, in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 1967–1977. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.153.
https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.153.
[19] D. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Peng, L. Chen, C. Brockett, M.-T. Sun and B. Dolan, Contextualized Perturbation for Textual Adversarial Attack, in:
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 5053–5069. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.400. https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.400.
[20] J. Ebrahimi, A. Rao, D. Lowd and D. Dou, HotFlip: White-Box Adversarial Examples for Text Classification, in: ACL 2018, Melbourne,
Australia, July 15-20, 2018, Volume 2: Short Papers, I. Gurevych and Y. Miyao, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018,
pp. 31–36. doi:10.18653/v1/P18-2006. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P18-2006/.
[21] J. Gao, J. Lanchantin, M.L. Soffa and Y. Qi, Black-Box Generation of Adversarial Text Sequences to Evade Deep Learning Clas-
sifiers, Proceedings - 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops, SPW 2018 (2018), 50–56. ISBN 9780769563497.
doi:10.1109/SPW.2018.00016.
[22] B. Formento, C.S. Foo, L.A. Tuan and S.K. Ng, Using Punctuation as an Adversarial Attack on Deep Learning-Based NLP Systems: An
Empirical Study, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2023, pp. 1–34. https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-eacl.1.
[23] Y. Belinkov and Y. Bisk, Synthetic and Natural Noise Both Break Neural Machine Translation, in: 6th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, {ICLR} 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings, OpenReview.net,
2018. https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJ8vJebC-.
[24] J. Li, S. Ji, T. Du, B. Li and T. Wang, TextBugger: Generating Adversarial Text Against Real-world Applications, in:
26th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2019, San Diego, California, USA, February 24-27,
2019, The Internet Society, 2019. ISBN 189156255X. doi:10.14722/ndss.2019.23138. https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/
textbugger-generating-adversarial-text-against-real-world-applications/.
[25] I. Mondal, BBAEG: Towards BERT-based Biomedical Adversarial Example Generation for Text Classification, in: Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021, K. Toutanova, A. Rumshisky, L. Zettlemoyer, D. Hakkani-Tür, I. Beltagy, S. Bethard, R. Cot-
terell, T. Chakraborty and Y. Zhou, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 5378–5384. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-
main.423.
[26] C. Emmery, Ákos Kádár and G. Chrupala, Adversarial Stylometry in the Wild: Transferable Lexical Substitution Attacks on Author
Profiling, in: EACL, 2021, pp. 2388–2402. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2021.eacl-main.203/.
[27] S. Eger and Y. Benz, From Hero to Zéroe: A Benchmark of Low-Level Adversarial Attacks, in: Proceedings of the 1st Conference
of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, AACL/IJCNLP 2020, Suzhou, China, December 4-7, 2020, K. Wong, K. Knight and H. Wu, eds, Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 786–803. https://aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.79/.
[28] T. Le, J. Lee, K. Yen, Y. Hu and D. Lee, Perturbations in the Wild: Leveraging Human-Written Text Perturbations for Realistic Adversarial
Attack and Defense, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, S. Mure-
san, P. Nakov and A. Villavicencio, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022, pp. 2953–2965. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.findings-
acl.232.
[29] H. Liu, C. Cai and Y. Qi, Expanding Scope: Adapting English Adversarial Attacks to Chinese, in: Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
Trustworthy Natural Language Processing (TrustNLP 2023), Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 2023, pp. 276–
286. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.trustnlp-1.24. https://aclanthology.org/2023.trustnlp-1.24.
[30] D. Emelin, I. Titov and R. Sennrich, Detecting Word Sense Disambiguation Biases in Machine Translation for Model-Agnostic Adver-
sarial Attacks, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online,
November 16-20, 2020, B. Webber, T. Cohn, Y. He and Y. Liu, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 7635–7653.
doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.616.
[31] S. Eger, G.G. ˙I¸sgüder, A. Rücklé, J.-U. Lee, C. Schulz, M. Mesgar, K. Swarnkar, E. Simpson and I. Gurevych, Text Processing Like
Humans Do: Visually Attacking and Shielding NLP Systems, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019, pp. 1634–1647. doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1165. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
N19-1165.
[32] J. Li, T. Du, S. Ji, R. Zhang, Q. Lu, M. Yang and T. Wang, TextShield: Robust Text Classification Based on Multimodal Embedding and
Neural Machine Translation, in: 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20), USENIX Association, 2020, pp. 1381–1398.
ISBN 978-1-939133-17-5. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/li-jinfeng.
[33] A. Dionysiou and E. Athanasopoulos, Unicode Evil: Evading NLP Systems Using Visual Similarities of Text Characters, in: Proceedings
of the 14th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, AISec ’21, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 2021, pp. 1–12–. ISBN 9781450386579. doi:10.1145/3474369.3486871.
[34] S. Tan, S. Joty, M.-Y. Kan and R. Socher, It’s Morphin’ Time! Combating Linguistic Discrimination with Inflectional Perturbations, in:
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, 2020, pp. 2920–2935. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.263. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.263.
[35] S. Ren, Y. Deng, K. He and W. Che, Generating Natural Language Adversarial Examples through Probability Weighted Word Saliency,
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2019), 1085–1097. doi:10.18653/v1/p19-1103.
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1103.
[36] C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database, Bradford Books, 1998.
[37] Y. Zang, F. Qi, C. Yang, Z. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Liu and M. Sun, Word-level Textual Adversarial Attacking as Combinatorial Optimization,
in: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, 2020, pp. 6066–6080. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.540. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.540.
[38] G. Chang, H. Gao, Z. Yao and H. Xiong, TextGuise: Adaptive adversarial example attacks on text classification model, Neuro-
computing 529 (2023), 190–203. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2023.01.071. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231223001042.
[39] J. Pennington, R. Socher and C.D. Manning, GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation, in: In EMNLP, 2014.
[40] J. Xu and Q. Du, TextTricker: Loss-Based and Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks on Text Classification Models, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.
92 (2020), 103641. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2020.103641.
[41] N. Mrkši´c, D. Ó Séaghdha, B. Thomson, M. Gaši´c, L. Rojas-Barahona, P.-H. Su, D. Vandyke, T.-H. Wen and S. Young, Counter-fitting
Word Vectors to Linguistic Constraints, in: Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, 2016.
[42] L. Li, R. Ma, Q. Guo, X. Xue and X. Qiu, BERT-ATTACK: Adversarial Attack Against BERT Using BERT, in: Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020,
pp. 6193–6202. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.500. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.500.
[43] H. Zhang, H. Zhou, N. Miao and L. Li, Generating Fluent Adversarial Examples for Natural Languages, in: Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 2019,
pp. 5564–5569. doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1559. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1559.
[44] S. Garg and G. Ramakrishnan, BAE: BERT-based Adversarial Examples for Text Classification, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp. 6174–6181.
doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.498. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.498.
[45] Y. Lei, Y. Cao, D. Li, T. Zhou, M. Fang and M. Pechenizkiy, Phrase-level Textual Adversarial Attack with Label Preservation, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 2022,
pp. 1095–1112. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.83. https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-naacl.83.
[46] Z. Shao, Z. Wu and M. Huang, AdvExpander: Generating Natural Language Adversarial Examples by Expanding Text, IEEE ACM Trans.
Audio Speech Lang. Process. 30 (2022), 1184–1196. doi:10.1109/TASLP.2021.3129339.
[47] L. Yuan, X. Zheng, Y. Zhou, C.-J. Hsieh and K.-W. Chang, On the Transferability of Adversarial Attacks against Neural Text Classifier, in:
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 2021, pp. 1612–1625. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.121. https://aclanthology.org/
2021.emnlp-main.121.
[48] C. Stephenson, The Methodology of Historical Census Record Linkage: a User’s Guide To the Soundex, Journal of Family History 5(1)
(1980), 112–115. doi:10.1177/036319908000500106.
[49] Z. Dong, Q. Dong and C. Hao, HowNet and Its Computation of Meaning, in: Coling 2010: Demonstrations, Coling 2010 Organizing
Committee, Beijing, China, 2010, pp. 53–56. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/C10-3014.
[50] D.S. Wishart, Y.D. Feunang, A.C. Guo, E.J. Lo, A. Marcu, J.R. Grant, T. Sajed, D. Johnson, C. Li, Z. Sayeeda, N. Assempour, I. Iynkkaran,
Y. Liu, A. Maciejewski, N. Gale, A. Wilson, L. Chin, R. Cummings, D. Le, A. Pon, C. Knox and M. Wilson, DrugBank 5.0: a major update
to the DrugBank database for 2018, Nucleic Acids Res. 46(Database–Issue) (2018), D1074–D1082. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1037.
[51] X. Wang, H. Jin, Y. Yang and K. He, Natural Language Adversarial Defense through Synonym Encoding, in: Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2021, pp. 823–833.
[52] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee and K. Toutanova, BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understand-
ing, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019,
pp. 4171–4186. doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423. https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
[53] Z. Meng and R. Wattenhofer, A Geometry-Inspired Attack for Generating Natural Language Adversarial Examples, in: Proceedings of the
28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2020, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December 8-13, 2020, D. Scott,
N. Bel and C. Zong, eds, International Committee on Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 6679–6689. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.coling-
main.585.
[54] S. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi and P. Frossard, DeepFool: A Simple and Accurate Method to Fool Deep Neural Networks, in: 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, IEEE Computer Society,
2016, pp. 2574–2582. doi:10.1109/CVPR.2016.282.
[55] B. Liang, H. Li, M. Su, P. Bian, X. Li and W. Shi, Deep Text Classification Can be Fooled, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, {IJCAI-18}, International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization,
2018, pp. 4208–4215. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2018/585.
[56] B. Wang, H. Pei, B. Pan, Q. Chen, S. Wang and B. Li, T3: Tree-Autoencoder Constrained Adversarial Text Generation for Targeted Attack,
in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp. 6134–6150. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.495. https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.495.
[57] D. Ippolito, D. Duckworth, C. Callison-Burch and D. Eck, Automatic Detection of Generated Text is Easiest when Humans are Fooled,
in: ACL, 2020, pp. 1808–1822. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.164.
[58] D. Harbecke and C. Alt, Considering Likelihood in NLP Classification Explanations with Occlusion and Language Modeling, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, ACL 2020, On-
line, July 5-10, 2020, S. Rijhwani, J. Liu, Y. Wang and R. Dror, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 111–117.
doi:10.18653/v1/2020.acl-srw.16.
[59] V. Malik, A. Bhat and A. Modi, Adv-OLM: Generating Textual Adversaries via OLM, 2021.
[60] W. Zhou, T. Ge, K. Xu, F. Wei and M. Zhou, BERT-based Lexical Substitution, in: Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, A. Korhonen, D.R. Traum
and L. Màrquez, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 3368–3373. doi:10.18653/v1/p19-1328.
[61] C. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. Bethard and D. McClosky, The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit,
in: Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Baltimore, Maryland, 2014, pp. 55–60. doi:10.3115/v1/P14-5010. https://aclanthology.org/P14-5010.
[62] M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh and C. Guestrin, Semantically equivalent adversarial rules for debugging NLP models, ACL 2018 - 56th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference (Long Papers) 1 (2018), 856–865. ISBN
9781948087322. doi:10.18653/v1/p18-1079.
[63] J.Y. Yoo and Y. Qi, Towards Improving Adversarial Training of NLP Models, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 16-20 November, 2021, M. Moens, X. Huang, L. Specia and
S.W. Yih, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 945–956. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.81.
[64] N. Berger, S. Riezler, S. Ebert and A. Sokolov, Don’t Search for a Search Method - Simple Heuristics Suffice for Adversarial Text Attacks,
in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, M. Moens, X. Huang, L. Specia and S.W. Yih, eds, Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2021, pp. 8216–8224. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.647.
[65] S. Singla, E. Wallace, S. Feng and S. Feizi, Understanding Impacts of High-Order Loss Approximations and Features in Deep Learning
Interpretation, in: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, eds,
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 97, PMLR, 2019, pp. 5848–5856. http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/singla19a.html.
[66] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z.B. Celik and A. Swami, Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,
ASIA CCS 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (2017), 506–519. ISBN
9781450349444. doi:10.1145/3052973.3053009.
[67] B. Zhu, Z. Gu, Y. Qian, F. Lau and Z. Tian, Leveraging transferability and improved beam search in textual adversarial attacks, Neu-
rocomputing 500 (2022), 135–142. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2022.05.054. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231222006154.
[68] L. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Wei, Bridge the Gap Between CV and NLP! A Gradient-based Textual Adversarial Attack Framework,
in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada,
2023, pp. 7132–7146. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.446. https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.446.
[69] J.Y. Yoo, J.X. Morris, E. Lifland and Y. Qi, Searching for a Search Method: Benchmarking Search Algorithms for Generating NLP
Adversarial Examples, 2020.
[70] S. Samanta and S. Mehta, Towards Crafting Text Adversarial Samples, arXiv abs/1707.0 (2017). http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02812.
[71] P. Zhan, C. Zheng, J. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Zhang, PARSE: An Efficient Search Method for Black-box Adversarial
Text Attacks, in: Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2022, Gyeongju, Republic of
Korea, October 12-17, 2022, N. Calzolari, C. Huang, H. Kim, J. Pustejovsky, L. Wanner, K. Choi, P. Ryu, H. Chen, L. Donatelli, H. Ji,
S. Kurohashi, P. Paggio, N. Xue, S. Kim, Y. Hahm, Z. He, T.K. Lee, E. Santus, F. Bond and S. Na, eds, International Committee on
Computational Linguistics, 2022, pp. 4776–4787. https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.423.
[72] R. Maheshwary, S. Maheshwary and V. Pudi, A Strong Baseline for Query Efficient Attacks in a Black Box Setting, in: Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, 2021, pp. 8396–8409. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.661. https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.
661.
[73] Z. Zeng and D. Xiong, An Empirical Study on Adversarial Attack on NMT: Languages and Positions Matter, in: Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 454–460. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-
short.58. https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-short.58.
[74] M.S. Charikar, Similarity Estimation Techniques from Rounding Algorithms, in: Proceedings of the Thiry-Fourth Annual ACM Sym-
posium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’02, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2002, pp. 380–388–. ISBN
1581134959. doi:10.1145/509907.509965.
[75] X. Guo, S. Tu and L. Xu, Learning to Generate Textual Adversarial Examples, in: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning
- ICANN 2022 - 31st International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Bristol, UK, September 6-9, 2022, Proceedings, Part I,
E. Pimenidis, P.P. Angelov, C. Jayne, A. Papaleonidas and M. Aydin, eds, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 13529, Springer,
2022, pp. 195–206. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-15919-0_17.
[76] E. Wallace, J. Tuyls, J. Wang, S. Subramanian, M. Gardner and S. Singh, {AllenNLP Interpret}: A Framework for Explaining Predictions
of {NLP} Models, in: Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2019.
[77] S. Liu, N. Lu, C. Chen and K. Tang, Efficient Combinatorial Optimization for Word-Level Adversarial Textual Attack, IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio, Speech and Lang. Proc. 30 (2022), 98–111–. doi:10.1109/TASLP.2021.3130970.
[78] R. Maheshwary, S. Maheshwary and V. Pudi, Generating Natural Language Attacks in a Hard Label Black Box Setting, in: Thirty-Fifth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI
2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, AAAI
Press, 2021, pp. 13525–13533. https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/17595.
[79] Q. Chen, J. Sun and V. Palade, A Word-Level Adversarial Attack Method Based on Sememes and an Improved Quantum-Behaved Particle
Swarm Optimization, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2023), 1–12. doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3283308.
[80] G. Maimon and L. Rokach, A universal adversarial policy for text classifiers, Neural Networks 153 (2022), 282–291.
doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2022.06.018.
[81] L. Xu, A. Cuesta-Infante, L. Berti-Equille and K. Veeramachaneni, R&R: Metric-guided Adversarial Sentence Generation, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: AACL-IJCNLP 2022, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online only, 2022,
pp. 438–452. https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-aacl.41.
[82] D. Lee, S. Moon, J. Lee and H.O. Song, Query-Efficient and Scalable Black-Box Adversarial Attacks on Discrete Sequential Data via
Bayesian Optimization, in: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
[83] Y. Wang, W. Che, I. Titov, S.B. Cohen, Z. Lei and T. Liu, A Closer Look into the Robustness of Neural Dependency Parsers Using Better
Adversarial Examples, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, Association for Computational
Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 2344–2354. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.findings-acl.207. https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.207.
[84] W. Han, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and K. Tu, Adversarial Attack and Defense of Structured Prediction Models, in: Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020,
pp. 2327–2338. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.182. https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.182.
[85] P. Gai´nski and K. Bałazy, Step by Step Loss Goes Very Far: Multi-Step Quantization for Adversarial Text Attacks, in: Proceedings of the
17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2023, pp. 2038–2048. https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.149.
[86] D. Cer, Y. Yang, S.-y. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. St. John, N. Constant, M. Guajardo-Cespedes, S. Yuan, C. Tar, B. Strope
and R. Kurzweil, Universal Sentence Encoder for English, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing: System Demonstrations, Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium, 2018, pp. 169–174.
doi:10.18653/v1/D18-2029. https://aclanthology.org/D18-2029.
[87] D. Naber, T. Fakultät and U. Bielefeld, A Rule-Based Style and Grammar Checker.
[88] W. Yuan, G. Neubig and P. Liu, BARTScore: Evaluating Generated Text as Text Generation, in: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, Vol. 34, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang and J.W. Vaughan, eds, Curran Associates, Inc., 2021,
pp. 27263–27277. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/e4d2b6e6fdeca3e60e0f1a62fee3d9dd-Paper.pdf.
[89] T. Zhang*, V. Kishore*, F. Wu*, K.Q. Weinberger and Y. Artzi, BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT, in: International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. https://openreview.net/forum?id=SkeHuCVFDr.
[90] D. Deutsch, R. Dror and D. Roth, On the Limitations of Reference-Free Evaluations of Generated Text, in: Proceedings of the
2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Y. Goldberg, Z. Kozareva and Y. Zhang, eds, Association
for Computational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2022, pp. 10960–10977. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.753.
https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.753.
[91] A. Warstadt, A. Singh and S.R. Bowman, Neural Network Acceptability Judgments, arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12471 (2018).
[92] E. Malmi, A. Severyn and S. Rothe, Unsupervised Text Style Transfer with Padded Masked Language Models, in: Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online,
2020, pp. 8671–8680. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.699. https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.699.
[93] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li and P.J. Liu, Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer, Journal of Machine Learning Research 21(140) (2020), 1–67. http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.
html.
[94] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), K. Inui, J. Jiang, V. Ng and X. Wan, eds, Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, 2019,
pp. 3982–3992. doi:10.18653/v1/D19-1410. https://aclanthology.org/D19-1410.
[95] I.J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens and C. Szegedy, Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples, in: 3rd International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, eds,
2015. http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.
[96] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward and W.-J. Zhu, BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation, in: Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, Association for Computational Linguistics, USA, 2002,
pp. 311–318–. doi:10.3115/1073083.1073135.
[97] J. Gilmer, R.P. Adams, I.J. Goodfellow, D. Andersen and G.E. Dahl, Motivating the Rules of the Game for Adversarial Example Research,
CoRR abs/1807.0 (2018). http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.06732.
[98] J. Morris, E. Lifland, J. Lanchantin, Y. Ji and Y. Qi, Reevaluating Adversarial Examples in Natural Language, in: Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp. 3829–3839.
doi:10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.341. https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.341.
[99] D. Herel, H. Cisneros and T. Mikolov, Preserving Semantics in Textual Adversarial Attacks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.04205 (2022).
[100] E. Wallace, P. Rodriguez, S. Feng, I. Yamada and J. Boyd-Graber, Trick Me If You Can: Human-in-the-loop Generation of
Adversarial Question Answering Examples, Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 7(0) (2019), 387–401.
doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00279. https://transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/1711.
