Title: mahaNLP: A Marathi Natural Language Processing Library
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.02579v1
--------------------------------------------------

mahaNLP: A Marathi Natural Language Processing Library
Vidula Magdum1,3, Omkar Dhekane1,3, Sharayu Hiwarkhedkar1,3, Saloni Mittal1,3
Raviraj Joshi2,3
1 Pune Institute of Computer Technology, Pune, Maharashtra India
2 Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu India
3 L3Cube Pune
{vidulamagdum12, omkarjd1212, hiwarkhedkarsharayu, salonimittal12}@gmail.com
ravirajoshi@gmail.com
Abstract
We present mahaNLP, an open-source natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) library specifically built for
the Marathi language. It aims to enhance the support
for the low-resource Indian language Marathi in the
field of NLP. It is an easy-to-use, extensible, and
modular toolkit for Marathi text analysis built on
state-of-the-art MahaBERT-based transformer mod-
els. Our work holds significant importance as other
existing Indic NLP libraries provide basic Marathi
processing support and rely on older models with
restricted performance. Our toolkit stands out by
offering a comprehensive array of NLP tasks, en-
compassing both fundamental preprocessing tasks
and advanced NLP tasks like sentiment analysis,
NER, hate speech detection, and sentence comple-
tion. This paper focuses on an overview of the ma-
haNLP framework, its features, and its usage. This
work is a part of the L3Cube MahaNLP initiative,
more information about it can be found at https:
//github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP.
1
Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a major sub-
set of artificial intelligence. It helps to clear up lin-
guistic ambiguity and gives the data a useful quan-
titative structure for numerous downstream tasks.
While NLP has the potential to have a huge impact
on the ML community, recent models have pri-
marily focused on English and 6 other languages1
with a significantly high amount of resources (Joshi
et al., 2020). There are around 7,000 languages spo-
ken worldwide2. Out of which, approximately 22+
languages are existing Indian languages3 that are
widely spoken not only in India but also through-
out the world. Developing models that work for
these languages is important for a variety of rea-
sons, including bridging the existing language di-
vide and promoting exploration and research for
1https://datasaur.ai/blog-posts/
nlp-work-in-different-languages
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lists_of_
languages
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_of_
India
Figure 1: A brief overview of the features in mahaNLP
library
non-English languages in the growing NLP field4.
The Marathi language is 11th in the list of pop-
ular languages across the globe5. Despite being
a widely spoken language, Marathi-specific NLP
monolingual resources are still limited in com-
parison to other natural languages (Joshi, 2022a).
There are many popular open-source tools like
Spacy6, Stanza7, iNLTK8, IndicNLP9, providing
features to create effective multilingual NLP sys-
tems. Though these libraries do support the mul-
tilingual functionality for Marathi, they are not
exhaustive with respect to the functionalities they
support and have their own set of limitations and
discrepancies, such as the usage of older archi-
tectures to implement multilingual models (Ruder
et al., 2021). Basic features like Marathi sentiment
4https://ruder.io/state-of-multilingual-ai/
index.html
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marathi_
language
6https://spacy.io/
7https://stanfordnlp.github.io/stanza/
8https://inltk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
9https://indicnlp.ai4bharat.org/pages/home/
arXiv:2311.02579v1  [cs.CL]  5 Nov 2023
Figure 2: A comparison of a few existing libraries and mahaNLP specific to the Marathi language
analysis, named entity recognition, and hate speech
detection is missing in almost all the current multi-
lingual libraries.
The L3Cube-MahaNLP10 (Joshi, 2022b) initia-
tive is an umbrella for various tools, datasets, and
models that greatly assist in Marathi language pro-
cessing.
With this work, we aim to provide a
broader set of functionalities to developers. In this
paper, we propose mahaNLP library - a python-
based NLP toolkit focused on the Indian language
Marathi and majorly built on top of Hugging
Face transformer models11. Along with basic lan-
guage processing features, the open-source toolkit
wraps the state-of-the-art monolingual Marathi
transformer models for text analysis. It encom-
passes a myriad of features like sentiment and hate
analysis, named entity recognition, and a variety
of other Marathi language processing features as
shown in Figure 1. Thus, the mahaNLP library
aims to make Marathi NLP more accessible. The
demonstration video12 and example colab13 are
shared publicly.
2
Related Work
The communities of NLP and machine learning
have a prolonged history of developing open-
source tools and libraries. There are numerous
user-friendly, all-purpose NLP libraries available.
NLTK (Bird, 2006), Stanford CoreNLP (Manning
et al., 2014), Spacy (Honnibal and Montani, 2017),
AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2018), Flair (Akbik et al.,
2019), Stanza (Qi et al., 2020), Hugging Face
Transformers (Wolf et al., 2019) and iNLTK (Arora,
2020) are some of the libraries that are primarily
concerned with NLP tasks. These libraries provide
NLP tasks to the ML community like tokenization,
sentence encoding, text normalization, translation,
and so on.
10https://github.com/l3cube-pune/MarathiNLP
11https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune
12https://youtu.be/12AWux0AtFA?si=
dzcO3DrdykmV1HLy
13Example colab
However, while some of these libraries do sup-
port Marathi, they have a very limited range of NLP
tasks and pre-trained language models. Figure 2
illustrates the provisional comparison between ma-
haNLP and the existing libraries for the language
Marathi. The iNLTK library is not actively sup-
ported, it is based on very limited datasets and
LSTM-based ULMFiT models. Marathi models
for features like sentiment and NER are unavail-
able in SpaCy.
MahaNLP attempts to address
these issues by offering a broader set of pre-trained
language models, including BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and AlBERT
(Lan et al., 2019), as well as a broader set of NLP
tasks such as sentiment analysis, hate speech anal-
ysis, NER Tagger, and MLM-based modules. The
NER model supported by Stanza is based on our
L3Cube-MahaNER corpus (Litake et al., 2022)14.
3
System Design and Architecture
The ease-of-access is an important characteristic
of mahaNLP and the system is designed from
the user’s perspective. These perspectives can be
mainly defined as - a Standard Flow and a Model
Flow.
3.1
Standard Flow
The Standard Flow can be used by a basic program-
mer who has the least knowledge of the machine
learning domain. In this flow, the complex model
arguments are isolated from the users. They can
use a feature without knowledge of the models used
in the background. This flow has constructs similar
to standard NLP libraries. The intuitive nature of
this flow makes mahaNLP more user-friendly and
easily accessible. The pre-processing, tokenizer,
datasets, and ML-based models are part of this user
flow.
14https://stanfordnlp.github.io/stanza/ner_
models.html
3.1.1
Pre-process Module
An initial step in any NLP task is the preprocessing
of data. The transformer models in NLP perform
much better on cleaned data than raw, unprocessed
corpus. The preprocess module helps to provide
functions such as the removal of URLs, stopwords,
and non-Devanagari words for cleaning Marathi
textual data.
3.1.2
Tokenizer Module
A very important step in many NLP tasks is the tok-
enization of text. The mahaNLP Tokenizer module
provides functionalities for sentence-level tokeniza-
tion (splitting into multiple sentences) and word-
level tokenization (splitting into multiple words).
3.1.3
Datasets Module
The mahaNLP library currently supports 3 datasets
- MahaHate (Patil et al., 2022) for hate speech de-
tection, MahaSent (Kulkarni et al., 2021)(Pingle
et al., 2023) for sentiment analysis, and MahaNER
(Litake et al., 2022) for named entity recognition.
These datasets can mainly be used for finetuning
tasks. Each of these corpora can be separately
loaded in the pandas data frame. The datasets are
cached locally to avoid repeated downloads.
Feature name
Labels / Outputs
Function name(s)
Sentiment
positive, negative, neu-
tral
get_polarity_score
Hate
hate, non-hate
get_hate_score
Tagger
Person (NEP), Loca-
tion (NEL), Organiza-
tion (NEO), Measure
(NEM), Time (NETI),
Date (NED), Designa-
tion (ED)
get_token_labels,
get_tokens
Auto Complete
next (N) words
next_word,
com-
plete_sentence
Mask Fill
masked word
predict_mask
Similarity
similarity score (0-1)
embed_sentences,
get_similarity_score
Table 1: Standard Flow ML features
3.1.4
Machine learning-based modules
A set of modules utilize machine learning
models in the background to provide the de-
sired functionality.
Currently, these features
or modules are implemented using state-of-the-
art Marathi Transformer models and are de-
scribed below. The basic syntax to use them is:
Table 1 shows the features supported, output
type, and the corresponding functions.
3.2
Model Flow
The Model Flow provides advanced functionality
intended for use by ML practitioners with knowl-
edge in the NLP domain. It offers flexibility for
programmers to select background models and ad-
just their parameters. The model_repo module de-
fines the model flow. Table 2 presents the associa-
tion between standard flow machine learning-based
modules and model_repo submodules.
4
System Usage
The mahaNLP library is hosted on the official PyPI
repository. It can be installed using the pip com-
mand:
pip install mahaNLP
Once installed, we can then import the required
features using the python import statement and
start utilizing various functionalities. Currently,
the library has been tested on x64-bit Windows 10
OS and Google Colab platform (posix-linux).
4.1
Dataset Loading
A snippet of code demonstrating the loading
mahaSent dataset provided by mahaNLP is given
below:
4.2
Usage via Standard Flow
In Standard Flow, the user can simply import
the feature they want to use (e.g. autocomplete,
sentiment, tagger, etc.) and define the object to
initialize that particular model. Here, the user can
optionally pass the model_name as an argument
during model initialization.
A simple snippet of generic flow usage for
SentimentAnalyzer class object is given below:
Standard Flow module
model_repo submodule
Huggingface model
sentiment
SentimentModel
MarathiSentiment (Kulkarni et al., 2021)
hate
HateModel
mahahate-bert (Patil et al., 2022)
tagger
NERModel
marathi-ner (Litake et al., 2022)
autocomplete
GPTModel
marathi-gpt (Joshi, 2022a)
mask_fill
MaskFillModel
marathi-bert-v2 (Joshi, 2022a)
similarity
SimilarityModel
marathi-sentence-similarity-sbert (Joshi et al., 2022)
Table 2: Table shows which model_repo submodules are inherited by the Standard Flow modules and the default
huggingface model internally used. The huggingface models can be listed and selected in the Model Flow.
The get_polarity_score function returns float value
representing the confidence score for a predicted
sentiment class.
4.3
Usage via Model Flow
In Model Flow, the user has to import the specific
model (e.g. mahaHate, mahaNER, etc.) using
“import mahanlp.model_repo.modelname”. Then,
the user can define the model object and also can
optionally pass the model_name as an argument.
Refer the following code for loading and usage of
the MaskFillModel class object via Model Flow.
The predicted token string, sequence, and score
can be returned as:
The library also supports various standard hard-
ware devices. The gpu_enabled = True option
allows users to utilize the gpu for model usage or
inference.
Table 3 demonstrates all the modules of Ma-
haNLP along with inputs and their expected out-
puts. The detailed description and usage of all
the functionalities in mahaNLP are available at the
mahaNLP PyPI project.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
We have built mahaNLP - a simple, easy-to-use
and extensible toolkit for Marathi language pro-
cessing and development of robust NLP models.
The mahaNLP is majorly built on the top of the
huggingface transformers15 library and utilizes py-
Torch16 framework under the hood. It also utilizes
the resources developed by L3Cube as a part of
MahaNLP initiative. It primarily provides wrapper
classes to perform downstream tasks on supervised
datasets, transformer models, and other tools for
natural language processing in Marathi. The paper
demonstrates the usage of various modules in the
mahaNLP library.
We are working on expanding our project scope
in the following manner:
• Expanding the project to support more low-
resource Indic languages.
15https://huggingface.co/l3cube-pune
16https://pytorch.org/
Table 3: Sample examples of features provided by mahaNLP
• Extending the existing corpora provided by
the library and supporting Indo-Aryan lan-
guage datasets and other regional language
datasets like Konkani and Dongari which are
very prevalent in Maharashtra state.
• Addition of pretrained models for advanced
downstream tasks like machine translation,
natural language inference etc.
• Creation of web-based user interactive tools
or APIs which can be used by developers at
the production level.
• Further improvements in model accuracy for
predictions and reduction in overall model
size and computational cost.
Limitations
• Pre-processing can be made more efficient by
expanding the dataset for stopwords to a more
exhaustive list.
• The state-of-art huggingface transformer mod-
els have not been tested on a generic domain,
but only on specific domains such as the news
or social media domain. More generic models
built as a part of a broader initiative will be
integrated into the library.
• The current language models provided by ma-
haNLP are built on transformers that have
high runtime on CPU. In the future, we plan
to build and integrate more compact models.
These issues are planned to be addressed in the
upcoming versions of the library.
Acknowledgments
This work was done under the L3Cube Pune men-
torship program. We would like to express our
gratitude towards our mentors at L3Cube for their
continuous support and encouragement. We would
also like to thank L3Cube groups CodeBuddies,
BitsToBytes, AlgorithmUnlock, and Savadita for
their valuable dataset and model contributions.
This work is a part of the L3Cube-MahaNLP
project (Joshi, 2022b).
References
Alan Akbik, Tanja Bergmann, Duncan Blythe, Kashif
Rasul, Stefan Schweter, and Roland Vollgraf. 2019.
Flair: An easy-to-use framework for state-of-the-art
nlp. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the
North American chapter of the association for com-
putational linguistics (demonstrations), pages 54–59.
Gaurav Arora. 2020. inltk: Natural language toolkit for
indic languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12534.
Steven Bird. 2006. Nltk: the natural language toolkit.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive
Presentation Sessions, pages 69–72.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind
Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson Liu, Matthew Pe-
ters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language process-
ing platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07640.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2017. spacy 2:
Natural language understanding with bloom embed-
dings, convolutional neural networks and incremental
parsing. To appear, 7(1):411–420.
Ananya Joshi, Aditi Kajale, Janhavi Gadre, Samruddhi
Deode, and Raviraj Joshi. 2022. L3cube-mahasbert
and hindsbert: Sentence bert models and bench-
marking bert sentence representations for hindi and
marathi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11187.
Pratik Joshi, Sebastin Santy, Amar Budhiraja, Kalika
Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. 2020. The state and
fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion in the nlp
world. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
6282–6293.
Raviraj Joshi. 2022a. L3Cube-MahaCorpus and Ma-
haBERT: Marathi monolingual corpus, Marathi
BERT language models, and resources. In Proceed-
ings of the WILDRE-6 Workshop within the 13th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
97–101, Marseille, France. European Language Re-
sources Association.
Raviraj Joshi. 2022b. L3cube-mahanlp: Marathi natural
language processing datasets, models, and library.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14728.
Atharva Kulkarni, Meet Mandhane, Manali Likhitkar,
Gayatri
Kshirsagar,
and
Raviraj
Joshi.
2021.
L3cubemahasent: A marathi tweet-based sentiment
analysis dataset.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjec-
tivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages
213–220.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learn-
ing of language representations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11942.
Onkar Litake, Maithili Ravindra Sabane, Parth Sachin
Patil, Aparna Abhijeet Ranade, and Raviraj Joshi.
2022. L3cube-mahaner: A marathi named entity
recognition dataset and bert models. In Proceedings
of The WILDRE-6 Workshop within the 13th Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
29–34, Marseille, France. European Language Re-
sources Association.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The stanford corenlp natural language
processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual
meeting of the association for computational linguis-
tics: system demonstrations, pages 55–60.
Hrushikesh Patil, Abhishek Velankar, and Raviraj Joshi.
2022. L3cube-mahahate: A tweet-based marathi hate
speech detection dataset and bert models. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Threat, Aggression and
Cyberbullying (TRAC 2022), pages 1–9.
Aabha Pingle, Aditya Vyawahare, Isha Joshi, Rahul
Tangsali, and Raviraj Joshi. 2023. L3cube-mahasent-
md: A multi-domain marathi sentiment analysis
dataset and transformer models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.13888.
Peng Qi, Yuhao Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Jason Bolton, and
Christopher D Manning. 2020. Stanza: A python
natural language processing toolkit for many human
languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07082.
Sebastian Ruder, Noah Constant, Jan Botha, Aditya Sid-
dhant, Orhan Firat, Jinlan Fu, Pengfei Liu, Junjie Hu,
Dan Garrette, Graham Neubig, et al. 2021. Xtreme-r:
Towards more challenging and nuanced multilingual
evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 10215–10245.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz,
et al. 2019. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-
the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.03771.
