Title: Accelerating materials discovery for polymer solar cells: Data-driven insights enabled by natural language processing
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19462v2
--------------------------------------------------

Accelerating materials discovery for polymer
solar cells: Data-driven insights enabled by
natural language processing
Pranav Shetty,† Aishat Adeboye,‡ Sonakshi Gupta,¶ Chao Zhang,† and Rampi
Ramprasad∗,¶
†School of Computational Science & Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 771
Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
‡School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 771
Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
¶School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 771 Ferst
Drive NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA
E-mail: rampi.ramprasad@mse.gatech.edu
Abstract
We present a simulation of various active learning strategies for the discovery of
polymer solar cell donor/acceptor pairs using data extracted from the literature span-
ning ∼20 years by a natural language processing pipeline. While data-driven meth-
ods have been well established to discover novel materials faster than Edisonian trial-
and-error approaches, their benefits have not been quantified for material discovery
problems that can take decades. Our approach demonstrates a potential reduction in
discovery time by approximately 75 %, equivalent to a 15 year acceleration in material
innovation. Our pipeline enables us to extract data from greater than 3300 papers
1
arXiv:2402.19462v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Jun 2024
which is ∼5 times larger and therefore more diverse than similar data sets reported by
others. We also trained machine learning models to predict the power conversion effi-
ciency and used our model to identify promising donor-acceptor combinations that are
as yet unreported. We thus demonstrate a pipeline that goes from published literature
to extracted material property data which in turn is used to obtain data-driven in-
sights. Our insights include active learning strategies that can be used to train strong
predictive models of material properties or be robust to the initial material system
used. This work provides a valuable framework for data-driven research in materials
science.
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) methods have become ubiquitous in materials science. Indeed, data-
driven methods have enabled the discovery of new materials for applications such as high-
breakdown strength dielectric polymers,1–3 heussler alloys,4,5 organic photovoltaics with high
power conversion efficiency6,7 and gas separation membranes with high selective permeabil-
ity.8 Active learning is a technique that is used to drive this improvement.
It leverages
trained models of material properties to identify promising candidate materials and then
augment the training set once the candidate material is “measured”, to improve the predic-
tive performance of the ML models. Active learning methods have been used to discover high
hole mobility thin films,9 alloys for gas turbine engine blades,10 and high glass transition
temperature polymers.11 Recent work has benchmarked the performance of various active
learning strategies on problems such as electrocatalysis,12 magnetic properties,13 and band
gap.14 Several studies have also benchmarked the performance of human scientists against
bayesian optimization algorithms for the optimization of materials systems such as polyox-
ometallate clusters,15,16 and palladium-catalyzed arylations.17 However, these studies were
laboratory-scale experiments that were run under a controlled setting over a short time scale
relative to the many decades it can take for materials discovery to play out for important
2
applications. Polymer solar cells offer a promising playground for us to quantify the time
savings offered by the use of machine learning methods in materials science using historical
data.
Traditionally solar cells are inorganic and are made out of either crystalline silicon or
amorphous silicon. Light incident on the surface of the solar cell produces electron-hole
pairs which generates a potential that can drive an external load. Due to the use of an
inorganic material like silicon, the cost of manufacturing such cells is increased due to the
high temperatures required to process silicon. Polymer solar cells, on the other hand, are
made of organic materials and can thus be processed at much lower temperatures. The
most common configuration of a polymer solar cell is as a bulk hetero-junction blend of two
materials known as the donor and acceptor. Finding optimal donor/acceptor combinations
that lead to high power conversion efficiency (PCE) is an active area of research. Historically,
the acceptor was based on fullerenes, typically [6,6] phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
(PCBM). In recent years, though non-fullerene acceptors have gained traction and have led
to solar cell configurations with much higher efficiency.18
The chemical space for donors and acceptors is vast, making machine learning methods
a promising avenue for narrowing down the chemical space for testing candidate materials.
Past work has developed machine learning models for polymer solar cells to identify promis-
ing donors for fullerene systems19 as well as promising non-fullerene acceptors.20 Ref. 7 uses
trained ML models of PCE to find promising candidate materials and then tests cells fabri-
cated using ML predictions to discover new viable candidates. The number of experimental
papers published in this space is quite large however and covers a wide chemical space. In
this work, we found over ∼3300 relevant papers using our pipeline. The papers that typi-
cally applied ML methods to polymer solar cells, relied on data that was manually collected
and covered about 500 papers on average. A summary of publicly available polymer solar
cell data sets is provided in Table 1. Thus, due to the manual nature of data collection,
nearly five-sixth of relevant papers typically cannot be parsed for data extraction due to
3
time constraints. The use of natural language processing (NLP) offers a potential solution
to the problem of material property data collection at scale.
Table 1: Comparing public data sets of polymer solar cell device characteristics. PSC in
this table refers to PolymerSolarCells.
Type of data
Number of unique data points
Number of papers
Reference
Fullerenes only
1200
500
19
Non-fullerenes only
1001
-
21
Non-fullerenes only
1318
558
6,20
Fullerenes only
350
-
22
Fullerenes
and
non-
fullerenes
PSCNLP: 2585
PSCCurated: 867
PSCNLP: 3307
PSCCurated: 861
This work
NLP is a way to get computers to understand human text.
NLP has been used in
materials science to obtain insights from inorganic literature as well as polymer literature
by extracting structured material property data or synthesis data from a large number of
papers.23–27 We used NLP methods to extract device characteristics of polymer solar cells
from the abstracts of materials science literature. A data extraction pipeline was developed
as part of a previous work,28–30 that recognized the categories of words in text using machine
learning models and used heuristic rules to link them into a material property record. Using
this pipeline, we obtained a data set of donors and acceptors and their corresponding device
characteristics such as PCE which we call PolymerSolarCellsNLP.
We curated a subset
of PolymerSolarCellsNLP to record the structure of the donor and acceptor as a SMILES
string31 which we call PolymerSolarCellsCurated.
Using PolymerSolarCellsCurated, we trained a machine learning model that takes the donor
and acceptor as input and predicts the PCE (overall pipeline shown in Figure 1).
We
used this trained model to predict the PCE for all donor/acceptor combinations not found
in PolymerSolarCellsCurated to identify promising candidates with high PCE. This training
methodology was also used while simulating an active learning loop.
The fundamental
premise of using machine learning in materials science is that we can discover new material
systems faster than would otherwise be possible through trial-and-error. We provide the first
4
quantitative evidence for this that goes beyond laboratory scale active learning experiments
by comparing the sequence of donor/acceptor systems obtained using active learning to the
actual evolution of PCE for polymer solar cells over a 20 year time span. We thus make a
stronger policy case for wider systemic adoption of machine learning for the discovery of new
materials and provide some best practices for the deployment of active learning for materials
discovery.
Methods
Data extraction pipeline from literature
We created a corpus of 2.4 million materials science journal articles by web scraping and
by downloading from publisher-specific APIs. Elsevier, Wiley, Royal Society of Chemistry,
American Chemical Society, Springer Nature, Taylor & Francis, and the American Insti-
tute of Physics are the publishers included in our corpus.28 These papers span the years
2000 to 2022. A subset of 750 abstracts was annotated using an ontology specific to the
materials science domain consisting of the entity types POLYMER, POLYMER CLASS,
PROPERTY VALUE, PROPERTY NAME, MONOMER, ORGANIC MATERIAL, INOR-
GANIC MATERIAL, and MATERIAL AMOUNT. A Named Entity Recognition (NER)
model was trained using the annotated data set. The trained NER model along with heuris-
tic rules for entity linking was used to extract material property data from the abstracts of
all papers in our corpus that were polymer-relevant. This extracted data set represents all
material property data reported in the abstracts of our corpus of papers. A subset of this
material property data corresponds to polymer solar cells and the selection and curation of
this subset is described next. Refer to Ref. 30 for further details.
5
Figure 1: Pipeline used for extracting polymer solar cell PCE data from published literature
which is then used in two ways 1) To train ML models of PCE and predict high-performing
donor/acceptor pairs not reported in the literature and 2) To simulate an active learning
loop through which donor/acceptor pairs are ‘discovered’ sequentially. (J71, Y6) referenced
in the figure is a donor/acceptor pair.
Creating PolymerSolarCellsNLP
Polymer solar cells ∗was the domain with the largest number of papers in our corpus.
It is conventional for scientists to record information such as the donor/acceptor system
∗Note that our usage of polymer solar cells refers to cells in which at least the donor is a polymer,32–34
in contrast to all-polymer cells35,36 in which the donor and acceptor are polymers.
6
developed in the paper as well as its key device characteristics in the abstract of the paper.
Moreover, this field has for the most part developed over the ∼20 year time span between
2000 and 2022 which overlaps well with the time frame of our corpus of papers. Most of the
research in this field has also focused on developing a donor/acceptor that improves one key
property namely the power conversion efficiency of the resulting cell. This makes it an ideal
playground for our active learning experiments.
We picked the subset of abstracts (from which we extracted all material property data),
that contained the keyword “solar cell” and contained reported values for PSC device charac-
teristics. We also excluded keywords such as “perovskite”, “dye-sensitized”, “tandem solar
cell”, “quantum dot”, “hybrid solar cell”, “silicon solar cell” and “ternary solar cell”. In
practice, it is common for authors working in polymer solar cells to report the device char-
acteristics associated with the most important donor-acceptor combinations tested in the
paper in the abstract as they are the most significant results reported in the paper. Since
the ontology used in Ref. 30 was not specific to polymer solar cells, it was necessary to dis-
tinguish donor and acceptor labels for material entities reported in the abstract. We labeled
material entities as donors or acceptors based on the following hierarchy of rules:
1. Donors and acceptors are often separated by a “/” or a “:” such as “P3HT/PCBM” or
“P3HT:PCBM” wherein the first entry is the donor and the second entry is the accep-
tor. Material entities mentioned in this manner were labeled as donors and acceptors
respectively
2. POLYMER or ORGANIC entities that co-occur with the word donor or acceptor were
labeled as the donor and acceptor respectively.
3. If PCBM or any other fullerene is mentioned in the text, then it was labeled as the
acceptor.
4. If an ORGANIC entity is present in the list of materials for a material property record,
then it was labeled as the acceptor and the POLYMER entity in that material list was
7
labeled as the donor. This case could also correspond to a small molecule donor and a
polymeric acceptor. However, small molecule donors are rarely observed in our dataset
and are hence ignored in this rule.
Anything that fell outside the above set of rules was marked as being ambiguous and
required manual curation.
It is common for polymers to be referred to by generic identifiers such as P1 or P2 and
for the corresponding structure to be provided in the paper. In such cases, we changed
the name of the entity to P1 DOI where DOI is the digital object identifier of the pa-
per. This helps distinguish this case from other papers where similar identifiers were used.
PolymerSolarCellsNLP thus contains NLP extracted donor/acceptor pairs and their corre-
sponding device characteristics. The NLP pipeline also extracts coreferents (such as abbre-
viations) for the donor and acceptor.
Curating PolymerSolarCellsNLP to create PolymerSolarCellsCurated
To train machine learning models, we curated a subset of PolymerSolarCellsNLP to 1) fix any
extraction errors made by the NLP pipeline and 2) collect SMILES strings for donors and
acceptors which can be used to generate a structural fingerprint of the material entity for
training models. The SMILES string is a string representation of the structure of a molecule.
Using each extracted datapoint in PolymerSolarCellsNLP as the starting point, curators
checked the corresponding abstract to see if the NLP extracted data was correct. If any
part of the NLP extracted data was incorrect, then annotators fixed the entities extracted
incorrectly.
This included ensuring that the donor, acceptor, and corresponding device
characteristics mentioned in the abstract i.e. PCE, fill factor, open circuit voltage, and short
circuit were recorded correctly. Any relevant material property data present in the abstract
that the NLP pipeline failed to extract was recorded manually by the annotators. There
were cases where only the donor or the acceptor was mentioned in the abstract while the
other had to be located in the body of the paper. In such cases, the material entity not
8
found in the abstract is provided in single quotes to distinguish it from cases where the
material entity is provided in the abstract. The SMILES strings for all donors and acceptors
were also recorded. The SMILES strings for the most common donors and acceptors found
in our corpus were first created and then pre-populated in the corresponding row to avoid
repeating the effort of recreating those SMILES strings. For every other case, the SMILES
string was constructed by looking for the structure among the figures in the paper and using
the draw tool found in polymergenome.org to construct the SMILES string. In cases where
the structure was not found in the paper, the annotators looked for supporting references
that contained the structure. Note that we used the psmiles convention as defined in Ref.
37 for polymer SMILES strings. Creating the SMILES strings was the most time-consuming
aspect of data curation.
In addition to the basic curation workflow described above, we employed several filtering
criteria. We were only interested in properties reported for bulk heterojunction polymer
solar cells. Thus the donor in each data point is a polymer and papers dealing with ternary
systems, i.e., with multiple donors or multiple acceptors were excluded. This was done so that
the learning problem could be formulated using a single donor and acceptor. Small molecule
donors were excluded as very few papers in PolymerSolarCellsNLP report such data given
that our NLP pipeline was engineered to extract polymer property data. Out of 150 papers
randomly sampled from PolymerSolarCellsNLP, there was only one paper corresponding to
a small molecule donor. We also excluded papers reporting properties computed through
simulations or materials that were discovered using data-driven methods such as Ref. 7.
The device characteristics reported in PolymerSolarCellsCurated are power conversion effi-
ciency, fill factor, open circuit voltage, and short circuit current. In the analysis that follows,
we only make use of the power conversion efficiency. Note that all property values curated
were mentioned in the abstract. In case multiple property values are found in the abstract
corresponding to different fabrication conditions, the annotators were instructed to record
only those corresponding to the highest power conversion efficiency. This corresponds to the
9
optimal fabrication condition.
Machine learning prediction of power conversion efficiency
We used PolymerSolarCellsCurated to build machine learning models of the power conversion
efficiency (PCE) of a polymer solar cell. We modeled the PCE as being dependent on only
the donor and acceptor. In practice, the PCE depends on factors like the weight fractions of
the donor and acceptor and other device fabrication parameters.38 We however assumed that
the property values reported in the abstract are for systems in which other factors have been
optimized. This is because scientists typically report the highest PCE value they measure as
one of the key contributions of their paper which in turn corresponds to an optimized cell.
We empirically validated this assumption by sampling 20 papers in PolymerSolarCellsCurated
and verified that this assumption held true in all 20 papers. Our problem formulation is
more general than several others reported in the literature which only use the structure of
the donor and assume that the acceptor is a fullerene19 or do not consider the effect of the
acceptor.7 Due to the recent rise of non-fullerenes,18 it is necessary to include acceptors in
the problem formulation as done in Ref. 39. For donor-acceptor pairs for which multiple
power conversion efficiencies are available, we took the median of all available values. The
values may differ due to differences in the electron or hole transport layer, additives used
during the synthesis of the active layer, or the morphology of the active layer. Taking the
median “averages” out these factors.
We used hand-crafted fingerprints described in earlier work40 to fingerprint the donor and
acceptor. While other fingerprints have been developed for featurizing polymers using ideas
such as graph neural networks41 and BERT-based fingerprinting,37 we used handcrafted
fingerprints for this work as they can be used to fingerprint polymers as well as organic
molecules.
Moreover, each fingerprint component corresponds to a pre-defined chemical
feature which enables us to “peer” into the model and determine why the model made
certain predictions. In cases where the donor or acceptor is a copolymer, we take the average
10
fingerprint of all components of the copolymer, in keeping with past work.42 Further details
on fingerprinting methodology can be found in the Supporting Information Section 2. Min-
max scaling is performed on all fingerprint components to ensure that they are each between
0 and 1. The vector fingerprints for the donor and acceptor were then concatenated and input
to a Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) model to predict the power conversion efficiency.
The fingerprint dimension is 745 while the number of data points is 835. † Neural networks
tend to overfit when the number of data points is close to the dimension of the feature
space while GPR models generalize much better in this regime making it a natural choice
for our problem.43 We used the python package scikit-learn44 to train GPR models. We
used a Matern kernel45 with ν = 1.5. We chose this kernel as it is well tested in a variety of
materials informatics problems.46–48 PolymerSolarCellsCurated is split into 85 % for training
and 15 % for testing. We used the root mean squared error (RMSE) and the coefficient of
determination (r) to assess model performance.
Data selection methods for simulating active learning of polymer
solar cells
Using PolymerSolarCellsCurated as the set of candidate materials we picked a sequence of
donor/acceptor pairs using several data selection methods. This process was continued until
the data point with the highest PCE in our data set was discovered. This in effect, simulates
an active learning generated path of how the field of polymer solar cells may have developed
and can be used to compare against how the field developed. Let ypred
i
be the predicted value
of the GPR model for the ith test point and σi be the corresponding uncertainty of the GPR
model evaluated at that point where i ∈{1, ..., N} where N is the number of test points
at a given step in the active learning loop. Suppose the current step in the active learning
cycle is T. Let Yi represent the random variable corresponding to the measurement of the
†This is lower than the total number of unique donor/acceptor systems (867) contained in
PolymerSolarCellsCurated as 32 donor/acceptor systems in PolymerSolarCellsCuratedhave devices charac-
teristics other than PCE such as fill factor or open circuit voltage reported in the corresponding abstracts.
11
ith test point. If GPR is used to model Yi, then it is known that Yi is Gaussian distributed
with mean ypred
i
and standard deviation σi. We employed several different methods to pick
the next data point to test, described below.
1. Gaussian Process-Upper Confidence Bound (GP-UCB): This uses the pre-
dicted value along with its uncertainty to pick points, i.e., ypred
i
+ βσi. The parameter
β controls the trade-off of exploration versus exploitation. A higher value of β indicates
a belief that higher value points are likely to be found in regions of uncertainty while
a lower value of beta indicates a belief that the model predictions should be exploited
as is. We used a value of β = 1 in this work as it represents a balanced trade-off of
exploration and exploitation49
2. Gaussian Process-Probability Improvement (GP-PI): Intuitively, this strategy
looks for points that have the highest probability of being greater than some threshold
θ. P(Yi > θ) = 1 −Φ(θ−ypred
i
σi
) = Φ(ypred
i
−θ
σi
). Here Φ(.) is the cumulative probability
distribution function for a standard Gaussian. In practice, the threshold is selected to
be the value of the highest y sampled until that point, multiplied by some improve-
ment fraction 1 + ν, i.e., θ = maxt∈{1,...,T} yt(1 + ν). We pick a value of ν = 0.01.
This provides a practical compromise between being too aggressive or too conserva-
tive in seeking improvements across all active learning cycles. This is enough to avoid
negligible improvements between cycles but is not so large as to miss potential subtle
improvements in areas close to the current best observations thus leading to consistent
and gradual improvement.50 After computing the probability of improvement for all
test points, we pick the point with the greatest value.
3. Gaussian Process-Expected Improvement (GP-EI): In contrast to the previous
strategy where we compute the probability of improvement over some threshold, in
this strategy we look at the expected value of the difference between the value and
the threshold. Thus we compute the quantity E[Yi −θ] =
R ∞
−∞(yi −θ)p(yi)dyi. This
12
evaluates to E[Yi −θ] = (ypred
i
−θ)Φ(ypred
i
σi ) + σiϕ(ypred
i
σi ), where ϕ(.) is the probability
distribution function of the standard gaussian. The threshold is computed the same
way as GP-PI. After computing this quantity for all test points, we pick the point with
the largest expected improvement.
4. Greedy acquisition: This strategy simply looks at the highest predicted values ypred
i
.
This is equivalent to using β = 0 in GP-UCB.
5. Gaussian Process-Thompson Sampling (GP-TS): For each material system, we
sample the value of the power conversion efficiency from a Gaussian distribution with
mean ypred
i
and standard deviation σi. We pick the material system with the highest
sampled property value.
6. Linear contextual bandits: In a multi-arm bandit setting, an agent interacts with
an environment over several rounds. In contrast to the methods described above, we do
not train an ML model at each round. During each round, the agent selects an action
from a set of available actions (also known as “arms” in the multi-arm bandit setting)
where each action is represented by a d-dimensional feature vector (the “context”). In
this case, the set of actions is the available set of donor/acceptor systems. After taking
an action, the agent receives a reward, which in this case is the value of the PCE
“measured” for a donor/acceptor system. The goal is to learn a policy (a mapping
from context to action) that maximizes the expected cumulative reward over time. In
linear contextual bandits, the reward function is assumed to be a linear function of the
action. The agent’s goal is to estimate the parameters of the linear model based on
observed data and use it to make action selections that maximize expected rewards.
We implemented Thompson Sampling for linear contextual bandits.51 While training
GPR models, the focus is on optimizing prediction accuracy, while in linear contextual
bandits, the focus is on maximizing cumulative rewards. Instead of having a fixed
data set used for training, contextual bandits involve online learning where the agent
13
interacts with the environment and adapts its policy over time. Further mathematical
details are provided in Supporting Information Section 1.
7. Random: A donor/acceptor pair is sampled uniformly from the candidate set at each
step of the active learning cycle.
In each of the above methods, we could pick a batch b of any size but in practice, we use
b = 1 since the cost of fabricating a cell with a given material system and measuring the
PCE is much larger than the computational cost of the active learning loop.
Results and discussion
Analysis of polymer solar cell data
There are 3307 documents in PolymerSolarCellsNLP out of which 861 (∼26 %) have been
curated to create PolymerSolarCellsCurated (detailed breakdown in Table 2). The number of
unique data points in PolymerSolarCellsNLP is estimated based on the normalized names
of the donors and acceptors and is an approximation. The donors are always polymers and
hence can be normalized using the normalization workflow described in earlier work.29 The
acceptors on the other hand can be polymers or organic molecules. For polymer acceptors,
we used our polymer normalization workflow. For fullerene acceptors, given that only about
four such acceptors are commonly used (PC61BM, PC71BM, C60, ICBA), we manually con-
structed a list of named entity variants for each of these. For other non-fullerene acceptors,
we constructed an on-the-fly normalization data set using the coreferents for all non-fullerene
acceptors mentioned among the curated papers. The number of total data points is greater
than the number of unique data points as there are several material systems reported in mul-
tiple papers, usually differing in cell fabrication conditions. For PolymerSolarCellsCurated,
the number of data points was computed using the canonical SMILES string of the donor
and acceptor. The SMILES strings were canonicalized using the psmiles package described
14
in Ref. 37. Canonicalization is important as the same chemical structure can be represented
as a valid SMILES string in multiple ways and canonicalization is used to create a unique
SMILES string for a given chemical structure.
We can see from the heatmap in Figure 2 that only a small fraction (0.70 %) of the
donor/acceptor space has been explored experimentally. Not all donors and acceptors are
labeled as they are far too numerous.
The donors on the heat map which are reported
against the most acceptors correspond to P3HT (40), PTB7-Th (40), PBDB-T (37). The
material system with the highest reported PCE for a bulk heterojunction polymer solar cell
in PolymerSolarCellsCurated is PBDS-T as donor and BTP-ec9 as acceptor with a reported
PCE of 16.4 %.52 We built a prediction pipeline that can fill in the blanks in this figure
and used that to discern patterns as well as find optimal donor/acceptor combinations that
would otherwise require expensive experimental measurements. A machine learning model
that takes both the donor and the acceptor structure as input should in principle be able
to learn correlations between the two which can be used to predict novel combinations of
donors and acceptors.
Table 2: Detailed composition of the NLP extracted polymer solar cell data and the curated
subset
Type of data
PolymerSolarCellsNLP
PolymerSolarCellsCurated
Number of papers
3307
861
Unique donor-fullerene pairs
1160
607
Total donor-fullerene data points
2107
903
Unique donor- non-fullerene pairs
1425
261
Total
donor-non-fullerene
data
points
1934
284
Number of unique donors
1910
628
Number of unique acceptors
649
190
Maximum reported power conver-
sion efficiency
-
16.4 %
In Table 3 we compare the ground truth versus the extracted data to measure the fidelity
with which the NLP system can extract the relevant polymer solar cell data.
We measured the fidelity of extraction using k-tuple metrics where 2 ≤k ≤4. For a 4-
15
Figure 2: Entire donor/acceptor space at a glance. The donors and acceptors that are most
frequently reported are shown along the axes. The top three most commonly reported donors
and acceptors are spaced uniformly along each corresponding axes so that they can be clearly
distinguished. The remaining donors and acceptors are randomly ordered.
tuple comparison, we looked at the tuple (donor, acceptor, property name, property value).
We compared the ground truth tuples against the NLP extracted tuples for each abstract
to check if there is any NLP extracted tuple for which all 4 entries are identical and that
is marked as a true positive (TP). If no such NLP extracted tuple is found then we have
a false negative (FN). We similarly compared the NLP extracted tuples against the ground
truth tuples for each abstract to check if a match is found and if not then a false positive
(FP) is recorded. As the 4-tuple metric is strict, we computed 3-tuple and 2-tuple metrics
as well wherein the 4-tuple is split into 3 and 6 tuples respectively for each 4-tuple, in each
abstract. This allows us to see if at least some subsets of the 4-tuple are extracted correctly.
This is consistent with how extraction fidelity has been measured in the literature in cases
involving multiple entities in a tuple.53 Precision, Recall, and F1 score are then calculated
as below:
16
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(1)
Each of the above metrics is reported as a % value.
Table 3: Comparing fidelity of NLP extracted data to ground truth data. Each value in the
table is a %.
Metric
Precision
Recall
F1
4-tuple
46.03
40.25
42.95
3-tuple
61.34
55.09
58.05
2-tuple
72.87
66.18
69.37
Predicting power conversion efficiency
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Parity plot for a machine learning model trained to predict power conversion
efficiency. a) Model trained using only donors as input b) Model trained using donors and
acceptors as input to the model
17
The RMSE of property prediction is 2.07 % for the model using donors as well as ac-
ceptors as seen in the parity plot in Figure 3. Figure 3 compares a machine learning model
trained using the donor alone and using the donor as well as the acceptor as input to the
model. The donor-only data set was constructed by removing the acceptors from each data
point in the donor/acceptor data set thus ensuring a fair comparison. Thus, some data
points have the same donor but different values of power conversion efficiency which is due
to the corresponding acceptors being different. Having additional information on the ac-
ceptor improves the prediction performance of the model by 0.22 % as measured by the
test RMSE. Note that the train-test split is identical for both Figure 3a and Figure 3b.
Figure 4 shows the predicted power conversion efficiencies for all donor/acceptor pairs in
PolymerSolarCellsCurated. We observe from Figure 4 that the use of certain acceptors can
improve the power conversion efficiency significantly. The bright red horizontal line at the
bottom corresponds to the acceptor BTIC-2Br-m which is a Y6-based acceptor. Similarly,
some of the other high-performance acceptors in Figure 4 are also based on Y654 such as
BTP-4Cl and BTP-ec9. The observations we make from this figure match well with the
strategy recently employed in the polymer solar cell community of using acceptors based on
Y6 and testing it with various donors.
The highest donor/acceptor pairs predicted from our model are listed in Table 4 along
with the corresponding power conversion efficiency. All the acceptors are based on Y6 and
the corresponding donors are thus recommendations for promising combinations. Due to the
sparsity of the underlying data set, however, this extrapolation must be viewed with caution.
It is possible that the acceptors with the highest recorded PCE have an undue influence on
the predictions and that donor/acceptor interactions are unable to be fully captured due to
the sparsity of the underlying data. The vast majority of donors are reported with just a
single acceptor and likewise, most acceptors are tested with just a single donor, thus making
it difficult for a model to learn the correlations effectively. To examine this possibility more
closely, we looked at the top donors and acceptors from Figure 4 by computing the average
18
PCE over donors for each acceptor and likewise for donors (Table 5). . The top pairs reported
in Table 4 are not simply formed by matching the top donors with the top acceptors in Table
5 but are non-trivial combinations of donors and acceptors, suggesting that the model may
well be learning meaningful donor/acceptor co-relations.
The acceptors used in the top
reported pairs match closely with the top acceptors overall and the average PCE for the top
acceptors is higher than that for the top donors suggesting that acceptors do indeed play a
more important role than donors in determining the power conversion efficiency in the high
PCE regime.
Thus, we have demonstrated the end-to-end use of NLP to facilitate the creation of
a data set which is then used for building machine learning models and predicting new
donor/acceptor combinations for polymer solar cells. This also validates our modeling ap-
proach for simulated active learning discussed in the next section.
Figure 4: Predicted power conversion efficiency value for the entire donor/acceptor space.
The donors and acceptors with the highest average PCE are shown along the axes. The
ordering of donors and acceptors is the same as Figure 2.
19
Table 4: Donor/acceptor pairs with highest predicted power conversion efficiency
Donor
Acceptor
Predicted power
conversion
effi-
ciency
True PCE (if re-
ported in litera-
ture)
PBDB-TF
BTIC-2Br-m
14.34 %
16.1 %55
PM6
BTIC-2Br-m
14.33 %
-
PFBDB-T56
BTIC-2Br-m
14.33 %
-
PM7
BTP-ec9
14.31 %
-
PM7
BTP-4Cl
14.30 %
-
PM7
TPIC-4Cl
14.25 %
15.1 %57
PDBT-F58
BTIC-2Br-m
14.20 %
-
L2
BTP-ec9
14.17 %
-
L2
BTP-4Cl
14.16 %
-
PBDT(T)[2F]T59
BTIC-2Br-m
14.07 %
-
Table 5: Top donors and acceptors from Figure 4
Top Donors
Average PCE (%)
Top acceptors
Average
PCE
(%)
PTzBI-Si60
8.87
BTIC-2Br-m55
12.42
L261
8.68
BTP-4Cl62
11.19
PTQ1063
8.46
BTP-ec9
11.07
PM764
8.44
TPIC-4Cl57
10.42
F1365
7.98
Y6
9.37
Simulating the ‘discovery’ of new donor/acceptor combinations
The green line in Figure 5a-c shows how the power conversion efficiency of polymer solar cell
systems reported in the literature has changed over time. Each data point corresponds to a
single donor/acceptor system. In cases where a donor/acceptor system is reported multiple
times in the literature, we take the median value and the timestamp for the paper correspond-
ing to the median value ‡. Observe that the value of PCE shows an upward trend till 2022
when a peak of 16.4 % was obtained which is the highest value in PolymerSolarCellsCurated.
Thus this plot captures a near complete picture of the evolution of the field of polymer solar
cells. The discovery of new material systems has proceeded through trial and error which is
why the PCE does not increase monotonically but fluctuates in value over time. The number
‡in cases where the number of data points n is even, we use the PCE at index n
2 after the PCE values
are sorted
20
of PCE values reported that under-perform the then-state-of-the-art is likely underestimated
on this plot given that only material systems considered improvements get published. This
results in a bias in the available data.66
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5: Comparing the simulated path of material systems generated by data selection
methods against the evolution of power conversion efficiency in the experimental literature.
a) Both fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors included among candidate material systems b)
fullerene acceptor only c) non-fullerene acceptors only. Fig. d-f shows the range of values
obtained over ten different starting material systems for each data selection method tested
for the acceptors used in the row above. In the box and whisker plot in Fig. d-f, the red line
indicates the median of the data while the cross represents the mean of the data. Hollow
circles are outliers.
We consider how this field may have evolved had it relied completely on data-driven
methods to pick the next donor/acceptor combinations to evaluate rather than relying on
trial and error. This allows us to empirically estimate how much faster we could have reached
the end-point shown in Figure 5a-c.
21
Figure 1 shows the iterative process we used for material selection. The initial donor/acceptor
system we used was OC1C10-PPV/PC61BM67 which was the earliest reported material sys-
tem in PolymerSolarCellsCurated.
At each step, we trained a GPR model using all data
already “measured” and used that to make predictions on the remaining donor/acceptor
pairs in PolymerSolarCellsCurated. We picked one donor/acceptor system that was the most
“promising” according to a few different possible strategies. We “measured” the true power
conversion efficiency by looking up the value from PolymerSolarCellsCurated. This new data
point was then used to augment the training data set to train a new model and repeat the
above cycle. The iterations were terminated when the material system with the highest value
in our data set was identified. This is identical to active learning with the key difference
being that we can compare active learning generated paths of donor/acceptor pairs against
how the field evolved and estimate the speedup. We make three key assumptions in this
analysis:
1. The list of donor/acceptor systems used as candidate material systems is the full list of
material systems reported in PolymerSolarCellsCurated. While we do not assume fore-
knowledge of the actual value of PCE, coming up with viable new material systems
was part of the evolution of this field which we are unable to realistically simulate. A
fairer analysis would assume a much larger candidate list of donor/acceptor systems
which would be created without the bias that they were reported in the polymer solar
cell literature. There would however be no way to “measure” the value of PCE for
these material systems with the same fidelity as experimentally reported values.
2. The timestamp associated with each new donor/acceptor system that is picked is the
same as the timestamp for an entry of the corresponding index in the experimental data.
As the experimentally reported results come from many different research groups, this
assumption is reasonable if we assume that many different research groups are involved
in this data-driven workflow. It may even be possible for funding agencies to allocate
resources more efficiently if the iterative methodology described in this section were to
22
be followed.
3. Our simplified problem formulation considers only the discovery of donor/acceptor
pairs which are the most critical component of a polymer solar cell and does not
consider processing/fabrication.
As we see in Figure 5a-f, the data selection methods used in this work outperform trial
and error and random data selection. We compared different methods using the discovery
time speedup factor (DTSF) which is defined below:
DTSF = texp
max −t0
tsim
max −t0
(2)
where t0 is the timestamp associated with the earliest data point in PolymerSolarCellsCurated,
texp
max is the timestamp for the paper when the highest experimental PCE was reported in
PolymerSolarCellsCurated, tsim
max is the timestamp corresponding to the index at which the
simulated path reaches the same maximum PCE. The timestamp here is the date converted
to a rational number in which the fractional part is the day and month converted to a fraction
of a full year and the integer part is the year.
Intuitively this gives a sense of how much faster machine learning methods can reach the
same end-point as trial and error methods. When fullerenes, as well as non-fullerenes, are
used as candidate acceptors, we obtain the greatest speedup of a factor of about 4 while the
speedup factor is lower when only one of fullerenes or non-fullerenes are used as candidate
acceptors, reducing to a factor of ∼2. In the context of polymer solar cell donor/acceptor
discovery, this translates to a time saving of ∼15 years. This is one of the first quantitative
estimates of the time saved by using machine learning for materials discovery that we are
aware of using historical data of how materials discovery evolved. Figure 5a-c assume a
fixed starting donor/acceptor system, namely OC1C10-PPV/PC61BM. For all methods tested
except GP-TS and linear contextual bandits, a fixed starting point would result in a fixed
path of donor/acceptor pairs being selected as a GPR model will always generate the same
23
predictions given fixed training data and fixed hyperparameters.
In the case of GP-TS
and linear contextual bandits, however, there is a sampling step involved in picking a new
material which inherently introduces randomness.
We used the first ten donor/acceptor
pairs reported in PolymerSolarCellsCurated to estimate the range of speedups obtained for
each method. These ten donor/acceptor systems belong to the same generation of polymer
solar cells and are listed in Supporting Information Section 3. When error bars are accounted
for, we notice, from Figure 5d-f that GP-UCB, GP-EI, GP-PI and contextual bandits perform
similarly. GP-TS appears to underperform the other data selection methods in Figer 5d and
f while Greedy outperforms the other data selection methods in Figure 5f. Since Greedy has
a higher value on average, we plot the path generated by Greedy in Figure 5a-c. GP-UCB
has the tightest variance across all data selection methods tested, for all acceptor types. This
indicates that trading off exploration and exploitation is a sound strategy to be robust to
the starting material system of the active learning cycle. Note that linear contextual bandits
which is a linear method and therefore much faster than non-parametric methods like GPR,
has a similar speedup factor as GPR-based methods.
This indicates that the predictive
capabilities of a model have little to do with how quickly it can identify the best-performing
material system. We shall explore this more fully in the next section.
Analyzing the predictions from data selection methods
This section examines the path of donor/acceptor pairs picked by various data selection
strategies. We projected the vector representations of the concatenated donor/acceptor ma-
terial fingerprint to two dimensions using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP).68 We considered fullerene as well as non-fullerene acceptors. This projection re-
sults in four clusters forming (Figure 6). The leftmost cluster corresponds to non-fullerene
small molecule acceptors and the remaining clusters are described in the caption. The paths
shown in Figure 6 were generated using OC1C10-PPV/PC61BM as the initial donor/acceptor
pair. Note from Figure 6b that greedy jumps to the non-fullerene small molecule space after
24
the first iteration and stays there during all subsequent iterations. This space is known to
contain the candidates most likely to have high power conversion efficiency. This is likely
why greedy has higher average speedups compared to other methods as seen in Figure 5a
and c. All other methods spend at least one or more iterations in exploring other parts of
the donor/acceptor space. Observe also that greedy when applied to non-fullerene acceptors
and both fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors differ in the first material system only. All
subsequent iterations for both cases are restricted to the space of non-fullerenes. Yet, there
is a statistically significant difference in the time taken to find the optimal material system
in both cases (refer Figure 5d and f) with the non-fullerene only case taking significantly
longer. We posit that the initial inclusion of the fullerene acceptor or more generally the
inclusion of some initial material system that is different from the space where the optimal
material system is expected to lie, would accelerate convergence to the optimal material
system. This could be because the initial diversity helps give the model a better “view”
of the material space compared to if the candidates were less diverse. The latter can at
best present the model with a very local region of the material space, thus requiring more
iterations to understand the best direction to traverse in material space.
At each iteration, we measured the predictive performance of the trained GPR model
by comparing its predictions against all points not yet added to the test set (Figure 7).
The data points used for measuring test performance are reduced by one point at every
iteration and have some points that are different for each selection method. However, the
number of points selected during a typical active learning run (20-30) is small compared to
the total number of data points (835) which makes this a reasonable approach to infer the
general trend in the predictive capabilities of the models being trained. Note that there
is no consistent improvement in the predictive performance of the models being trained as
the number of data points in the training set increases, for most of the selection methods
we test. This is consistent with results reported in Ref. 14. The notable exception to this
however is GP-TS in which successive models have improved predictive performance. This
25
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6: The simulated path of material systems for each data selection method with the
material system vectors being embedded in two dimensions using UMAP. The left most
cluster in each figure corresponds to non-fullerene small molecule acceptors. The middle
two clusters correspond to fullerene acceptors within which the top cluster corresponds to
donors with fused aromatic rings and the bottom cluster corresponds to all other donors.
The rightmost cluster consists of polymer acceptors. The plots correspond to a) GP-TS b)
Greedy c) GP-UCB d) GP-PI e) GP-EI f) Linear contextual bandits
intuitively makes sense as all other methods pick material systems by directly optimizing
for high power conversion efficiency and therefore bias the trained model using the picked
data points. GP-TS on the other hand picks material systems by maximizing over PCEs
sampled from the predicted distribution for each material system and thus samples a more
diverse set of data points as seen in Figure 6a. This diverse sampling is likely what leads
to GP-TS being slower than other data selection methods as seen in Figure 5d-f. Thus this
data selection strategy allows trading-off speed of discovery for training a stronger predictive
model. By design, GP-TS reaches the optimal material state quickly and in parallel trains
models with strong predictive performance and is the only method out of the methods we
test that consistently achieves this balance across acceptor types. The trend observed in
26
Figure 7 is reported for both types of acceptors. The same trend for GP-TS is observed for
iterations performed over fullerene acceptors and non-fullerene acceptor candidates, reported
in Supporting Information Section 4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7: Evolution of the predictive performance of the models trained using different data
selection methods using OC1C10-PPV/PC61BM as the initial donor/acceptor pair. The data
selection methods compared are a) GP-TS b) Greedy c) GP-UCB d) GP-PI e) GP-EI
Summary and Outlook
A pipeline that extracts material property data from published literature which is then
used for training property prediction models was built. We found promising donor/acceptor
combinations that have not yet been reported in the literature, by training models to predict
power conversion efficiency. We used the timestamp associated with our literature-extracted
data set to demonstrate that data-driven methods alone would have discovered the most
promising donor/acceptor system in only one-fourth of the time it took through trial and
27
error. This allows for a stronger case to be made to policymakers to encourage further use of
ML methods for materials discovery. We summarize some best practices learned from this
study for deploying active learning for materials discovery
1. Gaussian Process-Thompson sampling should be used as the active learning strategy
if training a strong property predictor is desired.
2. If robustness to the starting material is desired, then GP-UCB is the recommended
strategy which will also on average lead to fast discovery of the optimal material system.
3. Using a diverse initial set of candidates during the active learning cycle helps the model
learn the optimization landscape more quickly and is empirically observed to lead to
faster convergence.
There are some key limitations of our study that we highlight below.
1. The list of candidate material systems we pick from, is the set of donor/acceptor
systems that have already been tested in the literature.
The structures that were
tested much later in the literature could only be discovered due to the experimental
trial and error that preceded it.
2. We assume that the time intervals of measurement in the data-driven view are identi-
cal to the trial and error approach, i.e., new materials through data-driven approaches
can be discovered at the same rate at which experimental papers containing new
donor/acceptor systems were published.
3. Our simplified formulation of the polymer solar cell optimization problem does not
consider other aspects of the cell such as the electrodes, electron/hole transport layer,
and fabrication/processing of the cell. These factors would affect our estimate of the
speedup of ML methods over trial-and-error experiments.
28
This study views active learning as a sequential process whereby a material is “chosen”
by the model and tested by the scientist. The only input from the scientist is the list of
materials provided initially. The difficulty of coming up with a perfect initial list ensures,
however, that scientists and machines would need to coordinate more closely in practice.
The insights generated by the selection process can guide scientific intuition to update the
list of materials continuously. An example of this is provided in Supporting Information
Section 5.
One of the bottlenecks when going from NLP-extracted data to a data set usable for
training ML models is obtaining SMILES strings for the donor and acceptor. This had to
be done manually during data curation. There are computer vision tools available that can
convert structures to SMILES strings such as MolScribe69 and OSRA.70 However, donor
or acceptor structures found in the literature are typically part of a larger figure such as a
reaction scheme. Robust segmentation of relevant structures combined with conversion of
structures to SMILES strings is necessary to bridge the gap between NLP extracted data and
trained property predictors. Furthermore, the conversion of polymer structures to SMILES
strings is not yet possible through these tools.
We also limited our focus to optimizing a single material property, namely the PCE. In
practice, however, materials scientists are often interested in optimizing multiple properties
simultaneously which may be inversely co-related.
In Ref. 10, for instance, the authors
find optimal multi-principal element alloys while optimizing two ductility indicators (Pugh’s
Ratio and Cauchy pressure). Multi-objective Bayesian approaches using hypervolume indi-
cators are a promising approach for solving such problems.71,72 In organic photovoltaics, a
possible direction of inquiry would be a simultaneous optimization of the efficiency, flexibil-
ity, and stability of the solar cell. PSCs need to be stable and retain their power conversion
efficiency with usage. This is typically inversely co-related with PCE. Higher flexibility PSCs
usually have weaker mechanical properties and therefore lower PCE.73–75
The ability to scale up the pipeline we have built to other properties and materials classes
29
will significantly speed up the development and deployment of new materials. This in turn
will accelerate scientific discovery across many critical applications such as clean energy,
healthcare, and devices.
Supporting Information
Additional experimental details, results, and theoretical background on methods used
Acknowledgements
This work was also supported by the Office of Naval Research through grants N00014-19-1-
2103 and N00014-20-1-2175. Pranav Shetty was funded by a fellowship by JPMorgan Chase
& Co. that helped to support this research. Any views or opinions expressed herein are
solely those of the authors listed, and may differ from the views and opinions expressed by
JPMorgan Chase & Co. or its affiliates.
Data and software availability
All code and data needed to reproduce the results in this paper can be found at https:
//github.com/pranav-s/PolymerSolarCellsML
References
(1) Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Kim, C.; Huan, T. D.; Pilania, G.;
Botu, V.; Ramprasad, R. Scoping the polymer genome: A roadmap for rational polymer
dielectrics design and beyond. Materials Today 2018, 21, 785–796.
(2) Ma, R.; Sharma, V.; Baldwin, A. F.; Tefferi, M.; Offenbach, I.; Cakmak, M.; Weiss, R.;
30
Cao, Y.; Ramprasad, R.; Sotzing, G. A. Rational design and synthesis of polythioureas
as capacitor dielectrics. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2015, 3, 14845–14852.
(3) Wu, C.; Chen, L.; Deshmukh, A.; Kamal, D.; Li, Z.; Shetty, P.; Zhou, J.; Sahu, H.;
Tran, H.; Sotzing, G.; Ramprasad, R.; Cao, Y. Dielectric polymers tolerant to elec-
tric field and temperature extremes: Integration of phenomenology, informatics, and
experimental validation. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2021, 13, 53416–53424.
(4) He, J.; Rabe, K. M.; Wolverton, C. Computationally accelerated discovery of functional
and structural Heusler materials. MRS Bulletin 2022, 47, 559–572.
(5) Jia, X.; Deng, Y.; Bao, X.; Yao, H.; Li, S.; Li, Z.; Chen, C.; Wang, X.; Mao, J.;
Cao, F.; Sui, J.; Wu, J.; Wang, C.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, X. Unsupervised machine learning
for discovery of promising half-Heusler thermoelectric materials. npj Computational
Materials 2022, 8, 34.
(6) Kranthiraja, K.; Saeki, A. Machine Learning-Assisted Polymer Design for Improving
the Performance of Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cells. ACS Applied Materials & Inter-
faces 2022, 14, 28936–28944.
(7) Sun, W.; Zheng, Y.; Yang, K.; Zhang, Q.; Shah, A. A.; Wu, Z.; Sun, Y.; Feng, L.;
Chen, D.; Xiao, Z.; Lu, S.; Li, Y.; Sun, K. Machine learning–assisted molecular design
and efficiency prediction for high-performance organic photovoltaic materials. Science
advances 2019, 5, eaay4275.
(8) Yang, J.; Tao, L.; He, J.; McCutcheon, J. R.; Li, Y. Machine learning enables in-
terpretable discovery of innovative polymers for gas separation membranes. Science
Advances 2022, 8, eabn9545.
(9) MacLeod, B. P.; Parlane, F. G.; Morrissey, T. D.; H¨ase, F.; Roch, L. M.; Dettel-
bach, K. E.; Moreira, R.; Yunker, L. P.; Rooney, M. B.; Deeth, J. R.; others Self-driving
31
laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin-film materials. Science Advances 2020, 6,
eaaz8867.
(10) Khatamsaz, D.; Vela, B.; Singh, P.; Johnson, D. D.; Allaire, D.; Arr´oyave, R. Multi-
objective materials bayesian optimization with active learning of design constraints:
Design of ductile refractory multi-principal-element alloys. Acta Materialia 2022, 236,
118133.
(11) Kim, C.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Jha, A.; Ramprasad, R. Active-learning and materials
design: the example of high glass transition temperature polymers. Mrs Communica-
tions 2019, 9, 860–866.
(12) Rohr, B.; Stein, H. S.; Guevarra, D.; Wang, Y.; Haber, J. A.; Aykol, M.; Suram, S. K.;
Gregoire, J. M. Benchmarking the acceleration of materials discovery by sequential
learning. Chemical science 2020, 11, 2696–2706.
(13) Wang, A.; Liang, H.; McDannald, A.; Takeuchi, I.; Kusne, A. G. Benchmarking active
learning strategies for materials optimization and discovery. Oxford Open Materials
Science 2022, 2, itac006.
(14) Borg, C. K.; Muckley, E. S.; Nyby, C.; Saal, J. E.; Ward, L.; Mehta, A.; Meredig, B.
Quantifying the performance of machine learning models in materials discovery. Digital
Discovery 2023, 2, 327–338.
(15) Duros, V.; Grizou, J.; Xuan, W.; Hosni, Z.; Long, D.-L.; Miras, H. N.; Cronin, L.
Human versus robots in the discovery and crystallization of gigantic polyoxometalates.
Angewandte Chemie 2017, 129, 10955–10960.
(16) Duros, V.; Grizou, J.; Sharma, A.; Mehr, S. H. M.; Bubliauskas, A.; Frei, P.; Mi-
ras, H. N.; Cronin, L. Intuition-Enabled Machine Learning Beats the Competition
When Joint Human-Robot Teams Perform Inorganic Chemical Experiments. Journal
of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59, 2664–2671, PMID: 31025861.
32
(17) Shields, B. J.; Stevens, J.; Li, J.; Parasram, M.; Damani, F.; Alvarado, J. I. M.;
Janey, J. M.; Adams, R. P.; Doyle, A. G. Bayesian reaction optimization as a tool
for chemical synthesis. Nature 2021, 590, 89–96.
(18) Fu, H.; Wang, Z.; Sun, Y. Polymer donors for high-performance non-fullerene organic
solar cells. Angew. Chem. Int 2019, 58, 4442–4453.
(19) Nagasawa, S.; Al-Naamani, E.; Saeki, A. Computer-aided screening of conjugated poly-
mers for organic solar cell: classification by random forest. J. Phys. Chem 2018, 9,
2639–2646.
(20) Miyake, Y.; Saeki, A. Machine learning-assisted development of organic solar cell mate-
rials: issues, analyses, and outlooks. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2021,
12, 12391–12401.
(21) Greenstein, B. L.; Hutchison, G. R. Screening Efficient Tandem Organic Solar Cells
with Machine Learning and Genetic Algorithms. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C
2023, 127, 6179–6191.
(22) Lopez, S. A.; Pyzer-Knapp, E. O.; Simm, G. N.; Lutzow, T.; Li, K.; Seress, L. R.;
Hachmann, J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. The Harvard organic photovoltaic dataset. Scientific
data 2016, 3, 1–7.
(23) Tshitoyan, V.; Dagdelen, J.; Weston, L.; Dunn, A.; Rong, Z.; Kononova, O.; Pers-
son, K. A.; Ceder, G.; Jain, A. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge
from materials science literature. Nature 2019, 571, 95–98.
(24) Kononova, O.; Huo, H.; He, T.; Rong, Z.; Botari, T.; Sun, W.; Tshitoyan, V.; Ceder, G.
Text-mined dataset of inorganic materials synthesis recipes. Scientific data 2019, 6, 1–
11.
33
(25) Guo, J.; Ibanez-Lopez, A. S.; Gao, H.; Quach, V.; Coley, C. W.; Jensen, K. F.; Barzi-
lay, R. Automated Chemical Reaction Extraction from Scientific Literature. Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 2021,
(26) Court, C. J.; Cole, J. M. Auto-generated materials database of Curie and N´eel temper-
atures via semi-supervised relationship extraction. Sci. Data 2018, 5, 1–12.
(27) Jensen, Z.; Kim, E.; Kwon, S.; Gani, T. Z.; Roman-Leshkov, Y.; Moliner, M.;
Corma, A.; Olivetti, E. A machine learning approach to zeolite synthesis enabled by
automatic literature data extraction. ACS central science 2019, 5, 892–899.
(28) Shetty, P.; Ramprasad, R. Automated knowledge extraction from polymer literature
using natural language processing. iScience 2020, 24, 101922.
(29) Shetty, P.; Ramprasad, R. Machine-Guided Polymer Knowledge Extraction Using Nat-
ural Language Processing: The Example of Named Entity Normalization. Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 2021, 61, 5377–5385.
(30) Shetty, P.; Rajan, A. C.; Kuenneth, C.; Gupta, S.; Panchumarti, L. P.; Holm, L.;
Zhang, C.; Ramprasad, R. A general-purpose material property data extraction pipeline
from large polymer corpora using natural language processing. npj Computational Ma-
terials 2023, 9, 52.
(31) Weininger, D.; Weininger, A.; Weininger, J. L. SMILES. 2. Algorithm for generation of
unique SMILES notation. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 1989, 29, 97–101.
(32) Lee, S.; Jeong, D.; Kim, C.; Lee, C.; Kang, H.; Woo, H. Y.; Kim, B. J. Eco-friendly
polymer solar cells: Advances in green-solvent processing and material design. Acs
Nano 2020, 14, 14493–14527.
(33) Sorrentino, R.; Kozma, E.; Luzzati, S.; Po, R. Interlayers for non-fullerene based poly-
34
mer solar cells: distinctive features and challenges. Energy & Environmental Science
2021, 14, 180–223.
(34) Jin, J.; Wang, Q.; Ma, K.; Shen, W.; Belfiore, L. A.; Bao, X.; Tang, J. Recent de-
velopments of polymer solar cells with photovoltaic performance over 17%. Advanced
Functional Materials 2023, 33, 2213324.
(35) Yin, H.; Yan, C.; Hu, H.; Ho, J. K. W.; Zhan, X.; Li, G.; So, S. K. Recent progress
of all-polymer solar cells–From chemical structure and device physics to photovoltaic
performance. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 2020, 140, 100542.
(36) Ma, S.; Zhang, H.; Feng, K.; Guo, X. Polymer Acceptors for High-Performance All-
Polymer Solar Cells. Chemistry–A European Journal 2022, 28, e202200222.
(37) Kuenneth, C.; Ramprasad, R. polyBERT: a chemical language model to enable fully
machine-driven ultrafast polymer informatics. Nature Communications 2023, 14, 4099.
(38) Zhao, J.; Yao, C.; Ali, M. U.; Miao, J.; Meng, H. Recent advances in high-performance
organic solar cells enabled by acceptor–donor–acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–DA’ D–A)
type acceptors. Materials Chemistry Frontiers 2020, 4, 3487–3504.
(39) Padula, D.; Troisi, A. Concurrent optimization of organic donor–acceptor pairs through
machine learning. Advanced Energy Materials 2019, 9, 1902463.
(40) Doan Tran, H.; Kim, C.; Chen, L.; Chandrasekaran, A.; Batra, R.; Venkatram, S.;
Kamal, D.; Lightstone, J. P.; Gurnani, R.; Shetty, P.; Ramprasad, M.; Laws, J.; Shel-
ton, M.; Ramprasad, R. Machine-learning predictions of polymer properties with Poly-
mer Genome. J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 128, 171104.
(41) Gurnani, R.; Kuenneth, C.; Toland, A.; Ramprasad, R. Polymer Informatics at Scale
with Multitask Graph Neural Networks. Chemistry of Materials 2023, 35, 1560–1567.
35
(42) Kuenneth, C.; Schertzer, W.; Ramprasad, R. Copolymer informatics with multitask
deep neural networks. Macromolecules 2021, 54, 5957–5961.
(43) Kamath, A.; Vargas-Hern´andez, R. A.; Krems, R. V.; Carrington, T.; Manzhos, S. Neu-
ral networks vs Gaussian process regression for representing potential energy surfaces:
A comparative study of fit quality and vibrational spectrum accuracy. The Journal of
chemical physics 2018, 148.
(44) Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 2011, 12, 2825–2830.
(45) Williams, C. K.; Rasmussen, C. E. Gaussian processes for machine learning; MIT press
Cambridge, MA, 2006; Vol. 2.
(46) Noack, M. M.; Doerk, G. S.; Li, R.; Streit, J. K.; Vaia, R. A.; Yager, K. G.; Fukuto, M.
Autonomous materials discovery driven by Gaussian process regression with inhomo-
geneous measurement noise and anisotropic kernels. Scientific reports 2020, 10, 17663.
(47) Lookman, T.; Balachandran, P. V.; Xue, D.; Yuan, R. Active learning in materials
science with emphasis on adaptive sampling using uncertainties for targeted design. npj
Computational Materials 2019, 5, 21.
(48) Tran, K.; Neiswanger, W.; Yoon, J.; Zhang, Q.; Xing, E.; Ulissi, Z. W. Methods for com-
paring uncertainty quantifications for material property predictions. Machine Learning:
Science and Technology 2020, 1, 025006.
(49) Srinivas, N.; Krause, A.; Kakade, S. M.; Seeger, M. Gaussian process optimization in
the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.3995
2009,
(50) Jones, D. R.; Schonlau, M.; Welch, W. J. Efficient global optimization of expensive
black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization 1998, 13, 455–492.
36
(51) Agrawal, S.; Goyal, N. Thompson sampling for contextual bandits with linear payoffs.
International conference on machine learning. 2013; pp 127–135.
(52) Bin, H.; van der Pol, T. P.; Li, J.; van Gorkom, B. T.; Wienk, M. M.; Janssen, R. A. Ef-
ficient organic solar cells with small energy losses based on a wide-bandgap trialkylsilyl-
substituted donor polymer and a non-fullerene acceptor. Chemical Engineering Journal
2022, 435, 134878.
(53) Jain, S.; van Zuylen, M.; Hajishirzi, H.; Beltagy, I. SciREX: A challenge dataset for
document-level information extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00512 2020,
(54) Song, C. E.; Ham, H.; Noh, J.; Lee, S. K.; Kang, I.-N. Efficiency enhancement of a
fluorinated wide-bandgap polymer for ternary nonfullerene organic solar cells. Polymer
2020, 188, 122131.
(55) Wang, H.; Liu, T.; Zhou, J.; Mo, D.; Han, L.; Lai, H.; Chen, H.; Zheng, N.; Zhu, Y.;
Xie, Z.; He, F. Bromination: an alternative strategy for non-fullerene small molecule
acceptors. Advanced Science 2020, 7, 1903784.
(56) He, Q.; Shahid, M.; Wu, J.; Jiao, X.; Eisner, F. D.; Hodsden, T.; Fei, Z.; Anthopou-
los, T. D.; McNeill, C. R.; Durrant, J. R.; Heeney, M. Fused cyclopentadithienoth-
iophene acceptor enables ultrahigh short-circuit current and high efficiency >11% in
as-cast organic solar cells. Advanced Functional Materials 2019, 29, 1904956.
(57) Li, G.; Cheng, H.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, T.; Liu, Y. Higher open circuit voltage caused by
chlorinated polymers endows improved efficiency of binary organic solar cell. Organic
Electronics 2020, 83, 105776.
(58) Huang, J.; Peng, R.; Xie, L.; Song, W.; Hong, L.; Chen, S.; Wei, Q.; Ge, Z. A novel
polymer donor based on dithieno [2, 3-d: 2’, 3’-d”] benzo [1, 2-b: 4, 5-b’] dithiophene
for highly efficient polymer solar cells. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2019, 7,
2646–2652.
37
(59) Firdaus, Y.; Maffei, L. P.; Cruciani, F.; M¨uller, M. A.; Liu, S.; Lopatin, S.; Wehbe, N.;
Ndjawa, G. O. N.; Amassian, A.; Laquai, F.; Beaujuge, P. M. Polymer Main-Chain
Substitution Effects on the Efficiency of Nonfullerene BHJ Solar Cells. Advanced Energy
Materials 2017, 7, 1700834.
(60) Zhu, L. et al. Aggregation-induced multilength scaled morphology enabling 11.76%
efficiency in all-polymer solar cells using printing fabrication. Advanced Materials 2019,
31, 1902899.
(61) Li, X.; Weng, K.; Ryu, H. S.; Guo, J.; Zhang, X.; Xia, T.; Fu, H.; Wei, D.; Min, J.;
Zhang, Y.; Woo, H. Y.; Sun, Y. Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cells Based on Benzo
[1, 2-b: 4, 5-b’] difuran-Conjugated Polymer with 14% Efficiency. Advanced Functional
Materials 2020, 30, 1906809.
(62) Ma, L.; Zhang, S.; Yao, H.; Xu, Y.; Wang, J.; Zu, Y.; Hou, J. High-efficiency non-
fullerene organic solar cells enabled by 1000 nm thick active layers with a low trap-state
density. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2020, 12, 18777–18784.
(63) Sun, C.; Pan, F.; Chen, S.; Wang, R.; Sun, R.; Shang, Z.; Qiu, B.; Min, J.; Lv, M.;
Meng, L.; others Achieving fast charge separation and low nonradiative recombination
loss by rational fluorination for high-efficiency polymer solar cells. Advanced Materials
2019, 31, 1905480.
(64) Zhang, C.; Song, X.; Liu, K.-K.; Zhang, M.; Qu, J.; Yang, C.; Yuan, G.-Z.; Mah-
mood, A.; Liu, F.; He, F.; Baran, D.; Wang, J.-L. Electron-Deficient and Quinoid Cen-
tral Unit Engineering for Unfused Ring-Based A1–D–A2–D–A1-Type Acceptor Enables
High Performance Nonfullerene Polymer Solar Cells with High Voc and PCE Simulta-
neously. Small 2020, 16, 1907681.
(65) He, E.; Zheng, Z.; Lu, Y.; Guo, F.; Gao, S.; Pang, X.; Mola, G. T.; Zhao, L.; Zhang, Y.
Highly efficient non-fullerene polymer solar cells from a benzo [1, 2-b: 4, 5-b’] difuran-
38
based conjugated polymer with improved stabilities. Journal of Materials Chemistry A
2020, 8, 11381–11390.
(66) Fujinuma, N.; DeCost, B.; Hattrick-Simpers, J.; Lofland, S. E. Why big data and com-
pute are not necessarily the path to big materials science. Communications Materials
2022, 3, 59.
(67) Dyakonov, V. Electrical aspects of operation of polymer–fullerene solar cells. Thin Solid
Films 2004, 451, 493–497.
(68) McInnes, L.; Healy, J.; Melville, J. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and pro-
jection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 2018,
(69) Qian, Y.; Guo, J.; Tu, Z.; Li, Z.; Coley, C. W.; Barzilay, R. MolScribe: Robust Molec-
ular Structure Recognition with Image-to-Graph Generation. Journal of Chemical In-
formation and Modeling 2023, 63, 1925–1934.
(70) Filippov, I. V.; Nicklaus, M. C. Optical Structure Recognition Software To Recover
Chemical Information: OSRA, An Open Source Solution. Journal of Chemical Infor-
mation and Modeling 2009, 49, 740–743, PMID: 19434905.
(71) Yang, Q.; Ding, S. Novel algorithm to calculate hypervolume indicator of Pareto ap-
proximation set. International Conference on Intelligent Computing. 2007; pp 235–244.
(72) Emmerich, M. T.; Deutz, A. H.; Klinkenberg, J. W. Hypervolume-based expected im-
provement: Monotonicity properties and exact computation. 2011 IEEE Congress of
Evolutionary Computation (CEC). 2011; pp 2147–2154.
(73) Xu, X.; Fukuda, K.; Karki, A.; Park, S.; Kimura, H.; Jinno, H.; Watanabe, N.; Ya-
mamoto, S.; Shimomura, S.; Kitazawa, D.; Yokota, T.; Umezu, S.; Nguyen, T.-Q.;
Someya, T. Thermally stable, highly efficient, ultraflexible organic photovoltaics. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2018, 115, 4589–4594.
39
(74) Gevorgyan, S. A.;
Heckler, I. M.;
Bundgaard, E.;
Corazza, M.;
H¨osel, M.;
Søndergaard, R. R.; dos Reis Benatto, G. A.; Jørgensen, M.; Krebs, F. C. Improving,
characterizing and predicting the lifetime of organic photovoltaics. Journal of Physics
D: Applied Physics 2017, 50, 103001.
(75) Rafique, S.; Abdullah, S. M.; Sulaiman, K.; Iwamoto, M. Fundamentals of bulk hetero-
junction organic solar cells: An overview of stability/degradation issues and strategies
for improvement. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2018, 84, 43–53.
40
