Title: A Method for Open-Vocabulary Speech-Driven Text Retrieval
Source URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0206014v1
--------------------------------------------------

arXiv:cs/0206014v1  [cs.CL]  9 Jun 2002
A Method for Open-Vocabulary Speech-Driven Text Retrieval
Atsushi Fujii∗
University of Library and
Information Science
1-2 Kasuga, Tsukuba
305-8550, Japan
fujii@ulis.ac.jp
Katunobu Itou
National Institute of
Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology
1-1-1 Chuuou Daini Umezono
Tsukuba, 305-8568, Japan
itou@ni.aist.go.jp
Tetsuya Ishikawa
University of Library and
Information Science
1-2 Kasuga, Tsukuba
305-8550, Japan
ishikawa@ulis.ac.jp
Abstract
While recent retrieval techniques do not
limit the number of index terms, out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) words are crucial in
speech recognition. Aiming at retrieving
information with spoken queries, we ﬁll
the gap between speech recognition and
text retrieval in terms of the vocabulary
size.
Given a spoken query, we gener-
ate a transcription and detect OOV words
through speech recognition. We then cor-
respond detected OOV words to terms in-
dexed in a target collection to complete the
transcription, and search the collection for
documents relevant to the completed tran-
scription.
We show the effectiveness of
our method by way of experiments.
1
Introduction
Automatic speech recognition, which decodes hu-
man voice to generate transcriptions, has of late
become a practical technology.
It is feasible that
speech recognition is used in real-world human lan-
guage applications, such as information retrieval.
Initiated partially by TREC-6, various methods
have been proposed for “spoken document retrieval
(SDR),” in which written queries are used to search
speech archives for relevant information (Garo-
folo et al., 1997).
State-of-the-art SDR methods,
where speech recognition error rate is 20-30%, are
∗The ﬁrst and second authors are also members of CREST,
Japan Science and Technology Corporation.
comparable with text retrieval methods in perfor-
mance (Jourlin et al., 2000), and thus are already
practical. Possible rationales include that recogni-
tion errors are overshadowed by a large number of
words correctly transcribed in target documents.
However, “speech-driven retrieval,” where spo-
ken queries are used to retrieve (textual) informa-
tion, has not fully been explored, although it is re-
lated to numerous keyboard-less applications, such
as telephone-based retrieval, car navigation systems,
and user-friendly interfaces.
Unlike spoken document retrieval, speech-driven
retrieval is still a challenging task, because recogni-
tion errors in short queries considerably decrease re-
trieval accuracy. A number of references addressing
this issue can be found in past research literature.
Barnett et al. (1997) and Crestani (2000) indepen-
dently performed comparative experiments related
to speech-driven retrieval, where the DRAGON
speech recognition system was used as an input in-
terface for the INQUERY text retrieval system. They
used as test queries 35 topics in the TREC col-
lection, dictated by a single male speaker.
How-
ever, these cases focused on improving text retrieval
methods and did not address problems in improv-
ing speech recognition. As a result, errors in recog-
nizing spoken queries (error rate was approximately
30%) considerably decreased the retrieval accuracy.
Although we showed that the use of target docu-
ment collections in producing language models for
speech recognition signiﬁcantly improved the per-
formance of speech-driven retrieval (Fujii et al.,
2002; Itou et al., 2001), a number of issues still re-
main open questions.
Section 2 clariﬁes problems addressed in this pa-
per.
Section 3 overviews our speech-driven text
retrieval system.
Sections 4-6 elaborate on our
methodology. Section 7 describes comparative ex-
periments, in which an existing IR test collection
was used to evaluate the effectiveness of our method.
Section 8 discusses related research literature.
2
Problem Statement
One major problem in speech-driven retrieval is re-
lated to out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words.
On the one hand, recent IR systems do not limit
the vocabulary size (i.e., the number of index terms),
and can be seen as open-vocabulary systems, which
allow users to input any keywords contained in a tar-
get collection. It is often the case that a couple of
million terms are indexed for a single IR system.
On the other hand, state-of-the-art speech recog-
nition systems still need to limit the vocabulary size
(i.e., the number of words in a dictionary), due
to problems in estimating statistical language mod-
els (Young, 1996) and constraints associated with
hardware, such as memories. In addition, compu-
tation time is crucial for a real-time usage, including
speech-driven retrieval. In view of these problems,
for many languages the vocabulary size is limited to
a couple of ten thousands (Itou et al., 1999; Paul and
Baker, 1992; Steeneken and van Leeuwen, 1995),
which is incomparably smaller than the size of in-
dexes for practical IR systems.
In addition, high-frequency words, such as func-
tional words and common nouns, are usually in-
cluded in dictionaries and recognized with a high
accuracy. However, those words are not necessarily
useful for retrieval. On the contrary, low-frequency
words appearing in speciﬁc documents are often ef-
fective query terms.
To sum up, the OOV problem is inherent in
speech-driven retrieval, and we need to ﬁll the gap
between speech recognition and text retrieval in
terms of the vocabulary size. In this paper, we pro-
pose a method to resolve this problem aiming at
open-vocabulary speech-driven retrieval.
3
System Overview
Figure 1 depicts the overall design of our speech-
driven text retrieval system, which consists of
speech recognition, text retrieval and query com-
pletion modules.
Although our system is cur-
rently implemented for Japanese, our methodology
is language-independent.
We explain the retrieval
process based on this ﬁgure.
Given a query spoken by a user, the speech
recognition module uses a dictionary and acous-
tic/language models to generate a transcription of
the user speech. During this process, OOV words,
which are not listed in the dictionary, are also de-
tected.
For this purpose, our language model in-
cludes both words and syllables so that OOV words
are transcribed as sequences of syllables.
For example, in the case where “kankitsu (cit-
rus)” is not listed in the dictionary, this word
should be transcribed as /ka N ki tsu/. How-
ever,
it is possible that this word is mistak-
enly transcribed, such as /ka N ke tsu/ and
/ka N ke tsu ke ko/.
To improve the quality of our system, these sylla-
ble sequences have to be transcribed as words, which
is one of the central issues in this paper. In the case
of speech-driven retrieval, where users usually have
speciﬁc information needs, it is feasible that users
utter contents related to a target collection. In other
words, there is a great possibility that detected OOV
words can be identiﬁed as index terms that are pho-
netically identical or similar.
However, since a) a single sound can potentially
correspond to more than one word (i.e., homonyms)
and b) searching the entire collection for phoneti-
cally identical/similar terms is prohibitive, we need
an efﬁcient disambiguation method. Speciﬁcally, in
the case of Japanese, the homonym problem is mul-
tiply crucial because words consist of different char-
acter types, i.e., “kanji,” “katakana,” “hiragana,” al-
phabets and other characters like numerals1.
To resolve this problem, we use a two-stage re-
trieval method. In the ﬁrst stage, we delete OOV
words from the transcription, and perform text re-
trieval using remaining words, to obtain a speciﬁc
number of top-ranked documents according to the
degree of relevance. Even if speech recognition is
not perfect, these documents are potentially associ-
ated with the user speech more than the entire col-
1In Japanese, kanji (or Chinese character) is the idiogram,
and katakana and hiragana are phonograms.
lection. Thus, we search only these documents for
index terms corresponding to detected OOV words.
Then, in the second stage, we replace detected
OOV words with identiﬁed index terms so as to
complete the transcription, and re-perform text re-
trieval to obtain ﬁnal outputs. However, we do not
re-perform speech recognition in the second stage.
In the above example, let us assume that the user
also utters words related to “kankitsu (citrus),” such
as “orenji (orange)” and “remon (lemon),” and that
these words are correctly recognized as words. In
this case, it is possible that retrieved documents
contain the word “kankitsu (citrus).” Thus, we re-
place the syllable sequence /ka N ke tsu/ in the
query with “kankitsu,” which is additionally used as
a query term in the second stage.
It may be argued that our method resembles the
notion of pseudo-relevance feedback (or local feed-
back) for IR, where documents obtained in the ﬁrst
stage are used to expand query terms, and ﬁnal out-
puts are reﬁned in the second stage (Kwok and Chan,
1998). However, while relevance feedback is used to
improve only the retrieval accuracy, our method im-
proves the speech recognition and retrieval accuracy.
Dictionary
Text retrieval
Collection
Acoustic
model
Language
model
Speech recognition
user speech
transcription
top-ranked documents
Query completion
completed
transcription
Figure 1: The overall design of our speech-driven
text retrieval system.
4
Speech Recognition
The speech recognition module generates word se-
quence W, given phone sequence X. In a stochastic
speech recognition framework (Bahl et al., 1983),
the task is to select the W maximizing P(W|X),
which is transformed as in Equation (1) through the
Bayesian theorem.
arg max
W P(W|X) = arg max
W P(X|W) · P(W)
(1)
Here, P(X|W) models a probability that word se-
quence W is transformed into phone sequence X,
and P(W) models a probability that W is linguis-
tically acceptable. These factors are usually called
acoustic and language models, respectively.
For the speech recognition module, we use the
Japanese dictation toolkit (Kawahara et al., 2000)2,
which includes the “Julius” recognition engine and
acoustic/language models. The acoustic model was
produced by way of the ASJ speech database (ASJ-
JNAS) (Itou et al., 1998; Itou et al., 1999), which
contains approximately 20,000 sentences uttered by
132 speakers including the both gender groups.
This toolkit also includes development softwares
so that acoustic and language models can be pro-
duced and replaced depending on the application.
While we use the acoustic model provided in the
toolkit, we use a new language model including both
words and syllables. For this purpose, we used the
“ChaSen” morphological analyzer3 to extract words
from ten years worth of “Mainichi Shimbun” news-
paper articles (1991-2000).
Then, we selected 20,000 high-frequency words
to produce a dictionary. At the same time, we seg-
mented remaining lower-frequency words into syl-
lables based on the Japanese phonogram system.
The resultant number of syllable types was approxi-
mately 700. Finally, we produced a word/syllable-
based trigram language model.
In other words,
OOV words were modeled as sequences of syllables.
Thus, by using our language model, OOV words can
easily be detected.
In spoken document retrieval, an open-vocabulary
method, which combines recognition methods for
words and syllables in target speech documents, was
also proposed (Wechsler et al., 1998). However, this
method requires an additional computation for rec-
ognizing syllables, and thus is expensive. In con-
trast, since our language model is a regular statistical
N-gram model, we can use the same speech recog-
nition framework as in Equation (1).
2http://winnie.kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp/dictation
3http://chasen.aist-nara.ac.jp
5
Text Retrieval
The
text
retrieval
module
is
based
on
the
“Okapi” probabilistic retrieval method (Robertson
and Walker, 1994), which is used to compute the rel-
evance score between the transcribed query and each
document in a target collection. To produce an in-
verted ﬁle (i.e., an index), we use ChaSen to extract
content words from documents as terms, and per-
form a word-based indexing. We also extract terms
from transcribed queries using the same method.
6
Query Completion
6.1
Overview
As explained in Section 3, the basis of the query
completion module is to correspond OOV words de-
tected by speech recognition (Section 4) to index
terms used for text retrieval (Section 5). However,
to identify corresponding index terms efﬁciently, we
limit the number of documents in the ﬁrst stage re-
trieval. In principle, terms that are indexed in top-
ranked documents (those retrieved in the ﬁrst stage)
and have the same sound with detected OOV words
can be corresponding terms.
However, a single sound often corresponds to
multiple words.
In addition, since speech recog-
nition on a syllable-by-syllable basis is not per-
fect, it is possible that OOV words are incor-
rectly transcribed.
For example, in some cases
the Japanese word “kankitsu (citrus)” is transcribed
as /ka N ke tsu/. Thus, we also need to con-
sider index terms that are phonetically similar to
OOV words. To sum up, we need a disambiguation
method to select appropriate corresponding terms,
out of a number of candidates.
6.2
Formalization
Intuitively, it is feasible that appropriate terms:
• have identical/similar sound with OOV words
detected in spoken queries,
• frequently appear in a top-ranked document set,
• and appear in higher-ranked documents.
From the viewpoint of probability theory, possi-
ble representations for the above three properties
include Equation (2), where each property corre-
sponds to different parameters. Our task is to select
the t maximizing the value computed by this equa-
tion as the corresponding term for OOV word w.
X
d∈Dq
P(w|t) · P(t|d) · P(d|q)
(2)
Here, Dq is the top-ranked document set retrieved in
the ﬁrst stage, given query q. P(w|t) is a probabil-
ity that index term t can be replaced with detected
OOV word w, in terms of phonetics. P(t|d) is the
relative frequency of term t in document d. P(d|q)
is a probability that document d is relevant to query
q, which is associated with the score formalized in
the Okapi method.
However, from the viewpoint of empiricism,
Equation (2) is not necessarily effective. First, it is
not easy to estimate P(w|t) based on the probabil-
ity theory. Second, the probability score computed
by the Okapi method is an approximation focused
mainly on relative superiority among retrieved doc-
uments, and thus it is difﬁcult to estimate P(d|q) in a
rigorous manner. Finally, it is also difﬁcult to deter-
mine the degree to which each parameter inﬂuences
in the ﬁnal probability score.
In view of these problems, through preliminary
experiments we approximated Equation (2) and for-
malized a method to compute the degree (not the
probability) to which given index term t corresponds
to OOV word w.
First, we estimate P(w|t) by the ratio between the
number of syllables commonly included in both w
and t and the total number of syllables in w. We
use a DP matching method to identify the number of
cases related to deletion, insertion, and substitution
in w, on a syllable-by-syllable basis.
Second, P(w|t) should be more inﬂuential than
P(t|d) and P(d|q) in Equation (2), although the
last two parameters are effective in the case where
a large number of candidates phonetically similar to
w are obtained. To decrease the effect of P(t|d) and
P(d|q), we tentatively use logarithms of these pa-
rameters. In addition, we use the score computed by
the Okapi method as P(d|q).
According to the above approximation, we com-
pute the score of t as in Equation (3).
X
d∈Dq
P(w|t) · log(P(t|d) · P(d|q))
(3)
It should be noted that Equation (3) is indepen-
dent of the indexing method used, and therefore
t can be any sequences of characters contained in
Dq. In other words, any types of indexing methods
(e.g., word-based and phrase-based indexing meth-
ods) can be used in our framework.
6.3
Implementation
Since computation time is crucial for a real-time us-
age, we preprocess documents in a target collection
so as to identify candidate terms efﬁciently. This
process is similar to the indexing process performed
in the text retrieval module.
In the case of text retrieval, index terms are orga-
nized in an inverted ﬁle so that documents including
terms that exactly match with query keywords can
be retrieved efﬁciently.
However, in the case of query completion, terms
that are included in top-ranked documents need to be
retrieved. In addition, to minimize a score computa-
tion (for example, DP matching is time-consuming),
it is desirable to delete terms that are associated
with a diminished phonetic similarity value, P(w|t),
prior to the computation of Equation (3). In other
words, an index ﬁle for query completion has to be
organized so that a partial matching method can be
used. For example, /ka N ki tsu/ has to be re-
trieved efﬁciently in response to /ka N ke tsu/.
Thus,
we
implemented
a
forward/backward
partial-matching method, in which entries can be re-
trieved by any substrings from the ﬁrst/last charac-
ters. In addition, we index words and word-based
bigrams, because preliminary experiments showed
that OOV words detected by our speech recognition
module are usually single words or short phrases,
such as “ozon-houru (ozone hole).”
7
Experimentation
7.1
Methodology
To evaluate the performance of our speech-driven re-
trieval system, we used the IREX collection4. This
test collection, which resembles one used in the
TREC ad hoc retrieval track, includes 30 Japanese
topics (information need) and relevance assessment
(correct judgement) for each topic, along with target
4http://cs.nyu.edu/cs/projects/proteus/irex/index-e.html
documents. The target documents are 211,853 ar-
ticles collected from two years worth of “Mainichi
Shimbun” newspaper (1994-1995).
Each topic consists of the ID, description and nar-
rative. While descriptions are short phrases related
to the topic, narratives consist of one or more sen-
tences describing the topic. Figure 2 shows an exam-
ple topic in the SGML form (translated into English
by one of the organizers of the IREX workshop).
However, since the IREX collection does not con-
tain spoken queries, we asked four speakers (two
males/females) to dictate the narrative ﬁeld. Thus,
we produced four different sets of 30 spoken queries.
By using those queries, we compared the following
different methods:
1. text-to-text retrieval, which used written narra-
tives as queries, and can be seen as a perfect
speech-driven text retrieval,
2. speech-driven text retrieval, in which only
words listed in the dictionary were modeled in
the language model (in other words, the OOV
word detection and query completion modules
were not used),
3. speech-driven text retrieval, in which OOV
words detected in spoken queries were simply
deleted (in other words, the query completion
module was not used),
4. speech-driven text retrieval,
in which our
method proposed in Section 3 was used.
In cases of methods 2-4, queries dictated by four
speakers were used independently. Thus, in practice
we compared 13 different retrieval results. In addi-
tion, for methods 2-4, ten years worth of Mainichi
Shimbun Japanese newspaper articles (1991-2000)
were used to produce language models. However,
while method 2 used only 20,000 high-frequency
words for language modeling, methods 3 and 4
also used syllables extracted from lower-frequency
words (see Section 4).
Following the IREX workshop, each method re-
trieved 300 top documents in response to each query,
and non-interpolated average precision values were
used to evaluate each method.
<TOPIC><TOPIC-ID>1001</TOPIC-ID>
<DESCRIPTION>Corporate merging</DESCRIPTION>
<NARRATIVE>The article describes a corporate merging and in the article,
the name of companies have to be identifiable.
Information including the
field and the purpose of the merging have to be identifiable.
Corporate
merging includes corporate acquisition, corporate unifications and corporate
buying.</NARRATIVE></TOPIC>
Figure 2: An English translation for an example topic in the IREX collection.
7.2
Results
First, we evaluated the performance of detecting
OOV words. In the 30 queries used for our eval-
uation, 14 word tokens (13 word types) were OOV
words unlisted in the dictionary for speech recog-
nition. Table 1 shows the results on a speaker-by-
speaker basis, where “#Detected” and “#Correct”
denote the total number of OOV words detected by
our method and the number of OOV words correctly
detected, respectively.
In addition, “#Completed”
denotes the number of detected OOV words that
were corresponded to correct index terms in 300 top
documents.
It should be noted that “#Completed” was greater
than “#Correct” because our method often mistak-
enly detected words in the dictionary as OOV words,
but completed them with index terms correctly. We
estimated recall and precision for detecting OOV
words, and accuracy for query completion, as in
Equation (4).
recall
=
#Correct
14
precision
=
#Correct
#Detect
accuracy
=
#Completed
#Detect
(4)
Looking at Table 1, one can see that recall was gen-
erally greater than precision. In other words, our
method tended to detect as many OOV words as pos-
sible. In addition, accuracy of query completion was
relatively low.
Figure 3 shows example words in spoken queries,
detected as OOV words and correctly completed
with index terms. In this ﬁgure, OOV words are
transcribed with syllables, where “:” denotes a long
vowel.
Hyphens are inserted between Japanese
words, which inherently lack lexical segmentation.
Second, to evaluate the effectiveness of our query
completion method more carefully, we compared re-
trieval accuracy for methods 1-4 (see Section 7.1).
Table 2 shows average precision values, averaged
over the 30 queries, for each method5. The average
precision values of our method (i.e., method 4) was
approximately 87% of that for text-to-text retrieval.
By comparing methods 2-4, one can see that our
method improved average precision values of the
other methods irrespective of the speaker. To put
it more precisely, by comparing methods 3 and 4,
one can see the effectiveness of the query comple-
tion method. In addition, by comparing methods 2
and 4, one can see that a combination of the OOV
word detection and query completion methods was
effective.
It may be argued that the improvement was rel-
atively small. However, since the number of OOV
words inherent in 30 queries was only 14, the effect
of our method was overshadowed by a large number
of other words. In fact, the number of words used
as query terms for our method, averaged over the
four speakers, was 421. Since existing test collec-
tions for IR research were not produced to explore
the OOV problem, it is difﬁcult to derive conclu-
sions that are statistically valid. Experiments using
larger-scale test collections where the OOV problem
is more crucial need to be further explored.
Finally, we investigated the time efﬁciency of our
method, and found that CPU time required for the
query completion process per detected OOV word
was 3.5 seconds (AMD Athlon MP 1900+). How-
ever, an additional CPU time for detecting OOV
words, which can be performed in a conventional
speech recognition process, was not crucial.
5Average precision is often used to evaluate IR systems,
which should not be confused with evaluation measures in
Equation (4).
Table 1: Results for detecting and completing OOV words.
Speaker
#Detected
#Correct
#Completed
Recall
Precision
Accuracy
Female #1
51
9
18
0.643
0.176
0.353
Female #2
56
10
18
0.714
0.179
0.321
Male #1
33
9
12
0.643
0.273
0.364
Male #2
37
12
16
0.857
0.324
0.432
Total
176
40
64
0.714
0.226
0.362
OOV words
Index terms (syllables)
English gloss
/gu re : pu ra chi na ga no/
gureepu-furuutsu /gu re : pu fu ru : tsu/
grapefruit
/ya yo i chi ta/
Yayoi-jidai /ya yo i ji da i/
the Yayoi period
/ni ku ku ra i su/
nikku-puraisu /ni q ku pu ra i su/
Nick Price
/be N pi/
benpi /be N pi/
constipation
Figure 3: Example words detected as OOV words and completed correctly by our method.
7.3
Analyzing Errors
We manually analyzed seven cases where the av-
erage precision value of our method was signiﬁ-
cantly lower than that obtained with method 2 (the
total number of cases was the product of numbers of
queries and speakers).
Among these seven cases, in ﬁve cases our query
completion method selected incorrect index terms,
although correct index terms were included in top-
ranked documents obtained with the ﬁrst stage. For
example, in the case of the query 1021 dictated by
a female speaker, the word “seido (institution)” was
mistakenly transcribed as /se N do/. As a result,
the word “sendo (freshness),” which is associated
with the same syllable sequences, was selected as
the index term. The word “seido (institution)” was
the third candidate based on the score computed by
Equation (3). To reduce these errors, we need to en-
hance the score computation.
In another case, our speech recognition module
did not correctly recognize words in the dictionary,
and decreased the retrieval accuracy.
In the ﬁnal case, a fragment of a narrative sen-
tence consisting of ten words was detected as a sin-
gle OOV word.
As a result, our method, which
can complete up to two word sequences, mistak-
enly processed that word, and decreased the retrieval
accuracy. However, this case was exceptional. In
most cases, functional words, which were recog-
nized with a high accuracy, segmented OOV words
into shorter fragments.
Table 2: Non-interpolated average precision values,
averaged over 30 queries, for different methods.
Speaker\Method
1
2
3
4
Female #1
–
0.2831
0.2834
0.3195
Female #2
–
0.2745
0.2443
0.2846
Male #1
–
0.3005
0.2987
0.3179
Male #2
–
0.2787
0.2675
0.2957
Total
0.3486
0.2842
0.2734
0.3044
8
Related Work
The method proposed by Kupiec et al. (1994)
and our method are similar in the sense that both
methods use target collections as language models
for speech recognition to realize open-vocabulary
speech-driven retrieval.
Kupiec et al’s method, which is based on word
recognition and accepts only short queries, derives
multiple transcription candidates (i.e., possible word
combinations), and searches a target collection for
the most plausible word combination. However, in
the case of longer queries, the number of candidates
increases, and thus the searching cost is prohibitive.
This is a reason why operational speech recognition
systems have to limit the vocabulary size.
In contrast, our method, which is based on a re-
cent continuous speech recognition framework, can
accept longer sentences. Additionally, our method
uses a two-stage retrieval principle to limit a search
space in a target collection, and disambiguates only
detected OOV words. Thus, the computation cost
can be minimized.
9
Conclusion
To facilitate retrieving
information by spoken
queries, the out-of-vocabulary problem in speech
recognition needs to be resolved. In our proposed
method, out-of-vocabulary words in a query are de-
tected by speech recognition, and completed with
terms indexed for text retrieval, so as to improve
the recognition accuracy. In addition, the completed
query is used to improve the retrieval accuracy. We
showed the effectiveness of our method by using
dictated queries in the IREX collection. Future work
would include experiments using larger-scale test
collections in various domains.
References
[Bahl et al.1983] Lalit. R. Bahl, Frederick Jelinek, and
Robert L. Mercer. 1983. A maximum likelihood ap-
proach to continuous speech recognition. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
5(2):179–190.
[Barnett et al.1997] J. Barnett, S. Anderson, J. Broglio,
M. Singh, R. Hudson, and S. W. Kuo. 1997. Exper-
iments in spoken queries for document retrieval. In
Proceedings of Eurospeech97, pages 1323–1326.
[Crestani2000] Fabio Crestani.
2000.
Word recogni-
tion errors and relevance feedback in spoken query
processing.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Flexible Query Answering Sys-
tems, pages 267–281.
[Fujii et al.2002] Atsushi Fujii, Katunobu Itou, and Tet-
suya Ishikawa.
2002.
Speech-driven text retrieval:
Using target IR collections for statistical language
model adaptation in speech recognition. In Anni R.
Coden, Eric W. Brown, and Savitha Srinivasan, edi-
tors, Information Retrieval Techniques for Speech Ap-
plications (LNCS 2273), pages 94–104. Springer.
[Garofolo et al.1997] John
S.
Garofolo,
Ellen
M.
Voorhees, Vincent M. Stanford, and Karen Sparck
Jones.
1997.
TREC-6 1997 spoken document
retrieval track overview and results. In Proceedings of
the 6th Text REtrieval Conference, pages 83–91.
[Itou et al.1998] K. Itou, M. Yamamoto, K. Takeda,
T. Takezawa, T. Matsuoka, T. Kobayashi, K. Shikano,
and S. Itahashi. 1998. The design of the newspaper-
based Japanese large vocabulary continuous speech
recognition corpus. In Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
pages 3261–3264.
[Itou et al.1999] Katunobu
Itou,
Mikio
Yamamoto,
Kazuya Takeda, Toshiyuki Takezawa, Tatsuo Mat-
suoka, Tetsunori Kobayashi, and Kiyohiro Shikano.
1999.
JNAS: Japanese speech corpus for large
vocabulary continuous speech recognition research.
Journal of Acoustic Society of Japan, 20(3):199–206.
[Itou et al.2001] Katunobu Itou, Atsushi Fujii, and Tet-
suya Ishikawa. 2001. Language modeling for multi-
domain speech-driven text retrieval.
In IEEE Auto-
matic Speech Recognition and Understanding Work-
shop.
[Jourlin et al.2000] Pierre
Jourlin,
Sue
E.
Johnson,
Karen Sp¨arck Jones, and Philip C. Woodland. 2000.
Spoken document representations for probabilistic
retrieval. Speech Communication, 32:21–36.
[Kawahara et al.2000] T.
Kawahara,
A.
Lee,
T. Kobayashi, K. Takeda, N. Minematsu, S. Sagayama,
K. Itou, A. Ito, M. Yamamoto, A. Yamada, T. Ut-
suro, and K. Shikano.
2000.
Free software toolkit
for Japanese large vocabulary continuous speech
recognition. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, pages
476–479.
[Kupiec et al.1994] Julian Kupiec, Don Kimber, and Vi-
jay Balasubramanian. 1994. Speech-based retrieval
using semantic co-occurrence ﬁltering.
In Proceed-
ings of the ARPA Human Language Technology Work-
shop, pages 373–377.
[Kwok and Chan1998] K.L. Kwok and M. Chan. 1998.
Improving two-stage ad-hoc retrieval for short queries.
In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 250–256.
[Paul and Baker1992] Douglas B. Paul and Janet M.
Baker. 1992. The design for the Wall Street Journal-
based CSR corpus. In Proceedings of DARPA Speech
& Natural Language Workshop, pages 357–362.
[Robertson and Walker1994] S.E.
Robertson
and
S. Walker.
1994.
Some simple effective approx-
imations to the 2-poisson model for probabilistic
weighted retrieval. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pages
232–241.
[Steeneken and van Leeuwen1995] Herman
J.
M.
Steeneken and David A. van Leeuwen.
1995.
Multi-lingual assessment of speaker independent
large vocabulary speech-recognition systems:
The
SQALE-project.
In Proceedings of Eurospeech95,
pages 1271–1274.
[Wechsler et al.1998] Martin Wechsler, Eugen Munteanu,
and Peter Sch¨auble. 1998. New techniques for open-
vocabulary spoken document retrieval. In Proceedings
of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 20–27.
[Young1996] Steve Young.
1996.
A review of large-
vocabulary continuous-speech recognition. IEEE Sig-
nal Processing Magazine, pages 45–57, September.
